S/PV.9378

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9378th meeting

Friday, 14 July 2023, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Lord Ahmad/Mr. Kariuki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Kuymizakis
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia/Ms. Zabolotskaya
Mr. Geissbühler
Mr. Abushahab
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Conflict-related sexual violence: promoting implementation of Security Council
resolutions on conflict-related sexual violence
Report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2023/413)
Letter dated 26 June 2023 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2023/476)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-20720 (E)
*2320720*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9378

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Conflict-related sexual violence: promoting
implementation of Security Council resolutions
on conflict-related sexual violence
Report of the Secretary-General on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2023/413)
Letter dated 26 June 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/476)
The President: I would like to begin by warmly
welcoming the ministers and other high-level
representatives. Their presence at this meeting today
underscores the importance of the subject matter under
discussion before the Council.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Botswana, Cambodia, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, the
Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, India, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Thailand, Ukraine, Uruguay and
Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefer to participate in this meeting: Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.
Ms. Zabolotskaya (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We would like to raise a point of order
regarding the participation in this meeting of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict.
2/27

14/07/2023

As we all remember, Ms.Patten said that Russian
soldiers had been — allegedly — given Viagra to rape
Ukrainian women. Then a recording of her conversation
with people she thought to be representatives of the
Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine was leaked online. In
that conversation, she admitted to having no reliable
information on that matter.
Therefore, Ms. Patten abused her status as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, spreading
false information with regard to a United Nations
Member State. We would like to put on record that we
oppose her participation in this meeting.
The President: I take note of the point of order
raised by the representative of the Russian Federation.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Naw Hser
Hser, civil society representative; and Nadine, survivor
champion.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Deputy Head of the European
Union delegation to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/476, which contains the text of a letter
dated 26 June 2023 from the Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Patten.
Ms. Patten: I wish to express sincere appreciation
for the leadership of the United Kingdom in convening
this open debate on promoting the implementation
of Security Council resolutions on conflict-related
sexual violence.
I warmly welcome the civil society briefers from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Myanmar.
As ever, the lived experience of survivors such as
Nadine and advocates such as Naw Hser Hser must
shape global solutions. Survivors are the moral compass
of this mandate.
23-20720

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9378

I just want to flag that to highlight survivors’ voices
the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict network, which I chair and which comprises
24 United Nations entities, has organized an exhibition
titled: A Conflict-Related Sexual Violence Survivor’s
Journey. I really welcome all at this meeting today to
visit the exhibition in the Visitors’ Lobby during the
course of the day.

incidents, with girls making up 97 per cent of those — a
vast majority of the cases. Yet while the report conveys
the severity and brutality of verified incidents, it does
not purport to reflect the global scale or prevalence of
a chronically underreported and historically hidden
crime. We know that for every woman who comes
forward, many more are silenced by social pressures,
stigma, insecurity and a paucity of services.

We meet today as the trend lines for conflict-related
sexual violence are worsening. The world is facing the
highest number of conflicts since the Second World War,
while the number of people forced to flee their homes
has reached a first-ever record of 110 million. Rising
militarization and arms proliferation are bringing
conflicts across the globe to boiling point, creating the
conditions for unimaginable and unrelenting cruelty.
Gang rape, sexual slavery and other forms of sexual
violence are being used as tactics of war, torture and
terrorism to subjugate and displace populations. At a
time of unprecedented global turbulence, new threats
have emerged from the largely ungoverned digital
space. Climate-related insecurity and displacement
have exacerbated competition for scarce resources,
in turn increasing intercommunal violence, including
sexual violence. Every new wave of warfare brings a
rising tide of human tragedy, including new waves of
war’s oldest, most-silenced and least-condemned crime.
And yet the promise expressed by the Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security that focus
on conflict-related sexual violence is prevention. They
represent a commitment to bringing all the available
tools to bear to break the seemingly endless cycles of
sexual violence, impunity and revenge. Even as the
Council is meeting to take up the issue once again,
violations continue to shatter lives and livelihoods,
destabilize communities and displace hundreds of
thousands around the world. The singular focus of the
Council must be to bridge the gap between resolutions
and realities and between our highest aspirations and
operations on the ground.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is once again
the country presenting the highest number of cases,
with 701 violations of conflict-related sexual violence
verified through the rigorous methodology under the
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1960 (2010). In addition, United Nations humanitarian
service providers reported more than 38,000 cases of
sexual and gender-based violence in 2022 in North
Kivu alone, including alarming levels of sexual
exploitation of children at more than 1,000 sites in and
around displacement camps. Against that backdrop, I
felt compelled to visit the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in June to assess the situation first-hand. I was
horrified by the testimonies I heard from women and
girls, many of whom had been very recently raped or
gang-raped and were still receiving treatment. Some
were completely disoriented and in a near-catatonic
state owing to the severity of the trauma. Many of
them stressed the daily risk of sexual violence while
they were carrying out livelihood activities around the
camps, such as searching for food and collecting wood
or water.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/413)
before us today provides a global snapshot of the
patterns and trends of conflict-related sexual violence
across 20 situations of concern. It records 2,455 United
Nations-verified cases of conflict-related sexual
violence committed in the course of 2022. Women and
girls account for 94 per cent of the verified cases, with
6 per cent of the reported violations being against men
and boys. Children represent 32 per cent of the verified

Just imagine facing a reality every day that you
are likely to be raped, yet having no choice but to take
that risk because your family must survive. Those
women and girls face an unacceptable choice between
economic subsistence and sexual violence and between
their livelihoods and their lives. We therefore cannot
underestimate how food insecurity increases the risk
of exposure to sexual violence and how the nexus of
conflict and hunger is linked to the complex spirals
of cause and effect. Another very disturbing reality is
the proliferation of brothels or so-called maisons de
tolérance inside and around the camps for internally
displaced persons, operating in broad daylight and under
the very noses of national authorities and humanitarian
actors. Sexual exploitation, including forced prostitution
as a basic means of survival — sometimes referred to
as “survival sex” — is rampant. It is sexual violence
driven by economic desperation, with women and girls

23-207203/27

S/PV.9378

Women and peace and security

14/07/2023

compelled to prostitute themselves for less than a dollar
in order to survive another day. It is inconceivable that
rather than zero tolerance for sexual violence, we are
seeing houses of tolerance.

mental-health and socioeconomic challenges. Children
born of rape are still unable to obtain birth registration
and identity documents, because Iraqi law requires
proof of paternity.

My first field visit in 2022 was to Ukraine, following
the surfacing of reports of sexual violence after the
Russian Federation’s full-scale invasion. I was struck
not only by the cases of sexual violence in conflict
zones, but also by the acute vulnerability of millions
of women and children forced to flee the country in a
matter of weeks or months after the start of the conflict.
When I visited reception centres in Poland and Moldova,
I witnessed first-hand the extraordinary toll on women,
children and the elderly, including their vulnerability
to unscrupulous individuals and criminal networks, for
whom the rapid and unprecedented mass displacement
of people is not a tragedy but an opportunity for
trafficking and sexual exploitation. In March, when I
returned to Ukraine, I once again met with survivors
and heard their heart-wrenching accounts of brutal
sexual violence reportedly perpetrated by Russian
soldiers. I want to take this opportunity to reiterate
the Secretary-General’s call on the Russian authorities
to take prevention measures in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. At the same time, I am
encouraged by the commitments made by the Ukrainian
Government, which were articulated in the framework
of cooperation that I signed with Deputy Prime
Minister Olga Stefanishyna in May 2022. Since then,
my Office and the United Nations system have been
supporting the national authorities in implementing a
comprehensive plan of action that includes addressing
the cross-border dimensions of trafficking.

The annual report clearly demonstrates the
emboldening effects of impunity. The reality is that
until we effectively raise the cost and consequences
of committing, commanding and condoning sexual
violence, we will never stem the tide of such violations.
This year, 49 parties, most of them non-State actors, are
listed for systematically committing sexual violence.
More than 70 per cent of them are persistent perpetrators
who have appeared on the list for five or more years
without any remedial or corrective action being taken.
It will be critical to ensure greater coherence between
the Secretary-General’s listing and the targeted and
graduated measures being imposed by United Nations
Sanctions Committees. If applied in a timely and
consistent manner, sanctions can change the calculus
of parties operating on the assumption that rape is costfree — or even profitable — in the political economy
of war, in which women are trafficked, traded and sold.

Animating the trend lines in the report before the
Council are the harrowing personal experiences that
speak to the devastating human cost of sexual violence.
In Haiti, after witnessing the execution of their
husbands, victims have been raped by gang members
in front of their children. Many have been forced out of
vehicles at gunpoint, robbed and subjected to collective
rape in broad daylight. In the Central African Republic,
a woman was gang-raped to death by members of an
armed group who accused her of having a relationship
with a member of the national armed forces. In Ethiopia,
many survivors have contracted HIV as a result of
rape and now face a lifetime of stigma and health
challenges. In Iraq, among the female Yazidi survivors
who returned from Da’esh captivity, more than 430
remain at displacement sites, grappling with significant
4/27

The report also identifies several emerging issues
that have exacerbated long-standing challenges to
reporting and response. For instance, inflammatory
rhetoric against United Nations peacekeepers, including
violent demonstrations, narrows the operating space
for delivering services and verifying allegations.
Nonetheless, nearly 70 per cent of United Nationsverified cases were reported in the eight peacekeeping
and special political missions where women’s protection
advisers were deployed. While data is not a prerequisite
for response, the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements convened by women’s protection advisers
are essential to building the evidence base for scaling
up interventions.
Globally, women human rights defenders,
including those advocating on behalf of victims of
sexual violence, have been targeted with attacks aimed
at preventing their activism. Patterns of sexual violence
have continued to be used as part of the repertoire of
political violence to intimidate and punish opponents
and women human rights defenders. In Myanmar,
Colombia and Libya, women, girls, men, boys and
individuals of diverse sexual orientation and gender
identity have been subjected to sexual violence,
including in detention settings.
23-20720

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

The report highlights trends in the wake
of unconstitutional shifts in power, escalating
militarization and the proliferation of illicit arms. It
looks at the complex array of battlefield actors, such
as private military and security companies, that have
complicated attribution and accountability. It also
highlights political and security challenges that have
eroded rule-of-law institutions, creating a risk of a
rule of lawlessness. Indeed, the central insight of this
year’s report is the need to harness the preventive
power of the rule of law. The positive impact of our
sustained engagement is evident in a number of
countries. In September 2022 in Guinea, I attended
the historic opening of the trial related to the events of
28 September 2009. That historic moment for survivors
of sexual violence was the culmination of a decade of
unrelenting advocacy and technical support to national
judicial authorities by my Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
consistent efforts by the military justice authorities, in
particular, have helped to stem the tide of mass rape,
although sexual violence, especially by the plethora of
armed groups, persists unabated. Several emblematic
cases involving notorious warlords and military
officers have been prosecuted and the perpetrators
convicted. On the legislative front, the Parliament
adopted a law on protection and reparations for victims
of conflict-related sexual violence and established a
national reparations fund. The personal commitment
and leadership of the First Lady of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was instrumental in those gains.
In terms of transitional justice, some momentum was
also observed in the Central African Republic, with the
delivery by the Special Criminal Court in the Central
African Republic of its first verdict convicting a
commander of an armed group for rape perpetrated by
his subordinates. In Colombia, the landmark report of
the Truth Commission made specific recommendations
to State institutions for transformative reparations for
survivors. When I visited Colombia in May, I heard
from survivors how important such acknowledgement
and the guarantees of non-repetition are for their
healing and recovery.
In terms of a way forward, the report recommends
instituting gender-responsive justice and securitysector reform, strengthening holistic and multi-sectoral
services for survivors, curtailing the flow of small
arms and light weapons and engaging politically and

S/PV.9378

diplomatically to address sexual violence in ceasefire
and peace agreements. The report also recommends
providing predictable financial support to the ConflictRelated Sexual Violence Prevention Multi-Partner
Trust Fund for the work of the United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict network and the
Team of Experts. Women’s protection advisers are also
a linchpin of our institutional response architecture,
and their deployment and the reinforcement of teams
should be considered at critical inflection points,
including during mission transitions and drawdowns.
We must focus our political resolve and resources in
a global context of unremitting violence. Indeed, since
the report before the Council was issued, serious allegations of conflict-related sexual violence have come
to light. In the Sudan, since conflict broke out in April,
the country office of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights has received credible reports
of violations against more than 50 women and girls. As
many as 20 women were reportedly raped in a single
attack. I received additional information this week on
the targeting of medical infrastructure and staff providing support to victims of sexual violence, as well as an
increase in abductions of women and girls. Both the
Rapid Support Forces and the Sudanese Armed Forces
are listed by the Secretary-General, and I have communicated to General Mohammed Hamdan Hemedti
and General Abdel Fattah Al-Burhan the measures that
they are respectively required to take by the Council.
It is evident that those tragic episodes form part of
the long litany of battles fought on the bodies of women
and girls, from Bosnia to Rwanda, Iraq, Syria and
elsewhere. Today we know more than ever before about
what motivates sexual violence, who the perpetrators
are and the service response that survivors need. We
know that those crimes do not occur in a vacuum but
are tied to broader security dynamics. It is therefore
essential to ground prevention efforts in that enhanced
knowledge, which is at the heart of the prevention
strategy that my Office launched in September 2022.
We must ensure the implementation of Council
resolutions while adapting our actions to today’s
conflicts and emerging global challenges, including
threats from the largely ungoverned digital space and
climate-related insecurity. The time is now for us to
double down on the institutional and accountability
frameworks put in place by successive resolutions. We
must act urgently and with sustained resolve to save
succeeding generations from that scourge.

23-207205/27

S/PV.9378

Women and peace and security

The President: I thank Ms. Patten for her
thorough briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Naw Hser Hser.
Ms. Naw Hser Hser: I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to brief the Council today in its
open debate on conflict-related sexual violence. I am
Naw Hser Hser, an advisory board member of the
Women’s League of Burma, a civil-society coalition
representing women from across Myanmar. It has now
been more than two years since the military launched
a coup overthrowing the elected Government, which
has resulted in further conflict across Myanmar. More
than 23,000 civilians have arrested by the junta and
more than 1.8 million have been displaced, and women
and girls are at greater risk of sexual and gender-based
violence, largely at the hands of the military but from
anti-military defence forces as well.
Despite those risks, women remain at the forefront
of the resistance to the military and make up more than
60 percent of pro-democracy human rights defenders.
Women human rights defenders from across Myanmar
are on the front lines, providing essential services to
internally displaced persons and survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence, reporting on human rights
abuses and providing shelter and safe houses for
protesters. We are united in our collective call for a
federal democracy in Myanmar, and we know that in
order to achieve that, we must not only end military
rule but also challenge patriarchal oppression,
Women human rights defenders in Myanmar face
enormous challenges, including threats to their safety
and that of their families. For example, the military
has issued arrest warrants for many of our staff. That
undermines our ability to support IDPs and survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence. Many women
defenders are in hiding, or like me have been forced to
leave Myanmar in order to continue their work.
The military has long used sexual violence to
attack civilian populations. Rape and sexual violence
were hallmarks of the military’s 2017 genocide of the
Rohingya, and Rohingya women and girls, including
transgender women, who fled Myanmar for Bangladesh
now face higher risks of violence. Since the coup d’état,
we have documented more than 100 cases of conflictrelated sexual violence and gender-based violence. In
one case, junta soldiers repeatedly raped a woman at
gunpoint in front of her husband in Chin state. That
same evening, the victim’s sister-in-law, who was seven
6/27

14/07/2023

months pregnant, was also raped by junta soldiers. The
real number of cases is likely much higher, since many
victims do not report sexual violence for fear of further
abuse by the military. Women and LGBTQI people in
detention are vulnerable to torture, including sexual
violence. Thousands of women have been arrested since
the coup and remain in detention, and 15 have been
sentenced to death for their pro-democracy activities.
Sexual violence is a deliberate and systematic tactic
for targeting and punishing women, not only for
speaking out against the regime but also for defying
patriarchal norms.
Many women defenders face both online abuse
and tactics that can result in offline violence, false
allegations and unlawful arrests. Women from ethnic
or religious minorities, lesbian, bisexual, transgender
and intersex women and women who are politically
active have been targeted for such abuse. As a result
of such attacks, many women feel they have no choice
but to censor themselves or scale back their activism.
International actors should support women human rights
defenders, protect their fundamental rights and enable
their participation, including at the international level.
Accountability is essential to ending all forms of
violence against women in all their diversity. The 2021
coup was a result of decades of impunity for the military
junta, including for its use of sexual and gender-based
violence as a tactic to target and terrorize civilian
populations. At the moment, domestic options for
justice, including for conflict-related sexual violence,
are impossible. I therefore urge the Security Council
to refer the situation in Myanmar to the International
Criminal Court for war crimes, genocide and crimes
against humanity.
As the Special Rapporteur on Myanmar recently
noted, the military needs three things to sustain
itself — arms, money and international legitimacy.
Women members of civil society know all too well
that those are also the tools used to perpetrate violence
against women in the country. The Security Council
should impose an embargo on the sale and transfer of
arms, ammunition and aviation fuel. I also urge the
international community to enact targeted sanctions
against the military and its proxies, including Myanmar
Oil and Gas Enterprise. In addition, I urge the Council
to reject any efforts by the military junta to hold
sham elections, which cannot be free or fair or lay the
groundwork for a democratic future. Finally, I ask the
Council to build on the progress of resolution 2669
23-20720

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

(2022) by continuing to demand an immediate end to
all forms of violence in Myanmar, including sexual and
gender-based violence, and by keeping Myanmar on the
agenda of the Security Council through open meetings,
so that civil society can participate.
Currently, one in three people in Myanmar are in
need of humanitarian assistance due to food insecurity
and limited access to health care, including sexual and
reproductive care for survivors. Local ethnic women’s
organizations are vital to providing humanitarian
assistance to their communities, and they need the
Council’s support to continue that essential work.
This is an important moment for Myanmar. For
the first time, we the people of Myanmar are united
across ethnic, religious and gender lines in our common
struggle to end the military dictatorship, ensure
justice and call for a federal democratic Myanmar,
grounded in diversity and pluralism. Now we need the
Council’s support.
I would like to end my statement today with
one simple point. Myanmar is an example of how
political violence, including sexual violence, is used to
intimidate, punish and silence human rights defenders,
journalists and women leaders in many conflicts, such
as in the Sudan, Afghanistan, Yemen, Syria and Libya.
I urge the Council today to demand an end to all forms
of violence against women human rights defenders and
civil-society leaders and to take meaningful action
to demonstrate that the protection of women’s human
rights is fundamental to peace, not only in Myanmar
but in all conflicts and crises.
The President: I thank Ms. Hser Hser for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Nadine.
Nadine: It is a great honour to be here. As a survivor
champion for the Government of the United Kingdom,
I will be speaking in a collective voice, highlighting
the views of many survivors from various countries.
I also want to take the opportunity to thank everyone
here for understanding the need for and importance
of a survivor-centred approach to guiding the way we
respond to conflict-related sexual violence.
Sexual violence is a crime against humanity. It is
brutal, deliberate and intended to punish and humiliate
individuals and their communities. Many of its victims
suffer from physical and psychological trauma, longterm injuries and HIV infections, and some have

S/PV.9378

died as a result. As a result of conflict-related sexual
violence, some women have to deal with unwanted
pregnancies, becoming mothers who bear the burden of
being excluded by their own families and communities.
Men and boys are facing reporting barriers because of
the stigma of perceived emasculation, as well physical
and psychological consequences, and often there are no
legal provisions regulating the rape of men.
The impact of sexual violence is pervasive and
destructive. The sheer numbers of people affected by
sexual violence show simply how many families and
how many communities are affected or destroyed. In
South Sudan, women and their families in the Yida
camp, who were already displaced when we spoke to
them in 2019, were already telling us how difficult it
was to try to find work and get food, because getting
out of the camp was too dangerous. They were watching
their children die of starvation because leaving the
camp was not an option.
Many survivors are very grateful for the global
conversation and attention on the issue and for the
efforts to reinforce legal frameworks and mechanisms
to prevent and respond. However, we are facing the
challenges of translating collective efforts from a global
to a national level, so that the people directly affected
can have a better life. Many survivors want to see their
States take tangible steps that will increase compliance
with international legal frameworks and translate their
obligations into national legislation. That said, if States
are to strengthen the rule of law to prevent and respond
to conflict-related sexual violence, we believe that they
first need to come up with clear action plans, effective
actions and a commitment to upholding their obligation
to their citizens by preventing, stopping and responding
appropriately to conflict-related sexual violence.
People need to see States taking charge of prevention
and response in order to feel safe and to be able to enjoy
their basic human rights.
Although not all perpetrators are men in uniform,
States should work very hard to restore good standards
for their servicemen. That is because most of us want
to see them doing what they are intended to do, namely,
protect the people — all of us. Citizens should not be
afraid when they meet men in uniform.
The repetition of sexual violence keeps people
living in fear and vulnerable to further attacks. When
people live in a country where there is no rule of law
and where those perpetrating the crime get away with

23-207207/27

S/PV.9378

Women and peace and security

14/07/2023

impunity, they worry. They do not know when they may
have an encounter with groups that perpetuate such
crimes. They cannot feel safe.

myth is to blame victims for contributing to the attack
because of the way they were dressed and all kinds of
similar reasons.

Many survivors have asked me to tell the Council
that States need to have organized national conversations
about the roles of people in uniform and to hold to
account perpetrators from other groups, too. The
uniform does not give people licence to commit crimes.
It should be worn by servicepeople who understand
their duties to represent the State and protect its people.
States must reinforce their recruitment processes and
take due diligence measures before allowing people to
join uniformed forces. Those who work in the forces
must first receive mandatory training on how to protect
and engage with survivors and how to enforce and
comply with national and international laws.

We want to see States adopting gender-responsive
approaches when engaging with survivors. It is vital
to treat people with dignity and be sensitive to their
gender and their sexuality. We ask that first responders
understand survivor vulnerability and not undermine
the impact of sexual violence on survivors because they
are older or because of their sexual orientation.

States must have courage when holding national
conversations about their laws and cultural norms and
customs, because we cannot undermine basic human
rights in the name of religion or culture. It is the role
of the State to ensure that national laws address issues
objectively, putting cultural views aside.
Currently, many civil society- and survivor-led
organizations have been at the forefront of leading
on raising awareness about sexual violence, but we
need States to support and promote awareness about
such work. States should be more present, not absent.
They should be at the forefront when it comes to the
responsibility to raise awareness about conflict-related
sexual violence.
States should support and see the benefit of
inclusive processes, bringing everyone on board in the
understanding that tackling the issue of conflict-related
sexual violence is a national concern and the biggest
attack on humankind. States should promote laws that
condemn stigma in all its forms and treat survivors
with dignity and care. Once that has become a national
conversation, we ask that States work with international
partners to identify how international frameworks can
complement national efforts.
States should also break all the myths and
surrounding rhetoric, such as why servicemen or
servicewomen perpetuate conflict-related sexual
violence. Some of those include being under the
influence of drugs, being away from their wives for
a long time or complying with peer pressure during
war. Some even claim that sometimes people are not
in control of what happened. The most ridiculous
8/27

A survivor who identified as part of the lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender community once told
us, to contradict a myth and misconception he faced
repeatedly, that just because he was a gay man, it did
not mean that he enjoyed the act. State actors must
approach all survivors with the same compassion and
care, regardless of their gender, ethnicity, age or sexual
orientation. States should not allow any excuse for
someone to violate another person’s private space and
force them into degrading treatment.
States need to ensure that their recruitment criteria
are reviewed and that the process and their armed
forces are professional. Their armed forces must serve
with discipline, accountability, transparency and
clear expectations with regard to professionalism and
the protection of all civilians. We must not allow the
rhetoric that the army is for bad boys or ex-criminals
or for people who have nothing else to do with their
lives. If States can strengthen their criteria for who can
join the forces by incorporating thorough background
checks, that will at least help recruit the right people
and reinstate faith in States to do the right thing for
their people.
Once we have ensured that we have the right
people, we need to ensure they are constantly trained
and undergo refresher training so as to stay up-todate on current norms, their roles and their duty to
protect and to reinforce good practices. We ask that
States incorporate a whistleblowing practice so that
servicemen who witness colleagues doing the wrong
thing can safely report colleagues who misbehave.
Over 90–95 per cent of survivors never report what
happened to them to the police. There are many reasons
for that, including a lack of faith or trust in the justice
system and how it will treat them. Conviction rates
for those crimes that are reported are shockingly low.
That also causes survivors not to report — why report
when so few cases succeed? We should understand
23-20720

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

that that fact alone can hinder the delivery of, and
access to, justice for many survivors who do not come
forward. In all of our justice systems, there is much
room for improvement and a need to draw on lessons
learned regarding how to effectively deliver justice in a
survivor-centred way.
We should learn from jurisdictions that are trying
to carry out safe and effective work on accountability. I
was in Colombia three weeks ago and was very inspired
to see the country having a national conversation and
addressing the challenges with survivors. The opening
of micro-cases and the announcement of a special
jurisdiction are examples of State efforts to respond
and prevent. However, many survivors were still
very reluctant to come forward, mainly due to safety
fears. Therefore, we should also recognize that some
States need help to hold perpetrators accountable.
The international community can intervene earlier by
working with States that are making an effort but are
still struggling.
We can support countries in training staff, ensuring
that people understand the international frameworks and
upgrading national laws to meet international standards.
We can help them to tackle the obstacles to justice and
share lessons learned from other courts and countries.
The international community should support States
that are dealing with aggressors and perpetrators that
are more powerful and put a stop to double standards,
quickly condemning some perpetrators while turning
a blind eye to others. All survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence suffer greatly. We should not respond
quickly to some only because of their geographical
positioning, while others die slowly and unnoticed.
The international community must condemn all
perpetrators and impose sanctions against all of them.
Just to give an example, the response in Ukraine was
very good, but there are also many survivors in many
other countries, such as Iran, the Sudan, Guatemala and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, inter alia. The
international community can help to create or support
additional avenues for accountability for international
crimes, such as expanding the International Criminal
Court’s jurisdiction, creating tribunals or adjudication
mechanisms to fill gaps and facilitating the use
of universal jurisdiction in other countries. The
international response must be consistent. There cannot
be avenues for accountability for international crimes
in some States and a total absence of response and
accountability in others.

S/PV.9378

However, we must also engage with survivors in
efforts to close the gap between normative frameworks
and the reality on the ground. Survivor participation
is key to efforts to raise awareness about conflictrelated sexual violence and its impact and about how
we can strengthen justice pathways in a way that
keeps survivors at their centre. When we became
survivor champions, Kol
bassia and I knew and
understood that our role was not just about the two of
us representing all survivors but also about figuring
out how to make a space and create a platform through
which more survivors could participate in the work of
the Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict initiative.
I am grateful that the United Kingdom Government
understands that and has been very supportive. We
were honoured to work with so many other survivors
from many countries in the planning of the conference
in London. During a survivors’ retreat at Wilton Park
this year, we sought to establish together what proper
engagement means. I am very grateful that we now have
a global survivor advisory group that is committed to
guiding how we prevent and respond and to promoting
a survivor-centred approach in the area of conflictrelated sexual violence.
I hope that at the next meeting on this issue another
survivor from the group will be invited to speak to the
Council — and we are asking more countries to follow
suit in order to promote the leadership of champions
and survivors. We can learn good practices from other
countries such as Kosovo and Colombia in the way
they engage with survivors. Kolbassia and I have had
the opportunity to meet many more survivors from
various countries, and we have been very inspired by
seeing their determination and resilience. They tell us
about their own challenges in surviving journeys and
the risks they take in doing what they do. Despite the
challenges, the survivors who are leading the work on
the ground are facing a lot of problems in terms of their
own safety, stigma and in their efforts to bring their
own communities to understand the value of their work.
They are doing a great deal with little support from
States or the international community, but as a result of
that lack of funding many of them experience serious
financial difficulties. They cannot compete with big
names that easily meet the criteria for funding. They
are nevertheless doing tremendous work, including
inspiring other survivors about resilience and hope for
the future. I would like to take this opportunity to ask
for the establishment of a fund to specifically support
survivor-led work.

23-207209/27

S/PV.9378

Women and peace and security

Before I conclude, I also want to take this
opportunity to say that although I now live in the
United Kingdom and have been able to rebuild my
life, what is happening in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo — the country I am from originally — is
very sad. I call on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to be more present, not absent,
with regard to what is going on in our country. It has
a responsibility to start that national conversation and
to raise awareness locally about what is going on. I ask
the Government to support survivors and condemn
stigma in all its forms. Our people are suffering too
much, and the war has been long, The Democratic
Republic of the Congo has become a dangerous place to
live for women, let alone for little girls. The aggressors
are getting away with what they are doing, and they
seem to have strong allies and international support. I
want to take this opportunity to ask the international
community to condemn them, hold them accountable
and to end the double standards by responding quickly
and effectively to what is happening in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The President: I thank Nadine for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to begin by thanking Special
Representative Pramila Patten for her ongoing work
in this area. She has led this agenda with conviction,
courage and principle. I have had the honour to work
with her directly, and we continue to recognize the
important work of the United Nations in that regard.
I also thank our incredible briefers, Ms. Naw Hser
Hser and Ms. Nadine, for their briefings today. To put
it into context, when we hear from survivors at the
Security Council — and I want everyone to think about
this very carefully — they have been through the most
abhorrent violation of their person, unimaginable in
every sense. Not only have they survived that particular
violation of their person — their private space, as
Ms. Nadine rightly said — they have survived. They are
not just victims but survivors in the truest sense. And
when we hear from survivors, whether in the Council
or anywhere else in the world, we must imagine the
strength, courage and conviction of those survivors.
Not only have they survived, they have become the
most powerful of advocates for this vital agenda before
us today. I therefore reiterate my gratitude, through
Ms. Nadine and Ms. Hser Hser, to all the courageous
10/27

14/07/2023

survivors who are doing incredible work around the
world. I thank them for doing so much to bring global
attention to the horrors of conflict-related sexual
violence and to the central and pivotal responsibility
that we all have to support survivors.
Sexual violence must never be accepted as an
inevitable consequence of war. We here in the Council
have a special responsibility in that respect. As we
reflect on the past 15 years, in that time the Council
has built a robust framework for preventing sexual
violence, supporting survivors and, importantly,
bringing perpetrators to justice. And while we may
note those achievements, as we have once again heard
directly from the Special Representative and our expert
briefers, there remains a gap all over the world between
what the Council has rightly mandated and the reality
faced by thousands upon thousands of people across
conflict zones — boys, girls, women and men — and
that violence continues. As we heard from Ms. Nadine,
survivors often suffer in silence. And tragically,
perpetrators go unpunished.
We need to be the Council for action, not just talk.
We have a collective responsibility to bridge that gap.
That means that every one of our States has to put the
resolutions adopted by the Council into actual living
practice, ensuring that important and pivotal access
to justice, and, importantly, providing survivors with
the critical services they need in order to rebuild their
lives. It means that States and United Nations bodies
have to incorporate that vital gender perspective into
peacekeeping operations. As we have heard directly
from survivors, when someone sees people in uniform,
whether they are from the State or the United Nations,
that should bring hope. It should address their fears. It
should bring security and safety. We all therefore need to
step up and do more. It means that the Security Council
use sanctions against those perpetrators. And crucially,
it means that those who engage in armed conflict stop
acts of sexual violence with immediate effect. For its
part, the United Kingdom is determined that the lack of
understanding — and indeed ignorance — should never
be a barrier to action.
In that regard, in order to help close the
implementation gap, we have worked with the Mukwege
Foundation. And I pay tribute to the incredible and
courageous Dr. Denis Mukwege, whom many of us know,
for launching a new guidebook on State obligations for
conflict-related sexual violence. I am pleased that we
have provided Council members with a copy of it. I ask
23-20720

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

that we, as Governments, as civil society organizations,
as activists and as advocates, come together to make the
most of this excellent new tool. For more than a decade,
supporting survivors and international cooperation
have been the central tenets of the United Kingdom’s
Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict initiative. The
prevention element is key. Our landmark international
conference in November last year in London, to which
Nadine referred, brought together more than 1,000
delegates. And most importantly, it brought together
survivors. We have just heard from Nadine about
follow-up events of the global coalition of survivors that
has recently been formed. And that is needed. Why?
It is because we need to accelerate progress towards
our goals. Since that conference, to date, the United
Kingdom Government has imposed sanctions on 13
perpetrators of sexual violence. However, as we heard
from Nadine, it also requires financing. Our three-year
strategy is also backed up by up to £12.5 million of
funding. Importantly, it is also providing direct support
for survivors and helping countries to strengthen justice
and accountability.
Domestic, local justice — the evidence is there — is
best served when it is done nationally. We need to stand
up and ensure that we can support such efforts. We
also continue to lead international efforts to support
children born of conflict-related sexual violence. I ask
once again the question, and it is self-reflection for all
of us: what is the crime of the child born of that crime?
The short answer is nothing. And we should be showing
compassion, care and support to such children born of
such abhorrent acts.
We published today the commitments of the United
Kingdom and its partners to support that group under our
Platform for action promoting the rights and well-being
of children born of conflict-related sexual violence, in
addition to the International Alliance on Preventing
Sexual Violence in Conflict, which we recently
launched and is vice-chaired by Colombia and Ukraine.
I am delighted to report that it has grown to 21 members.
I am truly delighted that Spain joined the Alliance in
June. France also recently became a very valued and
important member. All members of the Alliance are
committed to amplifying survivors’ voices, sharing our
collective expertise and, importantly, pioneering new
approaches. Members of the Alliance today — this very
day of our meeting — issued a joint statement shining
a light on the appalling reports of sexual violence in
the Sudan, referred to by the Special Representative of

S/PV.9378

the Secretary-General in her briefing. We have called
for all parties to the conflict to end violence, including
sexual violence, and for safe humanitarian access to all
those in need. On behalf of the United Kingdom, as the
current Chair of the Alliance, I want to thank all Alliance
members for standing with us on that important issue.
As we have already heard, it is survivors that are
key in every sense — survivors such as those led by
our survivor Champions, Nadine and Kolbassia. As the
Prime Minister’s Special Representative on Preventing
Sexual Violence in Conflict of the United Kingdom,
I can say from personal experience that working with
such groups and such incredible, courageous Champions
over the past six years has been truly inspiring and
humbling. They guide our entire approach, and I am
truly grateful to Nadine for her contribution today.
I have had the honour of leading this agenda, as
well as going on field visits, like others, throughout the
world, including the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Balkans, Bangladesh and elsewhere. I would like to
share with everyone how abhorrent those crimes are.
When I visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
November 2022, with Her Royal Highness the Duchess
of Edinburgh, we went to the incredible hospital run
by Dr. Mukwege — the Panzi Hospital. Forget for a
moment the country. Forget who is speaking and who
went on the visit. And just visualize for a moment that
the youngest victim, the youngest survivor of sexual
violence, whom we met, was four years old. She was a
young girl who had been raped not once but a number of
times. And to her, a man meant rape. That is the reality
that we face around the world.
Therefore, I cannot over-emphasize the importance
of our debate today. I thank my own team here in New York
for putting together the agenda for this meeting. I also
thank the United Kingdom’s survivor advisory group,
which has asked me to underline several specific key
issues to the Council today, and I am honoured to do so.
First, there is the importance of a survivor-centred
approach in all our work, engaging with a wide range of
survivors in the decisions that we make. Why? Because
it affects them.
Secondly, there is the vital role of psychosocial
support for survivors overcoming trauma. All of them
are broken emotionally and physically. We therefore
need to ensure that the first step of helping them
rebuild their lives is provided by allowing them to
overcome trauma.

23-2072011/27

S/PV.9378

Women and peace and security

Lastly, the survivors’ groups have asked me to
underline the importance of ensuring access to justice
and addressing wider sexual violence concerns during
times of both war and, importantly, peace.
On the topic of justice, we are working on the
elaboration of a convention on crimes against humanity
so that it delivers more effectively for survivors.
We are also partnering with the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court to overcome barriers to
justice, including through a new virtual-reality tool to
help survivors engage directly with the courts. That
incredible technology creates a virtual court to help
witnesses and survivors give informed consent to take
part in trials and help them prepare to give evidence. It
is putting survivors first.
Sexual violence in conflict is not inevitable. It is
reprehensible, it is abhorrent, and it is our responsibility
to act. Together we can. Indeed, we must. What is more:
we will, so that together we can consign sexual violence
in conflict to the history books. With the help of the
courageous survivors at the heart of our work — God
willing, insha’allah — I hope that we will achieve
that objective.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Geissbühler (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank the United Kingdom for convening this debate
and the briefers for their contributions and shocking
first-hand accounts.
In the words of Nadia Murad, who briefed the
Security Council in April 2022,
“We need more than moral outrage. We need
action.” (S/PV.9016, p. 6)
Fifteen years after the adoption of resolution 1820
(2008), conflict-related sexual and gender-based
violence, as well as impunity, persists. In Myanmar, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Haiti, the Sudan,
South Sudan and in the context of Russia’s military
aggression against Ukraine, State and non-State
actors continue to use rape, sexual violence, sexual
exploitation, abuse and trafficking as tactics and
tools of war, torture and terrorism. We must fully and
sustainably implement the tasks that the Council set
itself in resolution 1820 (2008). I would like to highlight
three points for action in that regard.
12/27

14/07/2023

First, we must invest more in the deployment of
expertise and capacities in United Nations missions.
Women’s protection advisers must be mobilized and
provided with sufficient resources to enable them to
fulfil their mandates. We must strengthen capacities
and expertise in protecting people from sexual and
gender-based violence and preventing, monitoring and
prosecuting it. Those capacities must be strengthened
within troop- and police-contributing countries, panels
of experts on sanctions and national institutions.
Secondly, there is a close link between illicit arms
proliferation and sexual violence. We must take that
into account if we are to improve our prevention of
those crimes. The illicit proliferation of small arms
and light weapons increases the risk of conflict-related
sexual violence. In our prevention efforts, we need to
take a systematic approach to using arms-control and
disarmament tools in a gender-sensitive way, and that
principle also applies to sanctions regimes. And we
should promote the participation of women in forums
aimed at reducing arms proliferation. For that reason,
Switzerland supports the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research in its studies that relate to the
issue’s links to the aspect of gender.
Thirdly, all survivors should have fair and
unimpeded access to justice. Victims of conflictrelated sexual violence are entitled to effective remedy
and reparation under international law. To that end,
Switzerland supports the work of the Global Survivors
Fund, which works to develop survivor-centred
reparation programmes. Besides that, the documentation
of crimes is crucial to their prosecution. For example,
in its defence of the right to the truth, Switzerland is
committed to ensuring that survivors of sexual violence
in Ukraine, Kosovo, Iraq and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo have access to justice and reparations.
If sexual violence is not prevented and people are not
protected against it, there can be no equal participation.
And as we well know, the full inclusion of women is a
sine qua non for lasting peace.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would first like to welcome you to New York,
Mr. President, as you preside over today’s open
debate, and to thank Special Representative Patten for
her briefing.
Sexual violence is a heinous violation of human
rights. Fifteen years after the adoption of resolution
1820 (2008) on sexual violence in conflict, sexual
23-20720

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

violence is still widely used as a tactic in war and
terror, causing immense harm to women and girls in
many countries and regions. China firmly opposes the
use of sexual violence as a weapon of war and strongly
condemns all acts of sexual violence against women and
girls. We call on the international community to work
together to take comprehensive measures to eliminate
sexual violence in conflict as soon as possible and to
promote new progress in the area of women and peace
and security.
I want to address three points.
First, we need to strengthen conflict prevention
and resolution. Our world is witnessing an increasing
number of violent conflicts, with nearly one fourth of
the global population living in conflict-affected areas.
Vulnerable groups such as women and children face
particularly severe security threats and risks of sexual
violence, displacement and trafficking in persons.
Sexual violence in conflict cannot be eliminated in
isolation. Only by establishing ceasefires, ending
hostilities and restoring peace can women and children
be fundamentally free from harm and their basic
rights protected. To achieve peace, we must pursue
the political settlement of disputes and increase our
negotiation, mediation and facilitation efforts. We
must practice genuine multilateralism and translate
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations into action. We should also focus on
addressing root causes and invest more in achieving
common security. As the Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, it must actively fulfil that role and
demonstrate its commitment.
Secondly, strong countermeasures must be taken.
Security Council resolutions explicitly prohibit
sexual violence as a means of war, but that red line of
international law has been repeatedly crossed. If we
cannot effectively punish the crimes that have already
been committed, it will be difficult to deter and prevent
new violations. The international community must
strengthen the spirit of the rule of law and implement
the requirements for combating sexual violence in
conflict so that perpetrators can be held accountable
and justice can be achieved for their victims. The
countries concerned bear the primary responsibility
for the prevention and elimination of sexual violence
and the protection of their own women and children.
The international community, on the basis of respect
for those countries’ sovereignty and leadership, should

S/PV.9378

support them in increasing security sector capacitybuilding to combat terrorist and violent extremist forces
effectively, strengthening the rule of law and improving
the legal and regulatory system for the protection of
their rights and interests, expanding humanitarian
efforts and helping victims of sexual violence obtain
remedy and reparation.
Thirdly, we must support the empowerment and
development of women. In conflict situations, sexual
violence is often intertwined with issues of discrimination
and poverty, further worsening women’s plight and
suffering. In addition to a peace-focused approach, the
international community should also view and address
the issue from the perspective of women’s empowerment
and sustainable development. Efforts should be made
to eliminate gender discrimination and differentiated
treatment, as well as to address the livelihood
challenges and development gaps that women face.
Digital and information technologies are important
means for empowering women and critical tools
for delivering early warnings of conflicts, victim
assistance and investigation and accountability.
However, the lack of reliable, accessible and affordable
digital infrastructure is a common challenge for women
in conflict-affected areas. We welcome the focus of this
year’s International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
Violence in Conflict on the technology and digital
divide. We support Special Representative Patten’s call
for bridging the gender digital divide and advocate for
using digital technology to enhance the protection of
women in conflict-related areas and amplify women’s
active role, participation and transformative power in
the work of ensuring peace and security.
The issue of women and armed conflict is one of the
12 priorities identified in the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action. As the host country of the Fourth
World Conference on Women, China has always been
an advocate for gender equality, a protector of women’s
rights and a practitioner of women’s empowerment. We
have deployed many women peacekeepers to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, bringing hope to
people in conflict areas, especially women and girls.
China is committed to helping other countries in
promoting women’s development and has provided
training to more than 130,000 women professionals
in developing countries. China, in collaboration
with UNESCO, has established awards for girls’ and
women’s education, helping more women change their
destinies through knowledge and skills.

23-2072013/27

S/PV.9378

Women and peace and security

China will continue to work with the international
community to make active efforts and greater
contributions to the advancement of women globally.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank the United Kingdom for its leadership
in preventing conflict-related sexual violence and for
providing this incredible opportunity for us today.
In particular, Mr. President, I am grateful to you for
sharing your experiences in dealing with this issue.
I also want to thank today’s civil society briefers
for their powerful messages, especially Special
Representative Patten, whose remarks were compelling.
From signing frameworks of cooperation to leading
the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict network, the Special Representative and
her team have made a real difference. We proudly
support the mandate of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, including through financial
support, which last year was over $2 million, and we
encourage other Member States to back this important
work. Finally, let me add our strong support for her
participation in this meeting; we object to Russian
Federation’s personal attacks against her for amplifying
the voices of women.
The United States is deeply committed to
preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual
violence and all other forms of gender-based violence.
We know that in conflicts around the world, sexual
violence is often used as a weapon of war. In Ukraine,
contrary to Russian objections and insinuations, there
is ample evidence and horrific reports of Russian
soldiers deploying sexual violence against men,
women and children, with victims ranging from age 4
to over 80. In the Sudan, girls on the way to school
are sexually assaulted by the Rapid Support Forces
militia and armed nomads. In Myanmar, the bodies
of women extrajudicially executed by the military
have injuries consistent with sexual violence. And the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/413) highlights
the shocking number of sexual crimes committed by
criminal and illegal armed groups in a host of other
countries, including in Haiti, as we heard earlier today
(see S/PV.9377).
The international community must do more
to address this profound crisis. We owe it to the
courageous survivors who have come forward and to
those who have been silenced by fear to take swift
and meaningful action. First, we must recognize that
14/27

14/07/2023

gender-based violence is fundamentally rooted in gender
inequality. We must take on harmful gender norms, and
we must empower women and girls in all their diversity.
The United Nations and its States Members must apply
conflict-sensitive and participatory gender analysis to
ensure our interventions address underlying inequities.
These inequities, when combined with weak or absent
State institutions, can lead to widespread gender-based
violence. It is therefore on us to continue to promote the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
decision-making roles at all levels of conflict prevention,
resolution and peacebuilding.
Secondly, we must adopt a survivor-centred and
trauma-informed approach. This means providing
survivors with access to medical care, particularly
clinical management of rape, psychosocial support,
reproductive health services and legal support. This
also means listening to those who have experienced
sexual violence in conflict and responding to their
unique needs, which will help facilitate their recovery
and legal remedies. And this means creating supportive
environments where survivors’ rights are respected,
retraumatization is avoided and survivors have the
resources they need to thrive.
Finally, we cannot turn a blind eye to these atrocities.
There must be accountability. We heard Nadine. We
heard Hser Hser. We must use our diplomatic tools to
reduce impunity for perpetrators and deter future acts of
violence. The United States is committed to exercising
existing authorities to impose economic sanctions and
implement visa restrictions.
I would also like to highlight the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the Security Council systematically
monitor conflict-related sexual violence and include it as
a stand-alone criterion for targeted sanctions. We must all
increase accountability within conflict-affected regions,
and we can do so by strengthening documentation efforts,
passing relevant national legislation and changing
institutional culture.
The Security Council has spent a great deal of time
discussing these issues, but we cannot discuss away the
crisis. It is time for us to act. The most vulnerable — those
trapped in conflict zones who want nothing more than the
chance to live in peace and who yearn for justice — are
counting on us. We must commit to action, and we must
do so with urgency.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I recall the able manner
in which you, Mr. President, presided over last year’s
open debate on conflict-related sexual violence (see
23-20720

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9016), especially the interest and fervor you
brought to the discussions, as well as your own longstanding contribution to ending conflict-related sexual
violence. Today has been no different, and Ghana thanks
the United Kingdom for convening today’s important
open debate.
I also express appreciation to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Pramila Patten for her briefing
and welcome the unique perspectives of Naw Hser Hser
and Nadine. We salute the courage of our briefers and
their strong advocacy on the subject, as well as the
attention they draw to the need to follow through with
global commitments.
As is well known, in times of armed conflict,
the fabric that holds communities together unravels.
Families are torn apart, civilian objects are crushed,
people are displaced, and impunity replaces law, order
and accountability. The breakdown of law and order
in such situations is usually accompanied by extreme
poverty, hunger and disease. When sexual violence is
introduced into this toxic mix, the human suffering is
immense, with deep-seated and long-lasting emotional
and physical consequences for affected persons and
communities. To borrow the words of Heinrich Böll,
the German writer and Nobel Prize winner:
“war will never be over, never, as long as somewhere
a wound it had inflicted is still bleeding.”
Ghana strongly condemns the unending cycle of
sexual violence across several conflict contexts. Whether
it is the subjugation of women and girls in Afghanistan
by the Taliban or the use of rape as a tool by armed
gangs against members of rival communities in Haiti,
the impunity with which sexual violence is perpetrated
is extremely alarming and not geographically isolated.
We also note, with great concern, as the 2022 report
of the Secretary-General (S/2023/413) indicates,
that the growing prevalence of arms proliferation,
increasing militarization, and shrinking civic space
have exacerbated sexual violence and challenged safe
reporting and response. The Security Council and
the global community therefore have a continuing
responsibility to ensure that the existing resolutions
that champion prevention, accountability and justice
are translated into tangible actions that can be felt on
the ground.
In making specific recommendations for today’s
debate, Ghana would like to focus on three issues.

S/PV.9378

First, we reaffirm support for the Security Council’s
practice of treating conflict-related sexual violence as
a basis for targeted sanctions against culpable actors.
Periodic briefings to sanctions committees by the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
would be useful in sustaining interest in the progress
of implementation of such sanctions. Tied to the global
efforts, domestic legislation in support of investigations
and penalties against perpetrators of sexual violence in
conflict settings would be necessary to right the wrongs
done to victims.
Secondly, while we commend the progress made
in the deployment of women’s protection advisers as
part of peacekeeping and special political missions, to
monitor, analyse and report on conflict-related sexual
violence, we urge the timely provision of adequate
resources for such purposes so as to facilitate frequent,
reliable and accurate reporting from the field to enable
the Council to take needful action when it can be most
effective in preventing or stopping such atrocities.
Lastly, to empower survivors, the United Nations
and Member States, including national civil society
groups, should be intentional in the recruitment of
survivors to be part of decision-making processes and
advocacy mechanisms on sexual violence. That form
of empowerment, we believe, meaningfully impacts
policy, legal processes and implementation and
helps survivors to re-establish a sense of control and
agency, as well as to recognize their own strengths and
capabilities in resolving that challenge.
In conclusion, 15 years since the Council’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), our
collective responsibility to eliminate conflict-related
sexual violence and end impunity for such crimes is
needed now more than ever. For our part, Ghana will
continue to demonstrate commitment to the women and
peace and security agenda through its national efforts
but also in our regional and international mobilization
endeavours. In that regard, “Women in peacekeeping”
is one of the priority themes that we have chosen to be
discussed during the peacekeeping ministerial meeting
scheduled to take place in Ghana from 5 to 6 December.
We commend Bangladesh for co-hosting in Dhaka, with
Canada and Uruguay, a preparatory meeting on the
theme. We look forward to welcoming all supporters of
peacekeeping in Accra to establish practical measures
to advance the potential of women in the arena of peace
and security.

23-2072015/27

S/PV.9378

Women and peace and security

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are delighted to see you, Mr. President, in
the President’s chair at the Security Council.
The Russian Federation condemns sexual violence
in all its forms, as it does all other crimes committed
in conflict and in post-conflict settings. Those acts
should be investigated and the perpetrators should be
held accountable. Such law enforcement activities falls
within the purview of States. Measures taken by United
Nations system entities and civil society complement the
aforementioned efforts. That work should be systematic
and comprehensive and aimed at achieving long-term
and lasting results, and due regard should be given to
the causes and sources of that negative phenomenon.
All of the aforementioned is possible only when
the information the United Nations draws on has been
verified and is objective. It is absolutely unacceptable
when the suffering of people who have been subjected to
sexual violence or accusations that such serious crimes
have been committed are used as pawns in political
games or become part of mudslinging rhetoric, which
is often not based on fact.
We must also note that there is a robust legal
basis for international cooperation on the prevention
of sexual violence in conflict, namely, the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 on the protection of victims of
war and their Protocols Additional. However, we are
compelled to recognize that not all States are parties
to those Protocols Additional, including even some
members who are actively calling for combating war
crimes in the Council.
The Security Council, addressing that issue as
part of its efforts to maintain international peace and
security, made its contribution by adopting a number of
thematic resolutions. Responsibility for such crimes is
set forth in States’ national legislation. On that note, it
is unclear to us why it is necessary to refer, as is done
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/413), to
customary rules of international law when prosecuting
sexual violence. It is also unclear why the term conflictrelated sexual violence is being used, as it is not a legal
term, nor has it been endorsed by the Security Council.
We also have some questions about assertions
that we should be establishing certain indicators of
sexual violence occurring and being provoked. We
would recommend that, instead of engaging in such
speculative exercises, the Security Council should
pay greater attention to specific situations and stress
16/27

14/07/2023

enforcement. The cornerstone should be efforts to assist
States in prosecuting perpetrators who, as a general
rule, are non-State entities. A key component of the
United Nations work on that front is assisting victims.
The assessments and conclusions of the report on
specific countries raise even more questions.
On what basis were the allegations that sexual
violence is being used in Syria as a tactic to stifle
dissent levelled at that country? It is worth noting that,
in the report, there is no assessment of what is going
on in Idlib and the trans-Euphrates area. What is the
reason for that selective approach? We welcome the
mention made of the tragic situation in Al-Hol camp,
where we are seeing rampant violence, prostitution,
sexual exploitation of minors and human trafficking.
However, we do not see any information in the report
about the fact that all of that is happening on territory
under the control of the United States and their allies.
The section on Myanmar is also one-sided. The
list of perpetrators consists solely of members of
the Myanmar armed forces, whereas crimes being
committed by terrorists and militants are ignored. That
does not help the credibility of the report.
The section on the Central African Republic and
Mali can be seen as an attempt to shift stress from the
objective fact that sexual violence tactics are being
used by terrorists.
We also have some questions about the portrayal
of the situation in Afghanistan. On the one hand,
there is an attempt to give a general assessment of
the human rights situation in the country, including
the issue of the restrictions on women’s rights. On the
other hand, there is no mention of the impact on the
rights of women, as well as those of other Afghans,
brought caused by the United States’ seizure of their
financial resources — resources which could have been
used to improve the awful socioeconomic situation
in Afghanistan. In those reports, there is also no
mention of the United States armed forces or the Global
Coalition against Da’esh, which spent many years on
the territory of the country, despite the fact that human
rights defenders published countless accounts of the
United States military being at least complicit in the
sexual exploitation of boys.
If any doubts remained as to the fact that the report
was biased, the section on Ukraine definitively dispels
them. The allegations contained therein targeting
23-20720

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9378

Russian servicemen are groundless and absurd. They
are nothing but a dissemination of fakes made up in
Kyiv. Representatives of the Kyiv regime are acting in
keeping with the maxims of their Third Reich idols, and
one of whom stated that the bigger the lie, the easier
it is to believe. However, the Secretariat should not
be participating in such information campaigns. Any
accusations against States or parties to a conflict in
any report should be reliable and based on corroborated
facts and drawn from sources that are verifiable. Yet,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
prefers to simply level groundless accusations at States’
armed forces without providing any chance for them to
be verified.

basement in Kramatorsk, where she was beaten, raped
and otherwise abused. Ukrainian secret service officers
threatened to do the same to her underage daughter.

Before the report was published, the Russian
Federation officially submitted requests to the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for information that would allow
it to verify what was said. Those requests were ignored.
On that note, we would like to underscore once again
that we fully repudiate the insinuations contained in
the report. The actions of Russian servicemen within
and outside combat environments are subject to
sole command, stringent rules and regulations. Any
unlawful acts are investigated without delay and the
perpetrators are brought to justice.

Those are but few cases of real crimes committed
by nationalists and the Armed Forces of Ukraine, which
the regime in Kyiv has never investigated, to which
the Special Representative has never paid attention
and for which no one was held accountable. However,
Russia will bring the relevant criminal proceedings
to a conclusion, and the perpetrators will receive the
punishment they deserve.

We would like to remind Council members that
the human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, as well as other international
entities, have published reports regarding numerous
crimes committed by Ukrainian fighters — beatings,
tortures using electric shock, threats and rape of
those suspected of cooperating with the authorities
in Donetsk and Luhansk. However, that information
was not duly assessed in the reports regarding sexual
violence in conflict.
After the liberation of the Donetsk People’s
Republic and the Luhansk People’s Republic, the
Investigative Committee of the Russian Federation was
able to conduct large-scale investigations of the crimes
committed by Ukrainian nationalists and servicemen
who were present on the territory of the two Republics
from 2014 onwards. Russian investigators determined
and recorded testimony from civilians who were
subjected to abuse by neo-Nazis and nationalists. A
woman from the Donetsk People’s Republic related that,
on the night of 18 to 19 January 2015, she was taken
by Ukrainian security service officers and brought to a

A female resident of Mariupol described how
fighters from the Azov Battalion, the very same one
whose leaders Zelenskyy recently hugged on camera,
raped women who showed sympathy for Russia and
sprayed construction foam, pardon me, into their
genitals. Neo-Nazis from the Tornado Battalion set
up a torture chamber in the basement of a school in
Lisichansk between 17 and 23 March 2015, in which
they tortured and raped local female residents, including
senior citizens and minors.

Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I congratulate the United Kingdom on its initiative
to convene today’s open debate, which is part and
parcel of our collective endeavour to fully implement
resolutions on the important issue of conflict-related
sexual violence.
Against a global backdrop of several crises,
today’s subject gives us an opportunity to reflect on
the fate of civilians, specifically women and children,
who pay the highest price in fragile conflict and postconflict situations. I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Patten and the civil society
representatives, Ms. Hser Hser and Nadine, present today,
for quite ably giving fresh impetus to today’s debate.
The adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), on 19 June
2008, and resolution 1888 (2009) in 2009, establishing
the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
amplified the echo of the women and peace and
security agenda, specifically with regard to the need to
put an end to sexual violence in armed conflict. Those
resolutions marked a turning point in the way we view
sexual violence, as a security issue in its own right.
The most recent report on the topic recalls, in a very
alarming manner, that sexual violence continues to be
used as a tactic of war, torture and terrorism against

23-2072017/27

S/PV.9378

Women and peace and security

the backdrop of deep-rooted political and security
crises, which are exacerbated by militarization and
the illicit proliferation of arms. The shocking situation
compels the international community, and specifically
Council members, to mobilize their efforts to put an
end to the cycles of conflict-related sexual violence by
stressing in particular preventive capacity, stemming
from the promotion of the rule of law, and by investing
more in three areas — prevention, accountability and
institutional reform.
Gabon continues to place the well-being of women
and young people at the centre of its development policy
and recognizes the boundless potential of women in
relation to security, stability and lasting peace. We
have remained consistent in our commitment to, and
advocacy for, first, accountability for the perpetrators
of conflict-related sexual violence and, secondly,
strengthening the resilience of women, who are often
the first victims.
The effective participation of women in prevention,
conflict resolution, post-conflict recovery and
peacebuilding helps not just to build more lasting peace
but also to make transitional justice decisions fairer and
better tailored to the harm suffered by victims, as well
as to their expectations.
We welcome the recent conviction of the
perpetrators of atrocities in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Justice was delivered to more
than 300 Congolese women who were victims of sexual
violence. Similarly, we commend the tireless efforts of
local organizations, such as the Synergie des femmes
pour les victimes des violences sexuelles, that work for
equitable justice and provide legal assistance to women
who are victims of sexual violence in North Kivu.
By facilitating access to justice and accountability
mechanisms for survivors, local civil society plays
a pivotal role in the reparations process — a key
component in restoring dignity to victims. To be more
efficient, we recommend a comprehensive approach that
is adapted to various situations on the ground by putting
specific emphasis on building the institutional capacity
of States, security sector reform and public awareness.
My country calls for further efforts to ensure
ownership and the comprehensive and inclusive
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
concomitant resolutions, in particular the pivotal
resolutions 1820 (2008) of 2008 and 2467 (2019) of
2019. We also recall resolution 1983 (2011), which was
18/27

14/07/2023

submitted by Gabon in 2011, as a sign of its staunch
commitment to this important issue. The resolution
underscores, among other things, the importance of
making systematic efforts to end conflict-related sexual
violence and gender-based violence.
My country calls for an enhanced partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
specifically with regard to coordinating their efforts on
the women and peace and security agenda, not just to
find tailored and lasting solutions to conflict and their
root causes, but also to further incorporate the gender
dimension in United Nations peacekeeping operation
mandates. To that end, we welcome the increasing
deployment of female peacekeepers in African Union
operations, for example, in Somalia. Moreover, Gabon
welcomes the establishment by the African Union
of organizations such as FemWise-Africa and the
African Women Leaders Network, which are effective
instruments that can further the involvement of women
in political processes. Those African Union initiatives
deserve praise and encouragement.
The denial of justice to victims is a compounding
circumstance that hampers their ability to rebuild.
We are firmly convinced that, to better prevent and
combat conflict-related sexual violence, we must adopt
a survivor-focused approach based on the protection of
survivors, resilience-building, justice and reparations.
By tending to the invisible wounds of war and armed
conflict and providing victims with access to the
mental health services and psychosocial support they
need, we will move decisively towards realizing our
shared aspiration of a world of peace for present and
future generations.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank the United
Kingdom presidency for organizing today’s open debate
on such a critical issue.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Patten for her briefing, and we pay tribute
to her continuous efforts to advance the conflictrelated sexual violence agenda, despite difficulties
and challenges. Her mandate and work are not only
important; they are indispensable and must be supported
and strengthened, as her mission embodies the hopes of
countless survivors for justice. We are grateful to the
civil society briefers for bringing their perspective to
the Council and helping us to better grasp the painful
realities on the ground.
23-20720

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

Let me recognize the particularly active role played
by the United Kingdom and by Lord Ahmad and the
special and continued attention to the issue, including
through far-reaching initiatives and projects, including
the one that was presented here.
When conflicts begin, so do violations and crimes,
including the terror and devastation of sexual violence.
As we heard, the world continues to experience
the shock of bodies of women and girls becoming
battlegrounds. Like bombs and missiles that blow up
residential areas, schools and kindergartens, sexual
violence in conflicts, used as a weapon of war, assaults
human bodies, scars minds, undermines the very fabric
of humankind and inflicts immeasurable suffering on
its victims. It is unbearable and a stain on our collective
efforts and commitment to respect human rights and
uphold the moral ground of the values we cherish.
Over the years, the Council has adopted a number
of resolutions condemning sexual violence in conflict
and emphasizing the need for accountability. Yet
despite a robust normative framework, conflict-related
sexual violence against women and girls continues in
many parts of the world, used as a weapon to punish
civilians and terrorize communities. That is what has
happened or is happening in many war-torn parts of the
world — from Afghanistan to Syria, from Haiti to the
Sudan and South Sudan, from Myanmar to Mali and
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic and Libya. In Ukraine, reports of
women, girls and children raped by Russian forces are a
painful and appalling testimony to widespread atrocities
and severe violations of human rights committed in an
unjust, illegal and absurd war.
The truth may be hard to swallow, but facts are
stubborn things. The cases mentioned and many others
testify to the huge gap between the normative framework
developed over the years and its actual implementation
on the ground. Nadine is right — there are laws, but
we need to enforce them. There are tools, but we need
to make proper use of them. One fundamental issue is
how hard it is to hold all the perpetrators accountable.
Despite clear condemnations and calls for prosecution,
far too many individuals responsible for sexual violence
manage to evade justice. The high levels of impunity
perpetuate a culture of violence and undermine
efforts to comprehensively eradicate conflict-related
sexual violence.

S/PV.9378

Another crucial gap lies in the still insufficient
access that survivors have to support services. While
resolutions emphasize the need for health care,
psychosocial support and legal aid, the realities on the
ground often fall short. Many survivors lack access
to those essential services, including sexual and
reproductive services, which hinders their recovery
and reintegration into society. Furthermore, and worse,
social stigmatization and cultural barriers prevent many
survivors from seeking assistance, exacerbating the
challenges they face. We must do more and better and
take decisive steps in that regard. As always, the work
starts at home. Member States must strengthen their
national legal frameworks to effectively criminalize
conflict-related sexual violence and ensure that the
perpetrators are brought to justice. Internationally, we
may need to go beyond resolutions. We must come to a
consensus and consider sexual violence in conflict on
the same level as prohibited weapons such as biological
and chemical agents. Given the pervasiveness of such
atrocities in almost every context of conflict and war, it
is worth the time and effort to explore other options for
multilateral and global support and action, including
the possibility of formulating a convention. In our view
it would be a valuable investment in what we are visibly
missing, which is prevention.
Peacekeeping missions should prioritize preventing
and responding to conflict-related sexual violence.
Increased funding for survivor support should be directed
towards programmes that provide comprehensive
assistance, including physical and mental health care,
legal aid and economic empowerment. In particular,
greater efforts should be made to ensure inclusivity
and accessibility for those who are always the primary
targets in conflicts — marginalized and vulnerable
groups, such as women with disabilities and members
of the LGBTQ+ community.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
Special Representative Patten for including Kosovo
in the annual report (S/2023/413). No matter where or
when such acts have happened, sexual crimes should
never be left unaddressed. The severe physical and
psychological trauma experienced by the victims should
never be ignored, excused, downplayed or forgotten.
We strongly believe that the report can constitute
a robust instrument to monitor and document, on an
annual basis, the progress that Kosovo’s authorities and
institutions have made in documenting those crimes

23-2072019/27

S/PV.9378

Women and peace and security

14/07/2023

and addressing their legacy by integrating a survivorcentred approach into the heart of all their programmes
and interventions.

the appointment of protection advisers. I will now raise
some specific elements for consideration by the Council
and Member States.

In conclusion, addressing conflict-related sexual
violence requires collective action, strong political
will and sustained commitment at every level. Women
and girls everywhere are not war spoils. They have
an inherent right to be safe, to live in peace and with
dignity and to enjoy freedom and equality. We must
therefore do everything we can to bring perpetrators to
justice, support survivors on their path to recovery and
ultimately advance towards the creation of a world free
from the horrors of sexual violence and exploitation.

First, prevention, protection and monitoring should
be included in all mandates and planning efforts that
require it.

Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate
on a very important issue. I am also grateful for the
information provided by Special Representative Patten,
as well as the testimonies and recommendations of the
civil-society briefers.

Fourthly, we should prioritize early warning and
the promotion of a culture of prevention, based on the
training, inclusion and full participation of women.

We are concerned about the information provided
in the Secretary-General’s report for 2022 (S/2023/413)
on conflict-related sexual violence in 17 cases, which
shows how far we still have to go. We deplore the use of
sexual violence as a tactic of war against women, girls,
boys and LGBTQI+ persons by State and non-State
armed groups, terrorist groups, private security
companies, mercenaries and criminal gangs.
Fears of stigma, rejection and isolation and a lack
of professional support mean that such crimes have
the highest rates of impunity, in or out of contexts of
conflict. We urge all States to take specific measures to
curb sexual violence in conflict situations, in line with
resolution 1325 (2000). We further support the efforts
of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security to provide verified information to inform and
guide the Council’s actions.
The issue we are addressing today should not
be limited to a regular debate. Just this morning
(see S/PV.9377), we adopted resolution 2692 (2023),
submitted by Ecuador and the United States, on
renewing and updating the mandate of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). Through
it, the Council condemns the increase in sexual and
gender-based violence in Haiti and expresses its
concern about its use by gangs there. It also insists
that BINUH’s human rights unit should have a specific
capacity to address sexual violence, including through
20/27

Secondly, we must tackle the drivers of violence
rooted in structures of domination and power.
Thirdly, we should consider inter-sectoral protocols
for victim care, including access to mental health care
and priority attention to survivors of sexual violence
in conflict.

Fifthly, accountability is the best deterrent.
Survivors must be given access to the legal tools
available in their national criminal justice systems and
in international bodies.
Sixthly, it is essential to build networks, such as
those of women mediators or peace ambassadors, that
take into account ethnic, cultural and other identities,
bringing together the needs, perspectives and
aspirations of survivors.
Finally, the lessons learned in cases such as those of
so-called comfort women in Asia and victims of sexual
violence in Colombia or in African or European countries
point to the need to explore measures that intensify
the Council’s efforts. Such efforts must promote the
reconstruction of the social fabric, the recovery of trust
and reparations for victims — indispensable elements
in achieving true and sustainable peace.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank the United
Kingdom for organizing today’s open debate and
the briefers for their comprehensive presentations.
Brazil takes this opportunity to commend Special
Representative Pramila Patten and her Office for their
crucial work in and commitment to combating sexual
violence in conflict. I also thank the civil society
briefers for their testimonials. Civil society plays a
key role in working with victims of conflict-related
sexual violence, giving them ways to move forward
after being the target of such an abhorrent crime. I
commend the meaningful presence here today of so
many representatives of countries that are also deeply
concerned about and engaged in this issue.
23-20720

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

Sexual violence adds an extra layer of suffering
to the already dreadful reality of war. It inflicts longlasting psychological trauma on victims, destroying the
social fabric and jeopardizing efforts towards peace and
development. More than 15 years have passed since the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), and the
United Nations has made some advances in addressing
this issue — for instance, the establishment of the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the launch
in September 2022 of the Framework for the Prevention
of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence.
The commission of sexual violence in conflict is
directly related to impunity, which, unfortunately,
remains common in most conflicts. Holding offenders
accountable should be the bare-minimum response
provided by States. Delivering justice to victims sends a
clear message of zero tolerance for such crimes and helps
to prevent their recurrence. Nevertheless, the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/413) sheds light on the need to
invest both financial and human resources to support
embattled States in providing justice. The process that
culminated in the inauguration of the ad hoc tribunal in
Guinea-Conakry shows the need for such investment.
Another key measure for ensuring accountability
and lasting peace is to include references in peace
agreements and post-conflict arrangements to the
situations of those who have been subjected to sexual
violence during conflict and its aftermath. As shown in
the Framework for the Prevention of Conflict-Related
Sexual Violence, gender-based violence drivers, such
as patriarchal norms and rules, gender inequality and
gender-discriminatory laws and rules, to name a few,
play a key role in inciting the commission of those
crimes. States should therefore also address those
drivers in their efforts against conflict-related sexual
violence, for instance, by promoting the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in decision-making
processes and peace talks.
Mr. Kuymizakis (Malta): I would like to begin by
thanking the United Kingdom for convening today’s
open debate. We also thank Special Representative
Pramila Patten and the briefers, Ms. Naw Hser Hser
and Nadine, for their courageous calls to action and
clear recommendations.
As a tactic of war, torture and terrorism, sexual
violence shatters the lives of survivors, their families
and their communities. In the eastern Democratic

S/PV.9378

Republic of the Congo, armed groups use sexual
violence to control territory and natural resources,
as attacks in and around internally displaced persons
camps escalate. In Ukraine, large-scale displacement
has increased trafficking for the purposes of sexual
exploitation. In Haiti, gangs regularly kidnap women
and girls. Arbitrary arrests in Myanmar have separated
children from their parents, increasing their risk of
forced marriage and human trafficking. The verified
incidents of conflict-related sexual violence in South
Sudan doubled in 2022. Conflict-related sexual
violence is often directed at human rights defenders.
In Colombia, illegal armed groups enforce patriarchal
social norms through violence by targeting LGBTQI
persons. States have an obligation to ensure a safe,
enabling environment for civil society and to protect
women who are active in public life from reprisals.
We are deeply concerned that the Taliban’s relentless
and systematic gender persecution in Afghanistan has
created an environment of pervasive impunity.
The glaring gap between the Security Council’s
standards and commitments to prevent and respond
to conflict-related sexual violence and the horrifying
reality for victims and survivors must be closed. In that
respect, we would like to highlight three priorities.
First, preventing conflict-related sexual violence
and improving protection requires survivor-centred
approaches that ensure access to comprehensive sexual
and reproductive health services and strengthen the
capacity of women- and survivor-led organizations. That
is especially crucial when health services are attacked,
as reported in the Sudan, where women and girls on the
move are being terrorized by sexual and gender-based
violence. It requires effective partnerships and trust
between local communities and the United Nations. It also
requires the deployment of women’s protection advisers
to all relevant situations of concern. Furthermore,
gender must be incorporated systematically into risk
assessments, monitoring and reporting, operational and
tactical planning, budgets and concepts of operation.
Secondly, by stopping the illicit transfer and
trade of weapons and ammunition to non-State actors,
mercenary groups and individuals, we can counteract
the growing links between militarization and sexual
violence and exploitation.
Thirdly, the Security Council can more proactively
use targeted sanctions against those who perpetrate
and direct sexual violence in conflict. We fully support

23-2072021/27

S/PV.9378

Women and peace and security

the Special Representative of Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the Council ensure that conflictrelated sexual violence is monitored systematically.
We firmly believe that targeted sanctions can be used
effectively to deter the commission of violence by all
parties, including mercenaries and private military and
security companies. More than 70 per cent of the parties
listed in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/413)
are persistent perpetrators. Those verified cases should
be aligned with the work of the sanctions committees
and their panels of experts, who should have access
to the data and expertise on conflict-related sexual
violence. Briefings by the Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict to sanctions committees
can greatly facilitate that important work.
All Member States have a role to play in
strengthening accountability and fostering a genderresponsive security sector. That cannot be done without
responding to structural gender inequality and harmful
social norms. As a shared commitment holder on
the agenda on women and peace and security, Malta
reaffirms its commitment to advancing those priorities.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, I would like to thank the United Kingdom
for organizing this important open debate and for its
unwavering dedication to the cause of ending sexual
violence in conflict once and for all. I would also like
to thank Lord Ahmad for presiding over this meeting.
I thank Special Representative Patten for her detailed
briefing today and reaffirm our full support for her
mandate and the tireless work of her Office. We listened
carefully to Ms. Hser Hser and Nadine, and I want to
thank Nadine in particular for sharing her personal and
heart-wrenching testimony with us today. The voices
and recommendations of survivors are critical to the
work of the Security Council.
The United Arab Emirates condemns all acts
of sexual and gender-based violence, particularly in
conflict. As co-Chair of the Informal Expert Group on
Women, Peace and Security, alongside Switzerland,
and as a member of the International Alliance on
Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict, a UnitedKingdom-led initiative, the United Arab Emirates
remains a steadfast partner in strengthening the global
response to those crimes.
Fifteen years have passed since the Council
adopted resolution 1820 (2008), which condemned
sexual violence as a tactic of war and an obstacle to
22/27

14/07/2023

peacebuilding. Since then, the international community
has taken important steps, but much remains to be done.
In that regard, I would like to share three points today.
First, we need to bolster survivors’ access to
necessary services and support. That requires taking into
consideration the needs of women and girls — from earlywarning mechanisms to humanitarian aid provision.
Those efforts can be successful only if they are carried
out with a whole-of-society approach, throughout the
entire conflict continuum. We must include women and
youth, as well as religious, community and education
leaders, in the design and implementation of genderresponsive strategies. In turn, they can act as one of
the key pathways to the prevention of such crimes.
That is critical across ongoing conflicts, including in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan,
where we continue to receive an increase in reports of
conflict-related sexual violence.
Secondly, the prevention of these crimes demands
strengthened national judicial institutions and the
consistent implementation of the rule of law. National
authorities with robust judicial institutions stand a
much better chance of countering sexual and genderbased violence. That could certainly be the case in
Haiti, where gangs employ such heinous acts as a
weapon to terrorize, abuse and control populations.
The United Nations capacity-building expertise should
also be leveraged to bolster survivor-centred justice
and accountability, which includes supporting those
who are uniquely positioned to engage with national
Government entities, such as peacekeeping operations,
and engaging with entities with expertise, such as
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence. Close cooperation with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and UN-Women can also
strengthen global norms and standards for gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls. To
that end, I am pleased to share the news that, last month,
the United Arab Emirates renewed its commitment to
UN-Women and pledged an additional $15 million over
the next three years.
Thirdly, we must utilize technology and education
to combat the shifting nature of such crimes. In recent
years, the threat has metastasized from a physical
threat to one that pervades online space. When the
threats evolve, so too must our tools to protect against
them. We do not need to be overly creative. Even
commonly used digital technologies such as WhatsApp
23-20720

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

can provide access to reporting mechanisms and
protection networks. As Ms. Shabana Basij-Rasikh
said at the briefing on Afghanistan last month (see
S/PV.9354), ensuring equal accessibility to technology
can be a lifeline to women and girls at risk. Education
must also be deployed to tackle the root causes of these
crimes, such as gender discrimination, hate speech and
incitement to violence. Education has the potential to
promote gender equality and eliminate stigma. Just last
month, the Council unanimously adopted resolution
2686 (2023), co-sponsored by the United Arab Emirates
and the United Kingdom, which urges Member
States to support quality education that promotes the
principles of tolerance to prevent sexual and genderbased violence.
In conclusion, we have seen promising progress. In
the normative framework, there are women’s protection
advisers in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
and these abhorrent crimes are included as a listing
criterion in various United Nations sanctions regimes.
Reparations for survivors and increased access to data
also speak to the direction of travel of our efforts. By
enhancing our commitment and advancing the gains,
the international community can better address these
heinous crimes and provide women and girls with
the protection and dignity they need and deserve.
We have the mechanisms in place. It is high time for
their implementation.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this important open debate on conflictrelated sexual violence, and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Patten and the civil society
representatives for their comprehensive briefings.
Sexual violence in conflict is a serious crime that
violates human dignity and consequently threatens
international peace and security. Japan is deeply
concerned about the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/413) pointing out the alarming
persistence of sexual violence and the weakening of the
rule of law in countries in conflict, such as Afghanistan,
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Ethiopia, Haiti, South Sudan and Ukraine.
In the context of Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine, we profoundly regret that the human rights
monitoring mission in Ukraine and the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine have
documented in detail and brought to light the distressing
reality of sexual violence as a method of torture and

S/PV.9378

inhumane treatment inflicted upon innocent civilians
and prisoners of war. In that regard, we welcome the
fact that Ms. Patten signed a framework of cooperation
with the Government of Ukraine to prevent and respond
to conflict-related sexual violence.
Japan has consistently demonstrated its proactive
stance in addressing conflict-related sexual violence
and has adhered to the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We firmly believe that establishing
robust judicial institutions and holding perpetrators
accountable are crucial to deterring conflict-related
sexual violence, a principle emphasized in numerous
resolutions, including resolution 2467 (2019). In order
translate that belief into action, Japan has played
a pivotal role in supporting the operation of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and stands as its
largest financial contributor. Since 2014, Japan has
also lent support to the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, operating
under the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Through that engagement, Japan has actively bolstered
countries’ judiciaries, such as those in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Central Africa, Somalia and
Iraq, with the goal of enabling the effective prosecution
of perpetrators. One of the concrete outcomes through
those efforts has been the indictment of the leader of an
armed group following a mobile court hearing in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In recognizing the significance of addressing the
practical needs of survivors, who continue to endure
immense suffering, Japan places the utmost importance
on providing timely and comprehensive assistance. We
have supported survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence through initiatives such as United Nations
Action Against Sexual Violence in Conflict, focusing
on areas such as psychosocial care and access to justice,
the invaluable work of which is currently represented
in the exhibition, entitled “A Conflict-related Sexual
Violence Survivor’s Journey”, in the South Lobby.
Furthermore, Japan actively contributes to multilateral
frameworks, including the Global Fund for Survivors
of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence and the Trust Fund
for Victims of the ICC.
I am pleased to emphasize that the endeavours
that I just mentioned are well represented in a key
component of Japan’s third national action plan on
women and peace and security, which was unveiled in
April. Furthermore, the recent action plan specifically

23-2072023/27

S/PV.9378

Women and peace and security

acknowledges the importance of providing support
for survivors, encompassing individuals of all
genders, including males and those who identify as
gender non-conforming. We are committed to the
implementation of the action plan in a transparent
manner by ensuring periodic external evaluations and
feedback from civil society.
A holistic response to conflict-related sexual
violence requires cooperation across Member States,
the United Nations system, civil society organizations
and other stakeholders. Japan has demonstrated
such cooperation by successfully co-facilitating
General Assembly resolution 76/304, on international
cooperation for access to justice, remedies and
assistance for survivors of sexual violence.
In conclusion, Japan will continue to make its
utmost effort to eliminate conflict-related sexual
violence wherever it takes place, including by promoting
the implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions. As the civil society representatives stated
earlier, our approach should be consistent, without
double standards.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Patten and our briefers for their unwavering
commitment on the ground. I would also like to
thank the United Kingdom for its leadership in, and
commitment to, this important subject, as illustrated by
its convening of this debate today. I commend all the
States that have committed themselves to ending sexual
violence and are advocating the women and peace and
security agenda.
I will underscore five points.
First of all, I reiterate our full support for the
mandate of the Special Representative. Her role of in
providing early warnings and impartial documentation
is essential. Human dignity and the interests of
women and girls must always be prioritized. We will
continue to ensure that, in its follow-up of crises, the
Security Council takes into account conflict-related
sexual violence.
We share the concerns expressed in the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent annual report on sexual violence
in conflict (S/2023/413). Even in 2023, Russia’s war of
aggression against Ukraine has given rise to the use of
sexual violence as a weapon of war and torture against
women, men and children. The report also documents
24/27

14/07/2023

abuses in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Sudan, Burma and many other parts of the world.
Earlier, we heard about the situation in Haiti in that
context. France condemns the violence and expresses
its solidarity with the victims.
Secondly, we must collectively fight impunity.
In the face of such violence, we must adopt a zerotolerance policy. The perpetrators of those abuses must
be held accountable. The documentation efforts by
the United Nations and investigations by national and
international courts are indispensable in that regard.
We support the strategy developed by the International
Criminal Court on the issue, and we support that
jurisdiction with human and financial resources. The
Secretary-General’s report mentions the essential role
of the deployment of specialists to protect victims and
analyse and investigate sexual violence in conflict. We
support those concerns being taken into account in all
peace operations. The Council must also implement all
the tools at its disposal, in particular, sanctions against
perpetrators of sexual violence. They constitute a
deterrent that must be used. We support the role of the
Special Representative before the sanctions committee
in that regard.
Thirdly, we stand with victims and survivors of
sexual violence. Care must be comprehensive, and
survivors must be able to access it, including when
legal proceedings are inaccessible or blocked. That is
why France is providing €8.2 million in funding to the
Global Fund for Survivors of Conflict-Related Sexual
Violence established by Dr. Denis Mukwege and
Ms. Nadia Murad.
Fourthly, to prevent sexual violence and
its consequences, we must strengthen women’s
participation and combat gender inequalities and
gender prejudices and stereotypes. The physical and
psychological consequences of such violence have an
impact on the societies affected and can mark several
generations. The full and meaningful participation of
women in all decision-making, at the negotiating table
and in all areas is essential to adequately guarantee the
justice and reparations due to victims of sexual violence,
and which are necessary to achieve reconciliation.
The Council has indeed identified that need in its
women and peace and security agenda, which must be
implemented. Together, we must strengthen our efforts
in that regard, ahead of the Summit of the Future, to be
held in 2024.
23-20720

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9378

As I have already said, preventing sexual violence
also means addressing discrimination, prejudice
and stereotypes. The rise of sexist, misogynistic or
homophobic hate speech increases the risk of genderbased and sexual violence.

disproportionately affects that segment of society.
Refugees and internally displaced persons from armed
conflicts are also mostly women, girls and children, as
well as persons with disabilities and the elderly. They
are at heightened risk of conflict-related sexual violence.

Finally, we must adopt the most protective standards
in combating against violence against women. We
call for the universalization of the Council of Europe
Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence
against Women and Domestic Violence, a modern
international instrument protecting against violence
against women, which also applies in times of armed
conflict. We welcome the fact that new accessions have
increased over the past two years.

As expressed by His Excellency Mr. Filipe Jacinto
Nyusi, President of the Republic of Mozambique,
during the Security Council’s open debate on the
protection of civilians held in May (see S/PV.9327),
the first step towards ending conflict-related sexual
violence has to be the cessation of hostilities in all
conflicts. Peace is the ultimate guarantee of civilian
security. We must therefore take stock of the existing
international, regional and national tools to tackle the
root causes of prevailing conflicts. While we are aware
that making peace and building peace take their own
time and pace, conflict-related sexual violence cannot
be accepted as the inevitable cost of armed conflict.
Therefore, all available tools, including legal, policy,
diplomatic and financial tools, must be mobilized to
prevent and mitigate its effects.

We have heard the Special Representative, Ms. Nau
Hser Hser and Nadine loud and clear. They may rest
assured that the fight against sexual violence will remain
at the heart of France’s priorities in the Council. France
will ensure the implementation of the resolutions on
women and peace and security and the provision of
adequate resources for teams on the ground.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique wishes to
express its profound gratitude to the United Kingdom’s
presidency for organizing this timely and important open
debate. We also praise the United Kingdom’s leadership
on this matter. We extend our deep appreciation for the
comprehensive briefings by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Pramila Patten, and the
civil society briefers.
We would like to start by reaffirming Mozambique’s
condemnation, in the strongest terms, of gender-based
violence in general, and conflict-related sexual violence
in particular. It constitutes a war crime and a crime against
humanity, as recognized by Security Council resolution
1820 (2008) and by the Protocol to the African Charter
on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women
in Africa, also known as the Maputo Protocol, among
others. The Secretary-General’s report on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2023/413) highlights that the
crime has persisted and deepened in different parts of the
world. It continued to be a tactic of war and terrorism. It
is a horrific practice that, unfortunately, prevails, in spite
of international and regional frameworks. It shows the
extent of the commitment and action that are required to
counter the full scale of the problem.
It is, therefore, with great concern that we see
women’s and girls’ rights continue to be seriously
jeopardized and violated. Conflict-related sexual violence

The implementation of international, regional
and national legal instruments to prevent and address
conflict-related sexual violence is of paramount
importance. The United Nations and other relevant
stakeholders have a pivotal role to play in continuing
their support with concrete actions to prevent conflictrelated violence all over the world. In that regard, we
welcome the efforts made by Governments around the
world, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s report. We
commend them for their commitment to implementing
their legal frameworks with regard to conflict-related
sexual violence.
In order to address conflict-related sexual violence,
it is crucial that we develop holistic approaches. In this
regard, we would like to underline the following points.
First, we deem it important to adopt and strengthen
existing international legislation at national levels,
with a focus on the investigation and prosecution of
perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence.
Secondly, there is a need for expanding training
programmes for State and civil society actors in
matters related to international, regional and national
frameworks on conflict-related sexual violence.
Thirdly, we must strengthen the capacity of the
justice sector at the national level to identify and assess
information on conflict-related sexual violence.

23-2072025/27

S/PV.9378

Women and peace and security

14/07/2023

Fourthly, we advocate allocating resources for the
implementation of national action plans on women,
peace and security. This could strengthen the potential
of these instruments through budgeted operational
provisions to address conflict-related sexual violence.

equality, holistic and comprehensive survivor-centred
services, including sexual and reproductive-health-care
services, mental health support, as well as counseling
and legal services. But above all, we must ensure that
the victims’ voices are heard and listened to and heeded.

In conclusion, Mozambique reiterates its firm
commitment to continuing to implement measures that
can contribute to our collective action in addressing
conflict-related sexual violence. It is our conviction that
women and girls, who are the most affected by these
criminal acts, can themselves play a transformative role
in political, socioeconomic and peace processes.

Thirdly, impunity for these crimes must end. Those
responsible for such acts must be held accountable.
The onus is on all of us to strengthen the rule of law
and ensure that there is independent investigation of
and prosecution for conflict-related sexual and genderbased violence.

The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than three
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rae (Canada): I am very pleased to speak
on behalf of 66 members of the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security, an informal network
that represents all five regional groups at the United
Nations, as well as the European Union. I would like to
highlight four points.
First of all, we categorically condemn the use
of sexual and gender-based violence by State and
non-State actors in situations of humanitarian crises
and conflict-affected settings. Sexual violence, which
disproportionately affects women and girls, is not only
a human rights violation, but it is also an abhorrent
act of cruelty, a significant impediment to peace and a
denial of gender equality.
We are deeply concerned by the persistent and
widespread use of sexual violence and related impunity
in many conflict-affected settings, as outlined by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2023/413). We call on
all parties to respect international law and all relevant
Security Council resolutions and to immediately cease
all forms of sexual and gender-based violence.
Secondly, we need to ensure that the victims and
survivors are at the heart of all our efforts to respond
to conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence.
Victims and survivors have different needs and different
perspectives and can face multiple and intersecting
forms of discrimination and stigmatization. We must
ensure that their human rights are protected and
promoted, that they are treated with dignity and respect,
and that they are able to obtain access to justice and
26/27

Fourthly, we urge the Security Council to use
all its tools to support action against conflict-related
sexual and gender-based violence as a deliberate tactic
of war. We strongly encourage the Council to ensure
that country mandates emphasize the prevention
and monitoring of and response to conflict-related
sexual violence.
Finally, we encourage the Security Council to
invite the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict to regularly
brief the sanctions committees on this critical question.
It is time for urgent action to prevent and respond to
conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence and
to ensure holistic, comprehensive survivor-centred and
trauma-informed responses.
(spoke in French)
I would just like to say a brief word in my capacity
as representative of Canada. For us, the most important
thing is that we listen to the experiences of all survivors,
and not just to listen to their experiences, but to act in
response to what we have heard and seen. This includes
women, girls, men and boys, groups as well as members
of the LGBTQI+ community. Canada is committed to
continuing its work with survivors.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the potential candidate country
Georgia, as well as Andorra, Monaco and San Marino,
align themselves with this statement.
23-20720

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

We reaffirm our long-standing and unwavering
commitment to eliminating sexual and gender-based
violence in all its forms, in times of peace and times
of war. Conflict-related sexual violence is a war crime
and a blatant violation of international law. It is a global
threat that knows no borders.
We strongly support the work and mandate of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Patten.
The report presented today (S/2023/413) is crucial to
shedding light on the continued and escalated levels
of conflict-related sexual violence, much of which
remains underreported and unpunished.
We acknowledge and applaud the work of women’s
civil society organizations, which are often the first
responders in war and conflict. While underresourced
and, deplorably, targeted with reprisals, they deliver the
support and services that the public and private sectors
often are not able to provide, including in response to
sexual violence.
We note with deep concern the use of rape as a tool
for oppression, repression and political intimidation
across a number of countries and the widespread
reported use of sexual violence by State actors, such
as the Russian armed forces in Ukraine, as well as the
increasing trend of sexual violence used by mercenary
and private military and security companies in countries
such as Mali, Myanmar, South Sudan and Ukraine.
These crimes must be punished and those responsible
held accountable. It is the responsibility of all States
to prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence
and bring perpetrators to justice.
The redress for this type of violence needs to be
linked to transitional justice processes. At the same

S/PV.9378

time, we need to resolutely implement the international
framework that is in place to address these abhorrent
crimes and back up our political declarations with action.
EU support for eliminating and addressing sexual
violence in conflict and emergencies is notable, with
projects incorporating a response to conflict-related
sexual violence amounting to over €100 million, and EU
missions and operations continuing to address sexual
and gender-based violence, including conflict-related
sexual violence, within the scope of their mandates. This
year, the EU has also imposed sanctions on individuals
and entities in view of their role in committing serious
human rights violations and abuses, in particular sexual
and gender-based violence.
Sexual violence in conflict obliterates humanity. We
stand ready to work with the international community to
end the impunity of perpetrators, tackle the institutional
culture that tolerates the use of sexual violence and
guarantee access to justice, reparations and redress for
survivors as well as to reintegration and livelihoods.
This includes provision of comprehensive sexual and
reproductive-health-care services and strengthening of
sexual and reproductive-health measures as an integral
part of compliance with the conflict-related sexual
violence frameworks by everyone, the United Nations
and its agencies, but also Governments.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. Given the lateness
of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence of members
of the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

23-2072027/27
