United Nations

S/PV.4317

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4317th meeting
Thursday, 3 May 2001, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cunningham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .

Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Ryan
Miss Durrant
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Neewoor
Mr. Strømmen
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Mejdoub
Mr. Krokhmal
Sir Jeremy Greenstock

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Letter dated 12 April 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2001/357).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-35824 (E)

*0135824*

S/PV.4317

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of May, I would like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Sir Jeremy Greenstock,
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, for
his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of April 2001. I am sure that I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Greenstock for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council’s
business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
Letter dated 12 April 2001 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2001/357)

The President: I welcome the Special Envoy of
the President of the Rwandese Republic, His
Excellency Mr. Patrick Mazimpaka.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mazimpaka
(Rwanda) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: I welcome the Minister of State
for Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation of
Uganda, His Excellency Mr. Amama Mbabazi.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mbabazi
(Uganda) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: I welcome the Minister of
Finance of Burundi, Mr. Charles Nihangaza.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nihangaza
(Burundi) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mangueira
(Angola), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Akasaka
(Japan), Mr. Andjaba (Namibia), Mr. Erwa
(Sudan), Mr. Norström (Sweden) and Mr.
Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania) took
the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Angola, Burundi, Canada, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Japan, Namibia,
Rwanda, the Sudan, Sweden, Uganda and the United
Republic of Tanzania, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Ms. Safiatou Ba-N’Daw, Chairperson of
the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, His Excellency
Mr. Leonard She Okitundu.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. She
Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a
seat at the Council table.

2

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Ms. Ba-N’Daw to take a seat at the
Council table.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 12 April 2001 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council transmitting the
report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
document S/2001/357.

S/PV.4317

I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to the following documents:
S/2001/378, letter dated 16 April 2001 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Uganda to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; S/2001/402, letter dated 24 April
2001 from the Permanent Representative of Rwanda to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; and S/2001/433, letter dated 1 May
2001 from the Permanent Representative of Burundi to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
On behalf of the Security Council, I would like to
welcome Foreign Minister She Okitundu of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Minister of State
Mbabazi of Uganda and Minister of State Mazimhaka
of Rwanda. We look forward to their remarks. We also
welcome Ms. Ba-N’Daw, Chairperson of the Panel of
Experts.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank our
colleague Ambassador Mutaboba of Rwanda for his
service to his country and the United Nations. We wish
him a safe journey home and extend a warm welcome
to his successor, Ambassador Gasana.
Today’s meeting occurs against a backdrop of
sadness and outrage in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the international community. Six
representatives of the International Committee of the
Red Cross were brutally murdered on 26 April.
In the presence of Foreign Minister She
Okitundu, we extend our condolences to the families of
the four Congolese victims. In the presence of our
Colombian and Swiss colleagues, we extend the same
message of sympathy for their nationals, who also lost
their lives in the service of our common humanity.
We express the hope that the perpetrators of this
crime will be brought to justice. We all need to work
for the safety and protection of humanitarian personnel
throughout the world and support those who seek to
alleviate human suffering caused by conflicts that we
seek to resolve.
I would like to note also that our discussion today
takes place 15 months after the last United States
presidency of the Security Council, and we also
discussed the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Much has changed, but much remains to be
done, and our discussion today on this important topic

should be seen in the context of this Council’s
determination to help bring the tragic conflict in the
Congo to an end.
I shall now give the floor to Ms. Safiatou BaN’Daw, Chairperson of the Panel of Experts on the
Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Ms. Ba-N’Daw (spoke in French): I am grateful
for this opportunity to present the results of our work
to the Member States of the United Nations.
The mandate entrusted to us by the Security
Council had three main points: to consider the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and other forms of
wealth in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; to
research and analyse the links between the exploitation
of resources and the continuation of the conflict; and to
make recommendations to the Security Council. The
results of our work are presented in the order
recommended in our mandate.
First is the illegal exploitation of resources and
other forms of wealth. The Rwandan and Ugandan
armies, and to a lesser extent the Burundi army, have
been engaging in massive looting of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
since 1998. This exploitation has benefited from
existing structures that date back to the war of August
1998. This exploitation takes two forms: mass-scale
looting and the systematic and systemic exploitation of
resources.
The mass-scale looting has consisted mainly of
the extraction, removal and confiscation of natural
resources, which are amassed or placed in reserve by
private individuals, companies or other groups.
Military and civilian officials of these two countries, as
well as the rebel leaders, have profited directly in most
cases.
The systematic and systemic exploitation has
required
good
organization
and
appropriate
infrastructure. In the case of Uganda, General Kazini
has set up networks and circuits with individuals he
controls. In the case of Rwanda, the organization is
more sophisticated and involves various levels. In
short, an entire system has been set up by the
authorities of certain countries with a view to greater
efficiency in the exploitation of the natural resources of
the Congo.

3

S/PV.4317

As regards the Government, although we cannot
speak of the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
the Panel has nonetheless identified some rather
surprising practices by which the Government of the
late President took some of the profits of parastatal
entities or granted concessions to the companies of
associates, in violation of certain procedures.
On the first point of the mandate, the Panel
concludes that certain Congolese and the Ugandan and
Rwandan armies are engaging in the exploitation of
natural resources and have set up structures to facilitate
this exploitation. That exploitation involves coltan,
gold, diamonds, timber, ivory, coffee and fiscal
resources.
The links between the exploitation of resources
and the continuation of the war are found at three
levels: at the level of personal gains of high-ranking
military and civilian officials, who benefit either from
direct financial gains or from getting important
contracts for their companies; in the field, because
there is more fighting between the regular armies of
non-invited States and the Mai-Mai and other negative
forces in the mining areas than at the official front,
where they have to deal with the Congolese Armed
Forces (FAC) and its allies; and at the level of
financing the conflict, because of the gap between the
military expenditures of the various armies and the
level of the defence budget of the various countries.
The conflict is financed in four ways, all of which
are linked to the exploitation of resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The regular armies are financed from the public
coffers. The problem often is how to meet the
shortfalls. In some cases, it is the public coffers that
provide that role. However, the public coffers often
benefit from a trickle-down effect of the re-exportation
economy based for the most part on the exploitation of
the resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
There is also financing from secret funds, as well
as free financing, which allows the armies stationed in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to receive funds
directly or indirectly from local companies or
individuals involved in the exploitation of natural
resources.
There is also financing through barter, in which
the authorities in control of a given area grant a mining

4

or other concession to one enterprise, which provides
military equipment in exchange.
The recommendations are essentially of six kinds.
However, the Panel stresses only four for the sake of
presentation: sanctions against countries and entities
illegally exploiting the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; preventive
measures with a view to avoiding the situation’s
recurrence; compensation for those suffering the illegal
exploitation of their natural resources; and the
establishment of a framework for the reconstruction of
the occupied areas.
The Panel thanks all those who supported it in its
work. This is also an excellent opportunity for us to
thank in particular the Government of Uganda, which
provided all the information we asked for.
The Panel had a difficult and very delicate
mission that had to be carried out and completed in
extremely adverse and hazardous circumstances in a
sensitive region where the susceptibilities and
ambitions of the belligerents have reduced the life of
the local populations to insecurity and uncertainty. Life
in the region today hangs in the balance. We are
grateful to God for our safety and that of the many
witnesses with whom we spoke, as well as and
especially that of ordinary Congolese.
The President: I wish to acknowledge the
presence among us of the Secretary-General and to
thank him for coming.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, on behalf of
Major-General Joseph Kabila, President of our
Republic, and of my Government and people, as well
as on my own personal behalf, I extend our deepest
condolences to you, Sir, to the families of the victims,
to the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC), and to the Governments of Switzerland and
Colombia over the cowardly murder on 26 April of six
members of the ICRC, including four nationals from
my country. My Government pays tribute to the
dedication of the people of the ICRC who have given
their lives to ease the suffering of my people. Despite
this tragedy, it is our hope that the ICRC and all other

S/PV.4317

humanitarian organizations will continue their efforts
to help the people of my country.

interests there, which fuel their warmongering. We
therefore welcome the report in document S/2001/357.

I express my delegation’s pleasure at seeing you,
Sir, preside over this open meeting of the Security
Council on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We are pleased that the Security Council is
currently being led by the representative of the United
States this month, a crucial and decisive moment for
putting a final end to the war of aggression that has
been waged against my country for 34 months. I also
take this opportunity to extend to you, on behalf of my
delegation and on my own personal behalf, my
warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, the principal organ
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

We bitterly regret, however, the fact that the
report confirms rather belatedly what my country has
loudly proclaimed since the very beginning of the
aggression, namely, that the main objective has not
been the security concerns of the three aggressor
countries: Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi. The
memorandums and all the white books that my
Government has conveyed to the Security Council
since August 1998 clearly show the double link
between the illegal exploitation of our resources and
the unleashing of the war, as well as between the illegal
exploitation and the mass violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. These documents
have been submitted to the Council, which has issued
them as official documents.

My delegation also acknowledges the excellent
work of the delegation of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland during its presidency last
month.
We also pay a well-deserved tribute to Mr. Kofi
Annan, Secretary-General of the United Nations. My
country is grateful to him for his outstanding efforts to
restore peace to the Great Lakes region and to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in particular. He has
shown enormous energy and perseverance in seeking to
end the useless and senseless violence that has taken so
many lives in our country. The Democratic Republic of
the Congo, through its highest authority, MajorGeneral Joseph Kabila, President of our Republic,
hopes that the Secretary-General will be able, in a
second term, to maintain the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as one of his top
priorities and to pursue his most commendable work
towards lasting peace and reconstruction in my
country.
Lastly, I would thank Mrs. Safiatou Ba-N’Dow
and all members of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
their essential report, which is of great political and
historic significance to us in the Congo. It
demonstrates that the false pretext of border insecurity
is no longer tenable and that the real motive for the
aggression is the systematic plundering and illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The aggressor countries have
occupied Congo because of their vast economic

In paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, “Declaration on the
granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples”, whose provisions are essentially duplicated
in resolution 2625 (XXV), it is stated that
“The subjection of peoples to alien
subjugation,
domination
and
exploitation
constitutes a denial of fundamental human rights,
is contrary to the Charter of the United Nations
and is an impediment to the promotion of world
peace and co-operation”.
We thank you, Sir, and all members of the
Security Council for having included on the Council’s
agenda the item on the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources and other forms of wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in violation of its
national sovereignty. The item is indeed within the
competence of the Security Council because of the
Council’s principal responsibility under the Charter for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The subject logically falls within the Council’s interest
in a swift return of lasting peace to my country and my
people.
My delegation is pleased that a consensus is
clearly emerging today within the Council and the
international community on the direct linkage between
the planned massacre of the Congolese people, the
shameless looting of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the continuation of fighting.
All of this ends up seriously impoverishing our people.

5

S/PV.4317

My delegation is pleased that in order to delimit
the goal of its work, the Panel of Experts decided to
define and interpret the concept of “illegal
exploitation”. This deals with all the extracting,
producing, marketing and exporting activities carried
out in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
violation of its sovereignty, in violation of mining and
environmental measures and in violation of
international contractual and customary law.
We would remind the Council of the following.
First of all, in the Corfu Channel case, in 1949
the International Court of Justice issued a ruling in
which it affirmed that among independent States,
respect for territorial sovereignty is one of the essential
bases of international relations. The concept of
sovereignty includes exclusivity, autonomy and full
authority within the territorial region.
Secondly, General Assembly resolution 1803
(XVII) of 14 December 1962, entitled “Permanent
sovereignty over natural resources,” in paragraph 7
states that violating the rights of peoples and nations to
sovereignty over their natural resources and wealth is
contrary to the spirit and letter of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and hinders the
development of international cooperation and the
maintenance of peace.
The report of the Panel of Experts describes most
eloquently the structures used by the occupying forces,
namely, Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi, whose
iniquitous and villainous methods are unequalled in the
darkest chapters of modern history.
Death threats against the members of the Panel of
Experts are unacceptable. It is up to the Security
Council, which gave them their mandate, to ensure
their security and to require that all States concerned
cooperate fully with the United Nations so that the
truth can burst forth.
The greed of the aggressor countries has sown
death and destruction throughout my country. The
Council will recall the terrifying figures cited by Ms.
McAskie, Emergency Relief Coordinator ad interim, in
her report on 28 November 2000. The report noted the
16 million Congolese who were directly affected by the
war of aggression — that is 33 per cent of the entire
population of the country. Two million died as direct
and indirect victims of the war, including
approximately 600,000 children under five years old.

6

Many other millions of innocent Congolese civilians
have become refugees in other countries or are
internally displaced. These figures have been
confirmed by the European Office of Humanitarian
Assistance and the International Rescue Committee,
which reported on nearly 3 million dead in the areas
occupied by the aggressors. This is an appalling,
intolerable situation.
The Council will recall the massacres of peaceful
Congolese civilians, the assassinations and murders of
civilians and Congolese prisoners, the deportation of
entire populations, attacks on individuals, rape and the
deliberate spreading of the AIDS virus.
The Council should remember the suffering of the
city of Kisangani, where three times the Rwandan and
Ugandan troops clashed, bombing residential areas,
cultural objects and places of worship despite their
being protected by the provisions of article 53 of
Additional Protocol 1 to the Geneva Conventions of 12
August 1949, and thus causing loss of human life,
especially among the vulnerable, mostly women and
children. Following these hateful acts, the Council
adopted resolution 1304 (2000) of 16 June 2000 and
called for the immediate, unconditional withdrawal of
Ugandan and Rwandese troops. We deplore the fact
that today, about a year later, despite measures taken by
the International Court of Justice in The Hague last
July, the city is still occupied.
More recently in Ituri, Ugandan troops caused
deadly clashes between the Hema and Lendu, two
important ethnic groups in our Orientale province, who
until then were living in peace.
On the moral, material and physical levels, the
damage that has been done is enormous. The
Congolese people, who warmly welcomed the report of
the Panel of Experts, are now entitled to call for
appropriate reparations pursuant to article 91 of
Additional Protocol 1 of the Geneva Conventions. It
provides that a party to a conflict which violates the
provisions of the Conventions and the Protocol shall, if
the case demands, be liable to pay compensation. It
shall be responsible for all acts committed by persons
forming part of its armed forces. Paragraphs 87 to 93 in
the report of the Panel of Experts clearly indicate the
names of individuals implicated in the looting.
Let me offer a few arguments proving that what
has happened in my country did not happen by chance,
but was rather premeditated and carefully planned. On

S/PV.4317

31 August 1998, my Government submitted a
memorandum on the armed aggression by the
Rwandan/Ugandan coalition against the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The memorandum, issued as an
official document of this Council, showed how
powerful alliances of interests made use of the move by
aggressor countries to serve their goal of dismembering
Central Africa for the purposes of economic
domination and control of the sources of important raw
materials.
The geographic zones of expansion of this
Balkanization strategy extend from the north of the
mining province of Katanga to the southern Sudan,
passing through the forests of the province of
Maniema, the Ruzizi valley in South Kivu, the
province of North Kivu and Orientale province. These
vast geographical areas contain enormous, coveted
wealth, such as strategic minerals, gold, diamonds, oil,
niobium, columbo-tantalite (coltan), timber, coffee,
quinine and so forth.
At the environmental level, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and other forms of
wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
violation of its sovereignty, has had devastating and
perhaps irreversible consequences for the management
of the flora and fauna. Entire national parks —
Virunga, Garamba, Salonga, Kahuzi-Biega — that were
classified by UNESCO as the heritage of mankind have
been completely devastated. First they were victims of
the flood of Rwandan refugees and people displaced by
successive conflicts. Then the parks became the target
of poaching established as a practice of war and of
organized illicit trafficking.
My delegation made a heartfelt appeal to the
Security Council that it should call on the international
community to react and help us protect unique species.
Because of the savage slaughter with automatic
weapons by the occupying forces, Congolese elephants,
bonobos, gorillas in the eastern plains, mountain
gorillas, chimpanzees, baboons, white rhinoceroses,
okapis and Congolese peacocks are all being
exterminated.
As a result of this enormous undertaking, only the
people of the Congo are losing. Continuation of this
unjust and senseless war and the illegal exploitation of
the natural resources and other forms of wealth have
greatly increased the suffering of our people.

We were outraged to hear that even yesterday
Uganda was being praised by the Bretton Woods
institutions when at the same time the report of the
Panel of Experts, in paragraphs 187 to 190, shows how
the systematic looting of Congolese resources has
directly contributed to improving the balance of
national accounts in that country and in Rwanda. The
fact that our aggressors are on the list of countries
benefiting from the Highly Indebted Poor Countries
Debt Initiative is seen by my people as rewarding them
for their crimes.
My country endorses the recommendations by the
Panel of Experts in paragraphs 236 to 242. These relate
to reparations and compensation for the Congolese
people and show that it is necessary to set up a
framework for the reconstruction of the country. To
that end, the conditions should be created to bolster the
powers of the State and to enable it to provide
improved safety and security for people throughout its
national territory.
In paragraph 239 of its report, the Panel of
Experts recommends the establishment of an
international mechanism that will investigate
individuals named in that paragraph as being involved
in economic criminal activities. That list should be
expanded to include those named in paragraph 211 as
being on the verge of becoming the godfathers of this
illegal exploitation. My Government considers that the
Council should act swiftly on the basis of these
relevant recommendations.
With all due respect for Rwanda, the systematic
looting of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has helped finance and support
the war in my country. My delegation would recall that
pillage is prohibited under article 33 of the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War.
The aggressors bear the shame of claiming to
teach the people of the Congo a lesson in democracy
and good governance. But in fact, they are bands of
looters. They will answer to history for this barbarism,
which will go down in the annals of mankind, along
with their attendant atrocities and massacres.
I wish most sincerely to thank Angola, Namibia
and Zimbabwe, which have come to my country’s
assistance in the framework of the self-defence
provisions of the statute of the Southern African
Development Community and in conformity with the

7

S/PV.4317

relevant provisions of the United Nations Charter. I
must point out that, in the absence of the aggression of
which the Democratic Republic of the Congo is victim,
the allied troops of Angola, Namibia and Zimbabwe
would certainly not be on Congolese territory.
My Government wishes also to pay hearty tribute
to the entire Congolese people, which has tirelessly
stated, loud and clear, its devotion to the Congolese
nation and its keen wish to coexist within a united,
strong country, in line with the founding accord of the
republic and with the self-determination achieved on
30 June 1960.
My delegation assures the Council and the
international community that His Excellency Major
General Joseph Kabila, President of the Republic, is
determined on behalf of the Congolese people to
restore peace through a diplomatic solution to the
conflict. On 2 February 2001, the Security Council
heard His Excellency Major General Joseph Kabila,
President of the Republic, speak at length about the
illegal exploitation of natural resources and other forms
of wealth in my country. That exploitation must end
immediately: the consequences for present and future
generations are already extremely grave.
The illegal exploitation of the mining resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo by aggressor
States and their nationals violates the right of the
Congolese people to self-determination. It also violates
the principle of the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which the
Security Council has repeatedly reaffirmed in all its
resolutions on the situation in my country.
With a view to attaining the peace demanded by
my people, and in the light of the gravity of the
situation, my Government calls on the Security Council
to call for protective measures comprising an embargo
on looted products in transit through, inter alia, Kigali,
Bujumbura and Kampala. And principally we call on
the Council to implement all the recommendations of
the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including: order
the demilitarization of the city of Kisangani,
reparations for material damage, and compensation for
the population in accordance with resolution 1304
(2000) of 16 June 2000; state that only the total and
final withdrawal by the aggressors can guarantee an
end to the looting of the wealth of the Democratic

8

Republic of the Congo; recognize the grave moral,
material and physical damage suffered by the
Congolese people as a result of this war and the
concomitant mafia-like activities; order meaningful
reparations for that damage in order to restore the
rights of the Congolese people; and order that legal
action be taken against the perpetrators of this looting
and their accomplices.
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the kind words
he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Special Envoy of the
President of the Rwandese Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Patrick Mazimpaka, on whom I now call.
Mr. Mazimpaka (Rwanda): My delegation would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May. Our
congratulations also go to your predecessor, Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, for a job well done last month. I wish to
thank you and, through you, the Security Council for
convening this open meeting, at which delegations can
express themselves on the contents of the report of the
Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, document
S/2001/357 of 12 April 2001, which has just been
presented to the Council.
Rwanda fully cooperated with the Panel, as is
rightly recognized in the report; since the publication
of the report we have put forward the reaction of the
Government of Rwanda, which is set out in document
S/2001/402, to which reference has been made, for
everybody to read through in order to see our detailed
comments.
We believe that the mandate given to the Panel
was not carefully defined; this led to contentious
interpretations. In our view, there are four major issues
that made the Panel of Experts produce a report that we
do not endorse.
First, the report interpreted “illegality” to mean
activities carried out without the consent of a
legitimate Government or of an authority exercising
power and control over territory. Those concepts,
which are generally accepted, are, in the context of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, defined also in the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement: article III, paragraph 18,

S/PV.4317

stipulates that State administration shall be exercised
by the Congolese signatories until new institutions
emanating inter-Congolese dialogue are set up. That
has not yet happened. Since that Agreement received
and, we hope, continues to enjoy the support of the
Council, we would have expected the Panel to adopt
the letter and spirit of the Agreement.
Secondly, the Panel extended the definition of
natural resources and other forms of wealth to include
services, transport, finance, and other movements of
goods and people. In our region, these are regulated by
multinational agreements, which include those between
our three countries — the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Burundi and Rwanda — and the conventions of
the Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries
(CEPGL), as well as regional arrangements, such as
those under the Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa (COMESA) and the Northern Corridor
arrangement; these conform also to World Trade
Organization conventions.
Ignoring these historical ties among the peoples
of the region is prejudicial to the socio-economic wellbeing of the people of the region, and more particularly
those of the Democratic Republic of the Congo cut off
from Kinshasa, who have been historically linked to
the world through eastern routes through Rwanda,
Burundi and Uganda.
Thirdly, the sources cited by the Panel do not
reflect the efforts that the Government made to
facilitate access to information. The Panel had an
opportunity to meet Rwanda’s head of State, President
Paul Kagame, for two hours. Nothing in the report
indicates that the Panel benefited from that meeting. It
is also true that none of the conclusions were put to the
President for discussion. The same goes for the large
number of ministers and officials who made themselves
available to discuss the issues with the panel.
Fourthly, the private sector, which was
characterized as pivotal in the illegal exploitation, was
never contacted to clarify their business practices or
credentials to the Panel. That is against the norms of
natural justice.
We can only conclude that the panel relied on
unacceptable sources variously described in the report
as deserters, a “high number of insiders living in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Europe”
(S/2001/357, para. 11) and “reliable sources” (ibid.,
passim) that are not identified. One wonders why the

Panel could not appreciate that such politically
motivated sources would only give information to
serve their own political agendas. Deserters would in
normal circumstances be defectors from one side to
another, and would only slur the side they had left.
We find it unusual that a panel of experts would
evaluate its own report, pass judgement and impose
punitive measures — as this one did — and that it
would do that on the basis of a report that the Panel
admits is today only 70 per cent complete. It surely
should not include condemnations of heads of State and
their families, companies and individuals without
meeting the burden of proof of guilt. The way heads of
State are treated in this report is simply unacceptable
and sets a dangerous precedent.
Since the report concludes that economic reasons
have superseded the security concerns of Rwanda,
allow me to reiterate the reasons why Rwanda has had
to defend its citizens against a murderous war waged
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Members of the Council may recall that, after the
genocide of 1994, the Security Council was on
numerous occasions seized of the matter of the
precarious security conditions caused by Interahamwe
militia and ex-Rwandese Armed Forces (FAR) soldiers
in refugee camps in Zaire. No solution was found by
this body. It became necessary for Rwanda and its
allies to find a solution to that situation. I am glad to
say that this was done with a measure of success,
because 1.5 million refugees were able to return home
and security was restored to Rwanda for a while.
However, the situation changed dramatically when the
Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of
Congo-Zaire (AFDL) Government of President Laurent
Kabila decided to regroup and rearm those forces.
Once again, appeals to the United Nations to
avert the looming crisis multiplied. The Security
Council set up an International Commission of Inquiry
that established beyond a reasonable doubt the
existence of well-organized forces bent on
destabilizing the Great Lakes region. Those included,
and were organized around, the Interahamwe and exFAR militia, which at the time numbered 70,000. The
report contained in document S/1998/1096 described as
profoundly shocking the network of forces from
Rwanda, Burundi, Angola and Uganda, the unhindered
flow of arms to them, and the support they were
receiving from the Government of the Democratic

9

S/PV.4317

Republic of the Congo. At that time western Rwanda,
the prefecture of Gisenyi, Ruhengeri, Kibuye and
Cyangugu and parts of Byumba, Kigali and Gitarama
were described as red zones by United Nations
agencies because of insecurity due to incursions by
those forces based in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
The situation changed dramatically when
Rwandan forces were able to put an end to those
infiltrations and push those forces back into the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — helped that time
by a rebellion against the Kabila Government. Security
was gradually restored in Rwanda and, though not
completely to date, in North Kivu. That situation
enabled Rwanda to continue to repatriate refugees and
to reintegrate them into our society. Close to 100,000
refugees have returned in the last six months alone, and
a total of 18,000 ex-FAR soldiers have been
reintegrated in the national army — the Rwandan
Patriotic Army (RPA) — at command, staff and other
ranks. The improvement in security and other
developments in the human rights area convinced the
Special Rapporteur to recommend, successfully, that
the Commission on Human Rights put an end to its
monitoring of Rwanda. We hope that this can be
achieved in the whole region once we succeed in
putting an end to the activities of the negative forces.
The war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
brought in several countries and generated rebellions
against the Government. In a genuine attempt to find
solutions to the multiple causes of the conflict, the
belligerents
negotiated
the
Lusaka
Ceasefire
Agreement with the assistance of countries of the
region. That Agreement addresses the sovereignty of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
control over its resources, the rights of the Congolese
people and the security of neighbouring countries. The
Lusaka Agreement provides for mechanisms to rid the
Democratic Republic of the Congo of all the negative
forces. That is a task the Security Council can ignore
only at the peril of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region. Signatories to Lusaka, today at
least, appear to be working in tandem to implement the
Agreement as it is, and need unconditional support
from this body. At this stage, the implementation of
both the Lusaka Agreement and Security Council
resolution 1341 (2001) is of paramount importance.
We are also busy preparing plans for the
disarming of the forces upon which the Security

10

Council had imposed sanctions in connection with
rearming through resolution 918 (1994). Had the
Council reinforced that resolution, the Lusaka
Agreement would be far advanced today and the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region would certainly have improved. We urge the
Council to re-examine its resolutions on the situation,
and in particular with regard to the activities of the
Interahamwe and ex-FAR troops, namely, resolutions
918 (1994), 997 (1995), 1011 (1995), 1013 (1995) and
1161 (1998), as well as the letter contained in
document S/1998/438 and the report contained in
document S/1998/1096. We also urge the Council to
take action without further delay so as to neutralize
these groups and their mushrooming allies — such as
the Forces pour la défense de la démocratie (FDD) and
the Mayi-Mayi. All countries should be discouraged
from continuing to support these forces by all means
available to the Council.
It came to our attention that the Panel is seeking
the extension of its mandate to do what it terms the
remaining 30 per cent of the work to be done. The
Council may recall that in February 2001 the
preliminary report was considered inadequate and
inaccurate. At that time we pointed out those
inaccuracies. To our knowledge, the Panel never went
back to the field to cross-check the information. We are
also forced to deal with a “final” report that the Panel
itself admits to be only 70 per cent done, and on the
basis of which Rwanda, its leaders and its citizens are
unreservedly condemned. Such a request is simply
meant to pre-empt reactions from people and countries,
like Rwanda, that have been wrongly accused by the
Panel.
Rwanda proposes that this report should be
dropped altogether because it is inaccurate and
inconclusive and does not in any way interpret the
wishes of the Council. It does not reflect the genuine
desire of members to establish the state of affairs in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo so as to recommend
ways and means of rectifying the situation, in the
interest of the Congolese people. It does not do justice
to countries like Rwanda, which went out of its way to
cooperate with the Panel.
However, should it please the Council to reopen
the investigations and correct the numerous lacunae in
the report just presented, then Rwanda wishes to
propose the following.

S/PV.4317

First, the Council and the Member States which
are the subject of this investigation should agree on the
terms of reference and spell out the appropriate
methodology. Secondly, clear definitions of terms
loosely used in the previous report, such as “illegal”,
“legitimate”, “power” and “control”, should be
established in relation to the specific and unique
political situation prevailing in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the region. Thirdly,
treaties, agreements and protocols governing the trade
regime in the region should be duly recognized. And
fourthly, the responsibilities of countries of destination
of the resources should be determined with regard to
both import and export activities.
My delegation respectfully wishes to urge the
Security Council to keep on course insofar as securing
peace and security in the Great Lakes region is
concerned. The Council will be encouraged to know
that, since the last meeting between the Council and the
Lusaka signatories, the commitment to the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement demonstrated
then has borne some fruit. The disengagement exercise,
in spite of a few problems, is effectively complete.
Joint planning between the Joint Military Commission
and the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) for the
disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation
and
resettlement of negative forces is under way, as
envisaged by resolution 1341 (2001). The interCongolese dialogue, crucial for re-establishing
common State authority over the whole Congolese
territory, was due to be launched in Lusaka this
morning. The concept of the plans for the final
withdrawal of all foreign forces from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was approved last month, and
planning will start soon.
The Lusaka process provides us with the only
realistic and long-lasting approach to the problems of
the Great Lakes region. Rwanda believes that its
security concerns cannot be minimized by any other
considerations. It believes also that in Lusaka all the
parties will find equitable solutions to the problems
that face their respective countries. The Security
Council and the whole United Nations system should
continue to accompany our countries in the quest for
the successful and timely implementation of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement as it is.

The President: I thank the Special Envoy of the
President of the Rwandese Republic for the kind words
he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation of Uganda,
Mr. Amama Mbabazi, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Mbabazi (Uganda): It is an honour for me,
on behalf of the delegation I lead and of my country, to
address this important meeting of the Security Council
on the final report of the United Nations Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I am particularly happy to see the presidency of
the United States once again taking an interest in the
search for a lasting peace in the Great Lakes region.
We can only assure you, Sir, of our readiness to render
Uganda’s full cooperation to enable you to achieve this
noble objective.
We are equally grateful to Her Majesty’s
Government of the United Kingdom for the able
leadership of Her Majesty’s Permanent Representative,
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, whose presidency last month
made the necessary preparations for this meeting.
The Government of Uganda is most obliged to all
of the members of the Security Council for the onerous
task of the maintenance of international peace and
security, which they all render to the world on behalf of
the United Nations.
The Government of Uganda welcomes the release
of this report. I wish to thank you once again, Mr.
President, as well as the Council, for giving us the
opportunity to respond to its contents. I will present to
the Council Uganda’s response in full. This response
covers all of the allegations against Uganda in the
report. I have also attached the personal response of
President Museveni of Uganda, a copy of which he has
already sent to the Secretary-General and which has, I
hope, already been circulated to Council members.
Allow me therefore, in the short time I have, to
give the Council a summary of this response. My
summary, like the response itself, will cover three
areas. First, we will talk about the principle itself of
investigating these allegations. Secondly, we will make
comments on the contents of the report, and especially
on the quality of the evidence presented. Finally, we
will talk about the way forward.

11

S/PV.4317

The report of the Panel raises important issues to
be investigated which are of interest to Uganda. In
1998, Uganda and Rwanda heard of some allegations
made against some officers of our armies operating in
the Congo. At the summit held in Kampala in October
1998, a decision was made to establish a ministerial
probe committee — which I was privileged to co-chair,
along with my colleague the head of delegation of
Rwanda — to look into those allegations.
It was as a result of those allegations that
President Museveni, in his capacity as Commander-inChief of the Ugandan People’s Defence Forces, issued
an order dated 5 December 1998 to all Ugandan troops
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Government officials prohibiting them and their
families from engaging in any trade in the Congo. It
will be of interest to the Council to know that since that
time, that order has been actively enforced and that
some people who have fallen afoul of it have suffered
disciplinary consequences.
We therefore support and welcome the principle
of investigation. We take note of the Panel’s serious
allegations that, although the Ugandan Government is
not institutionally involved, as the report states in
paragraphs and 7 and 85, top Ugandan military officers
and civilians are involved in the illegal exploitation of
resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This is the first time that allegations of illegal
exploitation have been specified, and we welcome the
opportunity to put these matters to rest.
In the case of the military officers and civilians
who are mentioned in the report, and in the case of the
Department of Forestry, which is alleged to have
colluded with private companies in a scheme to
facilitate the certification of timber from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo illegally, I am
happy to inform the Security Council that the
Government of Uganda has decided to establish a
judicial commission of inquiry on this matter. The
commission will be independent; it will work openly
and transparently. The actual composition will be
announced in due course in Kampala.
Having said that, I should like to say that Uganda
has serious problems with this report. The report has
fundamental flaws in it. The first flaw is the very basis
on which it is founded: the definition of illegality. The
Panel defines illegality as meaning the violation of
sovereignty, and says that, according to this Council’s

12

understanding of the definition, all activities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo which are taking
place without the consent of the Government in
Kinshasa are illegal. It goes further, saying that that
interpretation suggests that only non-invited forces and
their nationals are carrying out illegal activities in the
Congo. Finally, the Panel deems illegality to be the
carrying out of an activity in violation of regulations
established by the Government in Kinshasa, stating that
that definition is based on the Security Council’s
understanding of the term illegality.
We have a very serious problem with that
definition in many ways. First of all, as the Council
knows, Uganda fully participated in the debate when
the resolution establishing the Panel to investigate this
matter was adopted by the Security Council. This
question of legality or illegality was, indeed, debated in
the context of whether the investigation should cover
the whole of the Congo or part of the Congo. The
argument that the investigation should cover only the
eastern Congo was based precisely on the question of
legality and legitimacy. But there was an argument,
clearly presented by my colleague from Rwanda, that,
in fact, the Lusaka Agreement clearly took care of this
point, because it defined the question of legality during
the period of the implementation of the Lusaka accord.
It was agreed that for that period, as provided for in the
Lusaka accord, the three Congolese parties signatories
to that accord — the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Congolese Rally for
Democracy (RCD) and the Movement for the
Liberation of the Congo (MLC), as it was then
known — would each be charged with the
responsibility of administering the area that it
controlled until State administration was re-established
after the national dialogue resulted in a new political
dispensation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This argument was presented to this Council and,
obviously, the Council, it its wisdom, decided that the
investigation should therefore cover the whole of the
Congo, not just part of it. I therefore have no reason to
believe the Panel when it says that this definition was
the understanding of the Security Council.
Secondly, if, indeed, that definition as stipulated
by the Panel in the report had been intended, there
would have been no need to have an investigation. It is
public knowledge that 40 per cent of the country is
under the control of the Government in Kinshasa and
that the other 60 per cent is under the control of rebel

S/PV.4317

authorities. It is also common knowledge that normal
life — normal in the context of a war situation — goes
on in the areas controlled by the rebels. It would not,
therefore, have been necessary to establish a Panel to
investigate something that everyone accepted: the fact
that the central Government in Kinshasa had no
authority and was therefore not consenting to the
activities that were taking place in 60 per cent of
Congo, which would, therefore, have been declared
illegal straight away.
The importance of this point lies in the fact that
the rest of the report, and the rest of the investigation,
was based on the understanding that every activity —
the extraction of minerals, production of any kind and
any commerce or export in areas not controlled by the
Government — was illegal and therefore defined as
looting and plundering of the resources of the Congo.
We think that that is erroneous; it is an incorrect
definition of illegality, and we do not believe that that
was the meaning conveyed to the Panel by this
Council.
Of course, the results are obvious; they are selfevident. Although the report says that the Panel did not
receive cooperation from the Government side and its
allies, there is no indication that there was actually a
serious attempt to carry out an investigation. Indeed,
the report clearly discloses that the Panel acted on the
assumption that whatever happened on the side
controlled by the Government was legal and therefore
not subject to investigation.
The second flaw in this report is the quality of the
evidence presented. Most of the evidence is either
hearsay or falsehoods, and the Panel makes statements
which are not attributed. As I said earlier, in our
response we tackled the report paragraph by paragraph
to show that most of the evidence on which it is based
is, in fact, hearsay. I will pick out one example to
illustrate the point. Paragraph 27 of the report states
that
“Numerous accounts in Kampala suggest
that the decision to enter the conflict in August
1998 was defended by some top military officials
who had served in eastern Zaire ... and who had
had a taste of the business potential of the
region.”
It does not give us the sources. However, we know that
these stories are abundantly available in the public

domain in Uganda. They are in newspapers; they are on
the streets.
We think this is a very serious matter. Uganda has
given its reasons why it got involved in the Congo.
These reasons not only were accepted by the
belligerents in Congo, but the security concerns are
actually contained in the Lusaka Agreement. Indeed,
the Lusaka formula proposes to handle that specific
problem. So, if the United Nations Panel of Experts is
to contradict that position, to contradict what you, the
Council, have accepted in various resolutions, surely it
must present clear evidence that leaves no one in doubt
about its truthfulness and credibility — not numerous
accounts in Kampala.
If you go to Kampala, Mr. President, you will
find a lot of street gossip about what is happening in
the Congo and about what is happening in the Security
Council today. But if a panel of experts is going to
make recommendations that sanctions be imposed
against a country of 23 million people, surely it must
present evidence that is credible, that leaves no one in
doubt that what they are saying is true.
The Panel of Experts has made statements in its
report that the members of the Panel know to be false.
They acknowledged maximum cooperation received
from the Government of Uganda. They were received
by the President, the Vice-President, the Prime
Minister, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Minister
of Defence, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of
Transport, the Minister of Energy and Minerals, the
Minister of Forestry and all sorts of other officials.
Everyone they asked for they met. But regarding what
they say in paragraph 11 and paragraph 89, that they
asked for individuals and their request was turned
down — they named this specific individual as
Brigadier General Kazini — I would like to inform this
Council that this is not true. First of all, they never
asked for Kazini. I saw this for the first time in their
report. Secondly, in fact, General Kazini met them, not
once, but twice. Thirdly, when they met the military
commander, General Odongo, he offered the Panel
specifically that if they passed out questionnaires or
asked for any officers in the Congo they wanted to
interview, he was ready to make these officers
available. Up to this moment, they have not made such
a request. So to report that they requested these
people — presumably they made these requests to the
Government of Uganda and the Government of Uganda

13

S/PV.4317

turned them down — when they know this is false is
totally unacceptable.
On 6 March this year, we communicated with the
Chairperson of the Panel on the follow-up to the
interim report, reconfirming our continued support for
its work and inviting any questions, clarifications or
additional data, as well as extending another welcome
to the Panel to revisit Uganda before the finalization of
the report. The Panel did not respond to this.
What we find most despicable is the attack by the
Panel on the person of President Museveni. Let us look
at paragraph 211. I will read out a sentence:
“Presidents Kagame and Museveni are on
the verge of becoming the godfathers of the
illegal exploitation of natural resources and the
continuation of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.”
Godfathers are Mafia. Godfathers are those who
control criminal cartels, criminal syndicates. Therefore,
to call President Museveni a godfather is a very, very
serious matter. Or to call President Kagame a godfather
is a very, very serious matter. There must be evidence
for them to justify this label. What evidence is there in
this report? None, absolutely none. The only time they
mention the name of President Museveni is to say that
he has a blood brother called General Saleh, who is
said to have shares in a company that is dealing in
business in the eastern Congo; that he has a son who
has shares in a business suspected to be doing business
in the eastern Congo; and that he has a sister-in-law
who has shares in a company that is dealing in business
in the Congo, all of which, of course, is, by that other
definition, termed illegal.
But even if it were true that these relatives of the
President were in fact engaged in that business, is it
logical, is it normal to call the President, or anyone for
that matter, names; to give him a label for the acts of
relatives without showing any evidence that he was
party to those actions?
The casual manner in which the name of the
President has been handled is totally unacceptable to
the people of Uganda. President Museveni is the head
of State of a Member country of the United Nations. If
you are to call him names, surely you must have
evidence. They call him an accomplice to crime. Why?
Paragraphs 201 to 206 say that some rebel in the Congo
is alleged to have stolen money. The report was given

14

to President Museveni and he did not act against that
rebel; and therefore President Museveni qualifies as an
accomplice to crime.
We find this despicable, we do not accept it and
we do not know how you will handle this, Mr.
President, because it is setting a very serious precedent.
Even ordinary people’s reputations are protected.
Obviously, all these allegations against the name of the
President are calculated to injure the reputation of
President Museveni without cause. We demand an
apology, we demand that they be withdrawn and we
request that this Council look into this matter and take
appropriate action.
When we meet with the Secretary-General, we
know that this Panel, as a body of the United Nations,
enjoys criminal and civil immunities, but our view is
that the manner in which it has treated the name of
President Museveni is an abuse of privilege.
Uganda therefore feels that the quality of the
report is so low that its value and credibility are
seriously diminished and undermined. That is why we
support the extension of the mandate of the Panel, in
the hope that a better job will be done. In this
connection, Uganda would recommend that a new
panel be put in place or that the current one be
expanded, with a new chairperson, to inject some level
of professional competence, impartiality and serious
leadership into the investigation process. We believe
that it is also important to achieve a level of balance in
the new panel of experts in order to make sure that bias
and prejudice are avoided.
Uganda has also learned one lesson, an important
lesson: it pays not to cooperate with this United
Nations Panel of Experts. The Panel of Experts
acknowledges, as the Chairperson did this morning, the
maximum cooperation that Uganda rendered. This
ranged from meeting the President himself, the VicePresident and others to giving the Panel all the data it
requested. There was nothing that was not given. What
reward do we get? Abuse of the President and
recommendations of sanctions against the people of
Uganda. What evidence is there that Uganda was
institutionally involved in the illegal exploitation of
resources? Some individuals, numbering approximately
10, were involved, yet this Panel recommends that the
United Nations impose sanctions on 23 million
Ugandans. Why not ask for the arrest of those
individuals? On the other hand, countries that are

S/PV.4317

suspected of actually being illegally involved in the
exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have had their dubious interests
legitimized, if this report does so. Who has said that a
sovereign State cannot commit a crime?
Uganda believes that the cause of all this is war
in the Congo. It is the absence of a stable, strong State
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Therefore,
we believe that the primary focus should be on creating
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This
can be only through the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement. In this context, we would expect the
Security Council to handle this matter with the utmost
care, because — and members have heard the language
used this morning — this report and what has been said
have seriously poisoned the atmosphere in the region
and have the potential of being diversionary from the
cause of pursuing peace through Lusaka. The
exploitation of natural resources is not the cause, but
the consequence of the war and the absence of a strong
State.
Our view therefore is that the Security Council
should remain determined to play a leadership role in
the search for peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I have been much more pleased
than I was the last time I visited this Council by its
level of involvement. Everybody is happy that the
peace process at long last appears to be moving
towards disengagement. The Political Committee has
adopted a schedule of withdrawal of foreign forces.
National dialogue is on the move. Forces have moved.
Uganda has moved seven battalions and will be moving
another two within the next few days, and we are
considering completely moving out. The Lusaka peace
process provides a unique opportunity to address the
security concerns of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its neighbours and to create favourable
conditions for an internal dialogue on a new
democratic dispensation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The withdrawal of all foreign forces and the
emergence of a strong and stable State are the only
guarantee of an end to the illegal exploitation of natural
resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
Minister of Finance of Burundi. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Nihangaza (Burundi) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to perform the pleasant duty of

congratulating you, Sir, and, through you, the
Government of the United States on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of May. We are convinced that your presidency will
allow the work of the Council to progress on the path
towards peace throughout the world, in particular in the
Great Lakes region.
Let me also welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and commend him
for his commitment to peace and development in the
world, in particular in the countries of the Great Lakes.
The Government of the Republic of Burundi has
received the report in document S/2001/357, issued by
the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We wish to draw
the Security Council’s attention to the following points.
First, in its report, the Panel did not find
sufficient evidence to indict Burundi. In view of the
publicity in the media focused on the accusations
levelled against Burundi, anyone might have expected
to find a mass of very specific data in the report to
substantiate those accusations. It will be noted from a
reading of the report that Burundi is named from time
to time, appearing in a perfectly ritual fashion on a list
of countries to be targeted.
It is only in paragraph 105, on page 25 of the
English version of the report, that we find three
sentences that might be regarded as containing these
so-called accusations against Burundi. This is the
substance of the paragraph:
“An IMF office memorandum indicates that
‘Burundi does not produce gold, diamonds,
columbo-tantalite, copper, cobalt, or basic
metals’. Burundi however has been exporting
minerals it does not produce. As in the case of
Uganda and Rwanda, Burundi’s export of
diamonds dates from 1998, coinciding with the
occupation of the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The coltan exports span a longer
period (1995-1999), perhaps suggesting that this
might be a regular activity.”
This is the only sort of accusation against Burundi
contained in the report: a reference to an International
Monetary Fund (IMF) document of which there is no
trace; I have looked in Washington and hunted in my
country, and this IMF document does not exist. In

15

S/PV.4317

short, paragraph 105 confirms that Burundi is not
involved in plundering the wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

trading corridor via Lake Tanganyika. My country has
no political or territorial ambitions vis-à-vis any
neighbouring country.

Secondly, paragraph 105 seems to suggest that
there are no mineral ores in Burundi and that there is
no trade with the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This is quite astounding. Trade between Burundi and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has always
existed and includes a wide range of products. I would
like to inform the Council that before the war
approximately 40 per cent of Burundi’s exports went to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the same is
true today. As far as ores are concerned, the document
presenting the position of the Burundi Government,
which was submitted to the Security Council, provides
statistics that attest to Burundi’s exploitation of gold,
cassiterite, coltan and tin.

In conclusion, the Government of Burundi refutes
the serious accusations that have been levelled against
it, and calls on the Security Council to take into
account the anomalies identified in the report where
Burundi is concerned.

It should also be noted that comptoirs for gold
and diamonds existed long before independence, both
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
Bujumbura. They were run either by Congolese or
Burundians, or by nationals of other countries.
Thirdly, the grave nature of the conclusions on
Burundi contrasts with the lack of supporting data that
one would expect to find in the body of the report.
When we were in school, we were taught that the
conclusion of a composition should reflect the
substance of the body of the text. In the case of this
report, five whole pages of serious conclusions and
recommendations correspond to just three sentences in
the body of the report. This disproportion undermines
the credibility of the report as far as Burundi is
concerned.
Fourthly, Burundi is still prepared to cooperate
with the Panel of Experts. Despite the indiscriminate
way in which Burundi is implicated, the Government
of Burundi is still prepared to offer its full cooperation
with the Panel of Experts. Indeed, it intends to carry
out its own inquiry into the possible involvement of
Burundians. We recommend that the experts revisit
Burundi and interview people on both sides of the
border. To this end, Burundi is glad that the Security
Council has decided to extend the mandate of the Panel
of Experts.
Burundi has always stated that the deployment of
security arrangements on its border with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was dictated by
security concerns and by the need to keep open the

16

Burundi takes the view that resolving security
issues between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its neighbours would end all of the problems and
elements of tension associated with the state of
“subregional conflict”. The report of the Panel of
Experts should not distract us from genuine security
concerns. This is why Burundi once again states its
readiness to pursue a dialogue with the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the other
partners of the subregion in order to secure our
common borders and find long-term responses to the
underlying causes of the conflicts that are tearing that
region of Africa apart.
In this context, the Government of Burundi notes
with concern that the Burundian rebels and other
negative forces based in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are shifting towards other rear bases in the
subregion with a view to provoking total war in
Burundi. The Government will shortly be making
proposals to the Security Council that will be aimed at
ensuring that the successful implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement does not have the unfortunate result
of causing the death-mongers to move into
neighbouring Burundi and other adjacent countries — a
situation that would imperil the Arusha Peace
Agreement and that we hope the international
community will not allow to develop.
The President: I thank the Minister of Finance of
Burundi for his kind words addressed to me.
I shall now turn to members of the Council to
speak. It was important to hear the statements from our
guests this morning, particularly the Ministers. I would
like to note that I still have a number of speakers on my
list and the hour is growing late. I intend to suspend the
meeting between 1 and 1.15 p.m. and to resume later in
the afternoon, because we obviously will not finish
now.
Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to express its appreciation to Ms.

S/PV.4317

Safiatou Ba-N’Daw and the other members of the
Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the significant
amount of work they have done pursuant to the
mandate given to them by the Security Council. The
report they have prepared is an extremely important
document.
My delegation would also like to welcome the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda, the Special Envoy
of the President of Rwanda and the Minister of Finance
of Burundi. Their presence here today bears witness to
the importance that those countries attach to this
meeting and to this issue. Their contribution to our
debate is essential in clarifying certain aspects of the
matter under consideration so that we can objectively
assess the situation.
Our meeting is taking place at a decisive moment
in the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. This meeting is also being held just before the
Council’s mission to the region to evaluate progress
made in the peace process. The Council’s mission will
take account, inter alia, of the links between the
exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the continuation of the
fighting.
In its report, the Panel of Experts provides
sombre information about the scope of the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and about the continuation of
the conflict. It also identifies a correlation between the
economic interests of certain outside actors and the
continuation of the conflict.
We attach the greatest importance to ending the
illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to putting an
end to the war once and for all. It is a question of
reasserting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
sovereignty over its natural resources, as the Council
has affirmed in its resolutions on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Unfortunately, as the Panel notes, it is the
Congolese people that is suffering the consequences of
the pillage of its resources and of the continuation of
the war. The people of Congo, who desire a better

future, are counting on the support of the international
community to end the war and the pillage of its
resources, and to restore peace, security and stability to
the region.
The conclusions and recommendations of the
Panel of Experts are of great importance and could
have significant consequences for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for the region and for the
Security Council’s efforts with respect to the situation
in the region. They therefore merit our careful
consideration and frank and constructive dialogue with
the parties concerned.
We have heard the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo express his Government’s
satisfaction with the report and describe the
expectations of the Congolese Government. We have
also heard high-level representatives from Burundi,
Rwanda and Uganda explain the views of their
respective Governments. Indeed, the aim of today’s
meeting is to enable the States named in the report to
provide the clarifications they deem appropriate or
useful with respect to what is very serious information.
Today’s meeting and the talks the Security
Council mission will have in the region will enable
more in-depth discussion of Council follow-up to this
matter in the light of additional information from the
Panel of Experts and of its assessment of the situation.
In our view, the report should encourage the parties to
genuinely implement Council resolutions and to take
concrete steps to advance the peace process. In that
context, we expect the withdrawal of foreign forces
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo to be
swift, complete and final. Any new initiative by the
parties to that end would certainly be welcome.
While there has been progress in the
implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
and of Security Council resolutions, a heinous crime
has disrupted that progress: last week’s murder, at
Bunia, Orientale Province of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, of six members of the staff of the
International Committee of the Red Cross — four
Congolese, one Colombian and one Swiss — who gave
their lives in the cause of peace. Last Friday, the
President of the Security Council, on behalf of the
members of the Council, condemned that heinous and
cowardly crime.

17

S/PV.4317

In the light of that grave event, we reaffirm the
need for all parties to respect the principles of
neutrality and impartiality in the provision of
humanitarian assistance. We recall that it is the
responsibility of all parties to ensure the safety and
security of United Nations and associated personnel.
Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): I would like to start
my statement by expressing our deep concern at and
our condemnation of the cowardly murder of six staff
members of the International Committee of the Red
Cross in an ambush in Orientale Province on 26 April.
My Government conveys its sincere condolences to the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Colombia and Switzerland, and to the families
that have been so sadly affected. We stress the urgent
need to ensure that the safety and security of
international relief workers and of United Nations
peacekeeping and other personnel will be among the
Council’s priority tasks in the region.
Turning to the work of the Panel of Experts on
the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, allow me to say that we are grateful to you, Mr.
President, for arranging this meeting of the Security
Council, which enables countries with a direct interest
in this issue and countries accused of the illegal
exploitation of natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate and to help shape
the Council’s action in this regard.
We are pleased to welcome the Foreign Minister
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Foreign
Minister of Uganda, the Special Envoy of the President
of Rwanda and the Minister for Finance of Burundi to
this meeting; we have listened carefully to their
remarks.
We also would like to thank the Chairperson of
the Expert Panel, Ms. Safiatou Ba-N’Daw, for her very
useful and informative briefing and for all the work
that has been done by the Panel in fulfilling its
mandate, assigned through the statement of the
President of the Security Council dated 2 June 2000
(S/PRST/2000/20). Allow me to reiterate Ukraine’s full
support for that statement and for the other relevant
Security Council decisions, the goal of which is to put
an end to the illegal exploitation of natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which fuels the
conflict in that country.

18

We think that the nature of the Panel’s report is in
sharp contrast to that submitted to the Council in
January, as it contains numerous recommendations,
including coercive measures, which are the result of
the Panel’s review of the basic forms of illegal
exploitation of natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and of the collection of
extensive data on the structures engaged in such
exploitation and their financial, commercial and
transport activities.
It is of great concern to Ukraine that, according to
the report, the illegal exploitation of natural resources
of the country, in particular diamonds and other
strategic minerals, is considerable. We call upon all
Governments concerned to take immediate steps to end
such activities and to ensure compliance by their
individuals and corporations with legally acceptable
standards of business.
It is of equal importance that they also provide
full cooperation with the Panel in collecting
information on all activities of illegal exploitation of
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as well as in identifying the links between such
activity and the continuation of the conflict in that
country. This matter should be a principal focus of the
Security Council.
We believe that the Security Council should also
pursue an approach that links efforts aimed at cessation
of the illegal exploitation of natural resources and the
achievement of the desired political objectives in the
context of the process of the implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.
In assessing the overall situation, my delegation
believes that it would be responsible on the part of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Panel of
Experts for a final period of three months and to let the
Panel complete its action plan.
My delegation feels that the Security Council
should be given an opportunity to consider the whole
situation in question before it decides on the proposed
recommendations in this regard. We look forward to
receiving the Panel’s final report.
Finally, I would like to express my delegation’s
full support for the statement that you, Mr. President,
will make at the end of this meeting. We are hopeful
that it will build on the international community’s

S/PV.4317

efforts to restore the peace and normality that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo so sorely needs.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): May I also welcome the
Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, the Personal Envoy
of the President of Rwanda, Mr. Patrick Mazimpaka,
the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Uganda,
Mr. Amama Mbabazi, and the Minister of Finance of
Burundi, Mr. Charles Nihangaza, and thank them for
their participation in this discussion.
May I also convey, on behalf of the Government
and the people of Ireland, our sympathy and
condolences to the Governments and the peoples of
Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Switzerland, and to the families of the murdered
representatives of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
The report of the Panel of Experts is being
reviewed carefully by the Irish authorities. We support
an extension of the mandate of the Panel to allow it to
continue its work, and we look forward to receiving a
comprehensive addendum to this report. We hope, in
particular, that this will provide the international
community with a fuller picture of the complexity and
the extent to which the exploitation of resources in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo contributes to
sustaining the conflict in the region. This would deepen
the understanding of the international community of
the range of issues which feed the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and assist our
efforts to support the parties in advancing the peace
process.
Sweden, as Presidency of the European Union,
will be making a statement later in today’s debate.
Ireland subscribes fully to the position of the European
Union. I make the following points in my national
capacity.
The remit of the Panel was broad, focusing on
illegal exploitation and the link between exploitation
and the continuation of the conflict. The report of the
Panel of Experts makes some very serious allegations
against all parties to the conflict. Today’s meeting has
given those countries against which allegations are
made an opportunity to respond.
We have heard the concerns of some parties
named in the report that the information is
unsubstantiated or incorrect. Nonetheless, the

allegations are of a sufficiently serious nature to merit
thorough investigation by the relevant national
authorities. The Irish Government expects the parties
concerned to carry out such investigations and to
extend every cooperation to the Panel of Experts in its
future work. No effort must be spared by the relevant
authorities to ensure that activities which undermine
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are halted and that the Congolese people can
finally be allowed to benefit directly from the natural
wealth of their own country.
In this regard, I welcome Minister Mbabazi’s
announcement of his Government’s decision to
establish an independent judicial commission of
inquiry which will work openly and transparently to
investigate the allegations relating to Uganda. I also
welcome Minister Nihangaza’s declaration of his
Government’s decision to investigate allegations and to
cooperate with the Panel during its extended mandate.
At the same time, the concerns expressed by
some parties named in the report cannot be dismissed
out of hand. An extension of the mandate of the Panel
will allow it, over the coming months, to pursue
further, in a thorough manner, issues which it did not
have the opportunity to address in depth in the final
report. It will also facilitate further discussion with
parties that have expressed concern with the final
report. We strongly encourage all parties to engage in
further full and frank dialogue with the Panel as it
updates its report and assesses progress. We remind
those parties that have not extended full cooperation to
the Panel of their obligation to do so. Failure to do so
would seriously undermine their international standing.
This report is but one element in the wider efforts
of the international community to end the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As the Panel
proceeds with its work over the coming months, we
will be looking at the impact of such activities in the
context of the peace process and how the work of the
Panel can support that process. In particular, we will
look to progress from the parties on the three core
issues set out in the Lusaka Agreement. The first is the
preparation and adoption of a precise plan and schedule
which, in accordance with the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, would lead to the completion of the orderly
withdrawal of all foreign troops from the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The second is
the preparation for immediate implementation of
prioritized plans for the disarmament, demobilization,

19

S/PV.4317

reintegration, repatriation or resettlement of armed
groups. The third is progress in the inter-Congolese
dialogue.
The Security Council mission to the region later
this month will provide the Council with an
opportunity to engage with the parties on the wider
dimension of the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, focusing in particular on the three core
elements of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. We urge
the parties to maximize the potential of that visit for
concrete progress and to use the occasion of the visit to
engage closely with the members of the Council on the
core obstacles to peace in the region.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting on a
subject of particular importance. France’s best wishes
go out to the United States presidency of our Council
this month.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his lengthy presence among us this morning. I would
also like to welcome very warmly the Ministers of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Rwanda
and Burundi, who are also present in the Chamber.
As my colleague from Ireland has said, the
Ambassador of Sweden will in a short while set out the
views of all the countries of the European Union. As
my colleague has done, I too would like to add some
comments in my national capacity as representative of
France.
The information contained in the Panel’s report is
not, in fact, entirely new. Numerous elements had
already surfaced in the press, and non-governmental
organizations had also attested to the situation in
various ways. But this is the first time that an overall
picture of the looting of the resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has been provided
to us. That picture is extremely disquieting.
I would like to commend the work done by
Ms. Ba-N’Daw and the other experts. The report of the
Panel is courageous and well documented. It should be
stated clearly that we know that the safety of the
experts was at times under threat. This is a matter of
concern for the whole Council.
With regard to methodology, the Panel strictly
followed the mandate given to it by the Security
Council. This explains the large number of States

20

investigated pursuant to the broad interpretation given
to the concept of illegality.
One conclusion must be drawn. Not only does the
looting of resources feed the conflict; today we may
even ask ourselves whether looting has itself become a
motive for the continuation of the conflict. The
Security Council must henceforth take into account this
facet of the deadliest conflict currently besetting the
African continent. All of us recall the figures put
forward by New York’s International Rescue
Committee: 2.5 million deaths since 1998, 200,000 of
which were directly related to combat. These figures
are appalling. They demand action and mobilization on
the part of our Council and of all the parties.
The Council’s responsibility is to work with all of
the parties concerned to help end the looting, and this
report will help us do so. By a unanimous decision of
the Council, we will be extending the Panel’s mandate
for a three-month period. Over the next three months
the Panel will keep us informed. It will further expand
its knowledge of this very important issue, and, in three
months’ time, it will present to us a fresh appraisal of
the situation.
In the Panel’s work and in the mobilization of the
international community, it will be important to ensure
that, beyond the United Nations, the multilateral
institutions concerned and the countries involved all
participate fully in this endeavour. We would like the
Council to work in a spirit of dialogue with all of those
involved.
From this standpoint, I should like to welcome
not only the presence of the Ministers around this table
but also the statements that they have made. We must
listen attentively to one another. We welcome their
spirit of cooperation, and, in the same vein as my
colleague from Ireland, we would also like to welcome
the announcement by Minister Mbabazi of the creation
in Uganda of an independent commission of inquiry. I
welcome also the statement made by the Minister of
Finance of Burundi.
All of the countries involved must demonstrate
this same spirit of dialogue. For our part, we are
listening attentively and objectively to them. At the end
of the three months, when we have the additional
report, we will consider in this Chamber possible
further measures, which may be necessary if the
progress that we hope to see towards ending the looting

S/PV.4317

of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has not been
achieved.
All of the States involved must demonstrate a
spirit of dialogue. Some of them have chosen not to
state their position today, and I appeal to those not
present in the Chamber and which have been
implicated to demonstrate the spirit of cooperation
shown by the Ministers who are here today.
Above and beyond this report, I think that we
should all keep in mind the key objective that the
Security Council wishes to achieve in the Great Lakes
region. Our goal is to put an end to the conflict. Our
goal is the restoration of peace — peace with security
for all. Ultimately, our objective is a return to
economic development. All of this requires the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.
The United Nations is resolved to lend its fullest
support to that goal, but, of course, it is the actions of
the parties themselves that will make it possible to
advance in that direction.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
warmly welcome you to the presidency, Sir, and I thank
you for your kind words earlier in this debate.
It is very good to see the Ministers of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Rwanda
and Burundi here with us today. It has been extremely
important for us to listen to their statements and to
engage in a very necessary debate.
Like my two predecessors in this discussion, I
point to and fully support the statement which Sweden
will make on behalf of the European Union later on
today, but I want to make one or two remarks in my
national capacity.
The United Kingdom takes very careful note of
the work done so far by the Panel of Experts on the
Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We thank the members of the Panel for their
diligence and their courage.
The report of the Panel addresses an issue of
considerable concern: the way the natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo are being used
to fuel the conflict there. There is more work to be
done to shed light on this problem, and we therefore
support the extension of the Panel’s mandate.

In the presidential statement which the Council
will adopt later today, we set out guidelines for the
continued work of the Panel. Among other things, the
extended mandate will allow the Panel to pursue
further information which was not previously available
and to follow up responses to the Panel’s report,
including the extremely important ones today. We
believe that an addendum to the Panel’s work will
provide an opportunity to produce a fully balanced
analysis and to record, as far as possible, corroborated
evidence relating to all parties to the conflict.
This is a key element, because one of the most
important things the work of the Panel has done is to
bring this problem, of which we had all heard reports,
closer to the surface. We now need a serious and frank
dialogue with all concerned, but especially with the
parties to the conflict. Today’s debate is a start, and,
given the vigorous contributions we have heard so far,
the debate is, of course, going to continue.
We and all the parties agree that illegitimate
exploitation has to end. That is a vitally important basis
of agreement. But there is also, of course, some
disagreement on the precise facts of what was and is
illegitimate exploitation. That is inevitable, given the
circumstances in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the scope of the problem. We must engage
with each other and try to achieve greater clarity, but
we also need to focus on the primary goal here, which
is not to punish or narrowly to assign blame, but to
tackle the problem in the interests of promoting the
wider peace process and alleviating the suffering of the
Congolese people. It is their resources which have been
unscrupulously exploited for the benefit of others.
We do not regard resources as being the cause of
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
nor would addressing this problem alone solve that
conflict. But the natural resources of that country have
become part of what fuels the conflict, so all of the
parties must recommit themselves to work across the
board to bring an end to the conflict. In that context,
the Panel might usefully focus, in the next three
months of work, on better long-term sectoral strategies,
concentrating on specific materials, for instance, gold,
diamonds and coltan.
It is vital for the future peace, stability and
development of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
that its natural resources should work for the benefit of
its people. In addressing the abuses, we must also be

21

S/PV.4317

prepared to help the Government and the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to build effective
and transparent structures for legitimate exploitation
and trade in resources, including with its neighbours.
We therefore look to the Panel to establish a
comprehensive approach to the long-term aspects of
the problem which could help determine the success or
failure of the future of our efforts to bring peace and
stability to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
to the region.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for the kind words he addressed to
me.
Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I should like first of all to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency; I am
confident that you will discharge your duties in the
most effective way possible. We would also like to join
others in welcoming the representatives of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda
and Burundi who are participating in today’s meeting
of the Security Council. We have listened very
carefully to the important statements they have made.
The Russian Federation is grateful to the Panel of
Experts, chaired by Ms. Safiatou Ba-N’Daw, for the
substantive report that it has provided on the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources and other forms of
wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
are disturbed by the information that it contains about
the large-scale looting of resources, in violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, we do not believe
that the report should prompt the over-hasty adoption
of measures on the basis of an emotional response;
rather, it should provide food for thought, as it contains
information that we must study calmly and carefully.
Accordingly, we support a three-month extension of the
mandate of the Panel of Experts so that, at the end of
that period, it can submit an addition to the current
report, including commentaries by States named in the
report. We call on all the States mentioned in the report
to cooperate with the experts in their work and to
clarify carefully the situation with regard to the natural
resources and other forms of wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Illegal activities, by whomsoever committed,
must be brought to an end, and the sooner the better.
Russia believes that, in the final analysis, it is the

22

armed conflict that underlies the problem of the illegal
exploitation of the resources and other forms of wealth
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, just as it
underlies the problems of refugees, internally displaced
persons and child soldiers, human rights violations,
humanitarian crises and many other problems. Only
recently has there been some movement towards a
settlement of that conflict. We believe that movement
towards a political settlement in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must be a priority for the
Security Council. That is how we see the Council’s
discharge of its responsibilities under the Charter for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this public meeting to consider the report of
the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I note the presence at this important meeting of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation of Uganda,
the Special Envoy of the President of the Rwandese
Republic and the Minister of Finance of Burundi. I
should also like to express my delegation’s gratitude to
Ms. Safiatou Ba-N’Daw, Chairperson of the Panel of
Experts, and, through her, to all the members of the
Panel for the important work that they have carried out.
The report before us deals with a matter of
concern to this Council: the link between the illegal
exploitation of a country’s natural resources and the
continuation of the conflict that is affecting it. In this
regard, I should like first of all to restate Mali’s
position of principle, which resolutely rejects any
illegal exploitation of the natural resources and other
forms of wealth of a sovereign and independent State.
In this regard, my delegation believes that the
Security Council should thoroughly examine the
information and recommendations contained in the
report with a view to putting an end to the plundering
of the natural resources and other forms of wealth of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Such
plundering is fuelling the continuation of the conflict,
causing unspeakable suffering to the Congolese people
and destabilizing the whole region.
The message of this report is clear: measures
must be taken to end the plundering of the natural

S/PV.4317

resources and other forms of wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. From this standpoint, the
international community and the Security Council must
take steps to promote the peace process, which has
recently taken a positive turn with the launching of
phase II of the deployment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). As the Secretary-General
emphasized in his seventh report (S/2001/373) on
MONUC, everything must now be done to promote the
successful transition to phase III.
In this context, we believe that the discussions
begun today should be continued, in particular during t
the Security Council’s mission to the Great Lakes
region. It is essential to maintain the impetus of the
Lusaka process, while respecting the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo as well as that of other countries in the

region, thus contributing to the return of lasting peace
and stability in the Great Lakes region.
Mali looks forward with interest to the final
report of the Panel of Experts; we will then state our
views on the recommendations contained therein. That
is why we support the request for an extension for a
further three months of the mandate of the Panel of
Experts.
In conclusion, I should like to join in condemning
the murder, in the Bunia area, of six staff members of
the International Committee of the Red Cross and to
express our condolences to their families.
The President: If there is no objection, I propose
to suspend the meeting for a lunch break.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

23
