UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SIXTH-

YEAR

2265”

MEETING:

9 MARCH

1981

NEWYORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2265) .,,.,......,....I....................
Expression of welcome to the new representative of the United States of
America ,.....,..,..,.,...,,,..,,.,.,*..............................
Expression of thanks to the retiring President *I,*...........*..*........*
Adoption of the agenda ,,,.~~,,~..~~,,,.,.,.,,,....~~....~...........I.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 3 March 1981 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/14391) ..,,,,..,...,.....,...I......*.*,...*.

SiPV.2265

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1%4, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system,which hasbeenapplied
retroactivelyto resolutions
adoptedbefore1January1%5,became
fully operative
on that date.

2265th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 9 March 1981, at 4.20 p.m.
Presidenf:
Mr. PeterFLORIN
(GermanDemocraticRepublic).

3. The PRESIDENT(inferpretafion
from Russian):’
I wishto informmembers
of the Councilthat I have
receivedlettersfromthe representatives
of Israeland
Presenf: Therepresentatives
of thefollowingStates: Lebanon,in whichthey requestto be invited to parChina,France,GermanDemocratic
Republic,Ireland, ticipatein the discussion
of the itemonthe Council’s
Japan,Mexico, Niger, Panama,Philippines,Spain, agenda,ln accordance
with the usualpractice,I proTunisia,Uganda,Unionof SovietSocialistRepublics, pose,with the consentof the Council,to invite those
UnitedKingdomofGreatBritainandNorthernIreland, representatives
to participatein the discussion,
withUnitedStatesof America.
out theright to vote, in accordance
with the relevant
provisions
of theCharterandrule37of theprovisional
Provisional
agenda (SIAgenda12265)
rulesof procedure.
1. Adoptionof theagenda
At fhe invifation
of fhe Presidenf,
Mr. TuPni (Leb2. The situationin the MiddleEast:
acon), took a place at the Council
fable; Mr. Blum
Letter dated 3 March 1981from the Chargk
d’affairesa.i. of the PermanentMissionof (Israel) took the place reserved for him af rhe side of
Lebanonto the UnitedNationsaddressed
to the Council chamber.
thePresident
of theSecurityCouncil(Wl4391)
4. The PRESIDENT(inferpretation
from Russian):
The meetingwas called to order at 4.20 p.m.
The SecurityCouncilis meetingtoday in response
to
a requestby the PermanentMissionof Lebanonto
Expression of welcome to the new representative
theUnitedNations,whichiscontainedin aletterdated
of the United States of America
3 March1981addressed
to the Presidentof the Security Councilwhichwehave beforeus.
1. The PRESIDENT(inferpretation
from Russian):
I shouldlike, on behalfof the Council,to welcomethe
new PermanentRepresentative
of the United States 5. Membersof the Councilalsohavebeforethemthe
of Americato the UnitedNations,Mrs, JeaneKirk- followingotherdocuments:
a letter dated24February
patrick. I congratulateheron her assumption
of that 1981from the representative
of Lebanonto the Presoffice andhigh responsibilities
andassureher of the ident
of the Security Council[S/14381], and a letter
co-operationof the members
of the Council.
dated8 March 1981from the representative
of Israel
to the Presidentof the SecurityCouncil[S/14394].
ExpressIon of thanks to the retiring Preeldent

2. The PRESIDENT(inferprefafion
from Russian):
6. Thefirst speakeristhe representative
of Lebanon,
Beforethe consideration
of the item on the agenda, on whomI nowcall.
I shouldlike to paya tribute,onbehalfof themembers
of the Council,to Mr. JacauesLeurette.Permanent
7. Mr. TU$NI (Lebanon):Mr. President,since
Representative.
of Franceto the Unitedfrlations,fir
the greatskill heshowedasPresidentof the Council 3 March, when my delegationpresentedLebanon’s
last month.His skill as a talentedFrenchdiplomat requestfor a meetingof theSecurityCouncil,youhave
displayed
extremepatienceandgreatwisdom.~May
I be
deserves
our admiration.
allowed,whilecongratulating
you onyour assumption
of the dutiesof President,to congratulateyou as
Adoptloo of the agenda
well, andthankyou, for havingsofar conductedCOIIsultationsonour complaintwith suchconcernfor the
The ugenda was adopfed.
causeof peaceand the prerogativesandobligations
of the Council.We feel confidentthat, under your
The sltuatiou
lo the Middle East:
Letterdated3 March1981fromtheChargC
d’affaires guidanceand notwithstandingthe absenceof the
a.1.of the Permanent Mission of Lebanon to the customarypre-preparedconsensusresolution,the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
presentdebatewill reacha satisfactoryconclusion,as
tiurity Council(S/14391)
weall hope.

8. Indeed, this is one of the very rare instances when
my Government is not waiting for the expiration of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) to submit its grievances and ask
for action. We usually fill the gap between debates on
the renewal of the mandate of the Interim Force with
innumerable letters concerning the innumerable
violations by Israel of past resolutions, let alone
violations of the Charter, of the general principles of
the law of nations, of the General Armistice Agreemen between Lebanon and Israel’ of 1949 and, last
but not least, of the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of that most peace-loving country
in the Middle East, Lebanon.
9. Yet, since our last debate, on 17 December 1980
122SBrh !neeriiry], a novel situation has evolved in the
south, which makes it imperative for the Security
Council to intervene. Regular, repeated acts of violence have developed in6 a state of constant, continued warfare, which is a threat to international peace
and securi!y, as weli as to the safety and security of
UNIFIL.
10. For although most of the recent acts of aggression by Israel fall outside the limited area of operations
of UNIFIL, a pattern has evolved which imperils
the safety of the 6,000 gallant soldiers of peace and
which will undermine and obstruct their task and
render it more frustrating and, probably, sooner or
later, totally blunt it, since their now static mission is
confronted- by the dynamics of an ever expanding
confrontation.
11. We strongly maintain that lsrael finds it useful or,
rather, thrives on the illusion of the utility of fuelling
and stirring the dynamics of war and terrorism.
12. The Council need only review the very lengthy
list of daily shellings, air strikes, overflights, seaborne and airborne commando operations, motorized
and infantry incursions, kidnappings and the blowing
up of houses, of hospitals, of schools, and so on, to
understand why this situation is beyond tolerance. The
hundreds of casualties, the dead and injured, the children-Lebanese
children-the
aged and the women,
the extent and nature of the destruction, the rhythm
at which violence is exercised--all that is bound
inevitably to prompt counter-violence. But that is no
accident, for every Israeli leader, civilian or military,
proclaims defiantk; that it is all part and parcel of a
well-pondered policy of so-called pre-emptive strikes
which will continue, whatever the results.
13. But what are the results? What are the results so
far? We submit that they are of three species.
14. First, there has been an escalation of military and
paramilitary operations to an ever ascending level of
intensity. Pre-emptive strikes produce the predictable
reaction by “terrorists” of increased violence, which
locks everyone concerned in a vicious circle, i., xo-

rably conducive to total war. Israel will thus be affirn&g itself not a nation obsessed with its own security, but a terrorist State, using-or rather abusingweapons acquired for self-defe~ice further to kill and
destroy and to expand,
15. The second result has been the disruption of the
fabric of civilian life in southern Lebanon through the
destruction of property and the nicans of livelihood and
development, not excluding-as
was the case last
week-the Evangelical School of Sidon, supported,
incidentally, by American funds; a Druse religious
school in Hasbaya; as well as waterworks and electrical oroiects benefiting from United Nations assistance. -Hence, the masiive exodus from the south,
which is destabilizing all of Lebanon and making the
restoration of peace and national unity almost impossible in a country already shattered by six years of
continued war, which it has so far survived with
unequalled resilience, resistance and determination.
16. The third result has been the unavoidable explosion, beyond the Lebanese borders and in the whole
Middle East, of a general state of disintegration and
terror. Indeed, the microcosm will soon generate a
macrocosm. Lebanon has been ihe arena wherein
were waged, often by proxy, all the wars and revolutions of the region; its crisis will inevitably spill ovel
and, as has already been the case, its present stock of
violence will be exported. Directly threatened are
those who, friend and foe alike, once found it convenient to contain, or to maintain the illusion of containing, external conflicts within the structure of out
internal conflicts. And whilst so much is invested iit
ensuring peace, security and stability on the shores of
the Arabian Sea, where oil is exported through the
Gulf and its Straits, the world might one day soon
discover that the real security of such vital wealth and
resources is in fact endangered by violence and terror
imported from the shores of the Mediterranean Sea,
the unavoidable historical and geopolitical route of
both war and peace between East and West.
I7. To this we humbly beg to add that it would be
indeed agreat pity to destroy the credibility of UNIFIL
as a deterrent, ai an already existing and functioning
factor of stability, whilst those concerned with this
same stability of the Middle East are running around
trying to create new multinational systems of defence,
ai nounchallengeable cost. It may be sobering for all
of us to ask why southern Lebanon with UNIFIL
cannot become, in the interest of all, at least as secure
as the Golan Heights with the United Nations Disc
gagement Observer Force (UNDOF).
18. We therefore come to the Council, unabashed,
with a sentir-‘:nt of fear and concern, yet not without
hope. For, having condemned the disruption of peacekeeping from whatever source, and dissociating the
policy of our legitimate Government from all acts of
hostility, we refuse to accept the Security Council’s
being reduced to a mere forum where complaints are

aired, often with eloquence, somethnes with folly,
but alwavs to no avail. We also refuse to admit that
the Orgahization should be content with reducing the
role of the Secretary-General to the issuing of daily
statements & regret and calls for restraint, while being
rendered unable to act efficiently it1 his constant and
untiring efforts to create viable solutions to otherwise
insoluble crises.
19. Six weeks ago, the President of the Republic of
Lebanon, in an unprecedented attitude of courage and
candour but also in anguish and despair, addressed the
38 heads of State attending the third Summit Conference of the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
He presented what he described as our country’s
unique tragedy, that of a martyr country. He said:

“put an end to a situation which not only breeds
further death and destruction for the south but might
also become the source of extreme danger to the
re&;y ,as a whole, far beyond the borders of LebThat was a solemn warning, which I am now laying
before the Council, not unaware of its concern for
peace in the Middle East and of its responsibility in
solving the Middle Eastern problem, which, as we have
all admitted in earlier debates, could lead to another
world war.
2I, To all, I want once more to repeat what has often
been stated in this chamber and elsewhere, to no less
responsible audiences: peace in Lebanon cannot,
should not, and indeedshall not wait for the conclusion
of everyone else’s war and everyone’s revolution as
well.

“I shall speak to you in particular”-said the
President- “about the situation in southern Lebanon. Not that this subject overshadows other
aspects of the Lebanese crisis but because it epitomizes the entire Lebanese question , . .

22. So allow me to reiterate in the most unequivocal
terms that Lebanon’s will to survive is beyond all
question. Rarely has a country so small and, let us
admit it, so divisible and so divided, been able to
endure what we have endured and to remain independent, sovereign, proud and always ready to fulfil its
Zstorical obligations.

“The problem of southern Lebanon is not Lebanese in origin, yet Lebanon is shouldering its
burdens and responsibilities alone. The sons of the
south are being terrorized, displaced and killed;
their houses and properties are being destroyed,
their land plundered. Lebanon has appealed under
every possible international and regional charter
by which it is bound. We have brought complaints
about Israel to the Security Council because of
Israel’s recurrent acts of aggiession. . . .

23. Through centuries of cultural and political
universality, we have come to believe that resorting to
the international community is the surest way of
attaining peace and freedom, provided the world
Organization is willing to restrain those who, as Israel
does, challengeits resolutions and utilize one country
or another as a dumping pit of marginal wars and the
products of war.

“But we have only obtained resolutions, which
Israel continues to defy. , , .
“We have also complained to international,
regional and Arab conferences in which we have
participated. We are constantly pursuing contacts
with all friendly and sisterly States, seeking their cooperation to end the massacres, the tragedy and the
chaos prevailing in the south.

24. Now, what do we ask from the Council?
25. We ask that it exercise its responsibilities and
prerogatives: that it should forcefully and with determination not condemn, condone, regret, deplore or
call upon, but in simple, pragmatic terms initiate a
mechanism for peace in my country and, more specifically, on the internationally recognized border with
Israel. Such an arrangement must, once the dangers
of war have been ascertained, prevent the otherwise
unavoidableexplosion and create the objective conditions for the success of a most difficult peace-keeping
enterprise. For it was clear to the Council when
UNIFIL was created that the ulthnategoal, beyond the
cessation of hostilities, was to put an end to the erosion
of a country and a people.

“In response to our appeals,WChave encountered
only limiied response b; support, which has been
insufficient to deal with the Lebanese crisis in depth
and to cover all its aspects. . . .
“But now the crisis has attained such magnitude
that we are made to wonder what can the United
Nations, what can UNIFIL andwhat can the League
of Arab States as well do to help us to solve our
problems and protect our land and people?”

26. We strongly believe that, through proper consultations and, if needbe, a restrained debate, members
of the Council will be able to reach the type of actionoriented resolution which has been so often heralded
in the past. Indeed, the Council has reaffirmed, in
resolution after resolution, since resolution 444 (1979)
of 19January 1979,

20. Having used equal frankness in his criticisal of
armed transgression by Palestinian groups, contrary
to commitments, and of their consequences in the
south, President Sarkis conclud.~.’
his address by
asking in unequivocal terms for I lssistanc: of all
Arab and Muslim rulers, to help 1 _I
3

“its determination, in the event of continuing
obstruction of the mandate of the Force, to examine
practical ways and means in accordance with releVant provisidns of the Charter of the United b!ations
to secure the full implementation of resolution 425
(1978)“,

nection wlth the virtually incessant acts of naked
aggression committed by Israel agaitlst a sovereign
State, a Member of the Organization, Lebanon,
31. On 2 March, the Israeli air force carried out
totally unprovoked raids on the village of Abul-Aswad
and other populated localities situated in the region of
the town of Tyre in southern Lebanon. During those
barbarous bombingraids of peacefulvillages, 14people
were killed-largely among the civilian populationand more than SOwounded.

Only by exploring such “ways and means” can we
reverse the trend towards a broadening confrontation
and war. Then, and only then, can Lebanon, restored
to health, sanity and security, become the natural
partner that it should be in the creation of a just and
comprehensive Middle East peace, based on the
recognition of everyone’s right to independence,selfdetermination and security,

32. Those air raids carried out by the Israeli air force
on peaceful towns and villages of Lebanon are by no
means the first aggressive raids by Israel agahist that
country in the period of slightly more than two and a
half months of this year alone. Suffice it to recall the
letters of the representative of Lebanon sent to the
Security Council on 30 January and 24 February
ISi/
and Sil43811which aave concretedetails
&out the numerous
a&s of aggression
committedby
Israel againsthis country. Furthermore,Israeliaircraft have beencarrying out daily reconnaissance
flightsover practicallythe wholeterritory of Lebanon.
In this regard,on 18February,the Secretary-General
of theLeagueof ArabStates,ChedliKlibi, condemned
thoseactionsby Israelas“a nakedviolationof the
sovereigntyof Lebanonand a direct threat to the
nationalsecurityof the wholeArabworld”.

27. Mr. OVINNIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
frotn
Russian): Comrade
President, first of all, I wish to congratulate you,
the representative of a fraternal socialist country, the
German Democratic Republic, on your assumption
of the important post of Presidentof the Security Council for March and to wish you every success in the
discharge of the tasks facing the Council. The great
international prestige of your own country which
has achieved such outstanding success in economic
and social developmentwill be of great help in this, as
will your country’s great political authority and the
consistent struggle which it has waged against aggression and colonialism, all forms of exploitation, national
and racial oppression, and for freedom and independence of the peoples, thanks to which the German
Democratic Republic has won widespread recognition
in the world. The delegation of the Soviet Union is
convinced, Comrade President, that the success of
your work in this responsible post will be furthered
also by your own di&inguirhed diplomatic qualities
and your experience of fruitful work in the delegation
of the German Democratic Republic in the united
Nations, particularly in the Security Council, for the
achievement of peace, the consolidation of international security and the development of international
co-operation.

33. TheIsraelileaders,by nomeans
for thefirst time,
are attemptingto justify those aggressiveactions
againsta sovereignState, a Memberof the United
Nations,by means
of arrogantassertions
to the effect
that theyarecarryingout so-called
pre-emptive
strikes
againstthePalestinians-people
whohavebeendriven
out by Israelfrom their homesandhavefoundrefuge
and shelteron the territory of Lebanon.In this way
Israelonceagain,asit hasdonetimeandtimeagainin
the past,is blatantlyfloutingthe universallyacknowledgednormsof internationallawandopenlyviolating
numerousdecisionsof the SecurityCounciland the
GeneralAssemblydesigned
to protectthesovereignty
and territorial integrity of LebanonagainstIsraeli
encroachment.

28. I should like to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude to your predecessor as President of the
Security Council, the representative of France,
Mr. Leprette, for his ableand skilful performance of his
functions last month.

34. The pohit is not that Israel,as it mightseem,
cannotfind anyway out of the viciouscircle of violence,whichweheartalkedaboutsometimes.
Rather,
something
elseis true. It is not a circle at all but a
phenomenonwhich had one clear-cut beginning,
namely,the aggression
of IsraelagainstArab co6
tries whichis continuedby the exclusivefact of ttis
aggression,
thefact of thecontinuationof the occupation by Israelof Arabterritory.

29. I should like also to welcome to this table the
new representative of the United States of America,
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. By way of offering her my experience, I should like to say that the path in this organ, the
Security Council, is not always strewn with roses
-even for ladies; and, when it is, we find that rose
bushes are plants that have not only blooms but also
thorns.

35. WhatIsraelisdoingin Lebanoni.. veritableinternationalterrorism-andterrorismexaltedto the status
of Statepolic;rwhichfor that reasonis an evenmore
dangerous
form of terrorism.Wecannotfail to notice
that, pursuingthis policy of aggression
againstArab

30. As has repeatedly occurred over the last year,
the Security Council has been forced to meet in con4

States, Israel can do this only by relying on the broad
and comprehensive support of those who pay lip
service to opposition to international terrorism.
36, Israel’s raids against Lebanon are just a part of
the abnormal situation which was created, on the one
hand, by Israeli aggression against Arab countries
in 1967and, on the other hand, by the desire of the
United States t’o exploit this aggression for their own
far-reaching goals in that area.
37. The General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
the head of the Soviet State, Mr. Brezhnev, in his
report to the Twenty-sixth Congress of the Communist
Party of the Soviei Union, m&le the following statement on this situation and on ways of resolving it:
“In its attempts to achieve a dominant position
in the Middle East, the United States has adoptedthe
course of the Camp David policy, a course of splitting
the Arab world and the organizing of a separate deal
between Israel and Egypt. American diplomacy has’
not succeeded in converting this separate antiArab deal iuto a broader capitulation-type agreement. But it has succeeded in something: there has
been a further exacerbation of the situation in the
area. A Middle East settlement has received a setback.
“Now, what is to happennext? It seems to us that
it is time to move things off dead centre. It is time
to return to honourable collective efforts to find a
comprehensive settlement on a just and realistic
basis. In the circumstances this could be done, for
example, within the framework of a specially convened international conference.
“The Soviet Union is ready in a constructive
spirit and from a position of good will to take part in
this work. We are ready to do this together with
other interested parties, with the Arabs, including,
of course, the Palestine Liberation Organization,
with Israel. And we are ready to embark on a search
for a just solution together with the United States.
We have, I would remind the Council, a certain
amount of experience in this area which we acquired
a few years ago. We are ready to co-operate with
European States, with all those who have a sincere
interest in bringing about a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East.
“And, of course, in all this the United Nations too
can continue to play a useful role.
“As for the substance of the matter, we remain
convinced that for genuine ueacein the Middle East
an end must be pui to Israeli occupation of all the
Arab territories seized in 1967.The inalienablerights
of the Arab peopleof Palestinemust be implemented
up to and including the creation of their own State.
We must ensure the security and sovereignty of all
States of this area, includit& Israel. Those &e the
fundamental principles. The details can, of course,
be the subject of negotiations.”

That is the clear and distinct position of the Soviet
Union with regard to ways and means of resolving the
Middle East conflict.
38. And there is another thing that is absolutely clear:
the current aggressive actions of Israel against Lebanon certainly do not demonstrate that the Israeli
ruling circles are ready to show far-,ightedness and
realism in the matter of a comprehensive and just
settlement of the Middle East conflict. The fresh
aggressive raids of Israel against Lebanon show precisely the reverse, that is, that Israel is continuing to
bank on force.
39. In this situation it is the bounden duly of the
Council to bring the aggressor to reason and to react
appropriately to the appeal of the Government of
Lebanon, The Council should adopt a resolution condemningthe acts of naked aggression by Israel against
that State and clearly and unambiguously calling for
a cessation of such aggression. The resolution should
also oblige the Israeli authorities to observe and
respect strictly the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Lebanon within the confines of its internationally
recognized borders and to cease all intervention in the
internal affairs of that independent State.
40. The delegationof the Soviet Union believes that
it is only in this way that the Israeli aggressors can be
compelledto respect the letter and spirit of the Charter
of the United Nations and the many United Nations
resolutions designed to normalize the situation in
southern Lebanon.
41, The PRESIDENT (interpretatio,l
from Russiart):
The next speaker is the representative of Israel. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
42. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, let me first
of all pay my respects to you as President of the Security Council for this month. I should also like to take
this opportunity to extend my compliments to the
representative of France, who presided over the
Council’s business last month.
43. We have listehed carefully to the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon. We
have also heard a statement by the representative of the
country which over the past quarter of a century has
contributed so much to fomenting tension in our region
in its attempts to destabilize it and to fish in troubled
waters.
44. There is much in the presentation of the representative of. Lebanon on which we would wish to
comment both as regards the facts and as regards their
evaluation. We prefer, however, to address ourselves
to his presentation and to the matter before us in
general at the appropriate time.
The rneethg rose ut 5 p.m.

5

iJ1;II +I
4- ,J-b $1 dJI

j

b

+.I

* ,JWl -Ir I w

J @II
I +

,,a, d&J1
,,I ,I rl,,,

& J&l

irlJ,%

i;,

ti i.uJI +‘I &,A
,+ JrJl ;r,
$ $1 .A, tu;JI ,A : JI 41 ,I

mwl~~~wtlIffi#
aa~~~imaetltsewuawtirntsryia.

HOW TO OBTAIN

UMTED

il~HIXIFi)~~l811tPtrlrbln~~nBOYlatl.

NATIONS

PUBLICAllONS

United Nations publicadons
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consuh your bookstore or write IO: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATlONS

UNIBS

publications
des Nations Unies son, en veme dans les libmiries et lcs agences d@osiaires
du
monde enlier. Inrormez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adresset-vous B : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes, New York ou Gcn&c.
l.es

XAH

IIOJIYVI~Th

U3LIAHHSI

OP,‘AHH.?AI(HH

OWl~EIlUHEHHI.IX

HAI&UR

~3nlllIl(~
Oprnw13a~~1(
Olnen~uewb~x
Hai,&
HOW(HO ~yrl~rt,
a X”WWLIX
uara3”“8X
H ~~‘~HTCTI)RX 8” BC~X poRomx
~q,a. Hoeonu~e
cr~paow
oa HD~BBHHX B
BR”WM KHWXHOM MWlxJ,,HO ,,“I4 n”,I*HTe no nnpecy : Opra”113[L”I,R
06%ensHeHeblx
HawR.
Cexwn
no “poname
w,fia”“f,,
HLHI-ROOK “III, X<eeeea.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUULICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de Ias Naciones Unidas estin en venta en librcdas y casas diwibuidoras
co
lcdas parlcs de1 mundo. ConsuIte a su librcro o dirljasc a: Nacioncs Unidas, Secci6n de Venras,
Nueva York o Gincbra.
