S/2021/126

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 February 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 4 February 2021 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the letter dated 23 December 2020 from the
President of the Security Council (S/2020/1291), by which the Council approved the
temporary redeployment, for a two-month period, of two infantry companies and two
military utility helicopters from the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
The reinforcement of MINUSCA proved timely and essential, owing to the
persisting attacks perpetrated primarily by a coalition of armed groups aligned with
former President François Bozizé. Since mid-December 2020, that coalition has
sought to undermine democratic order by disrupting elections on 27 December 2 020,
destabilizing national institutions and discrediting the outcome of the presidential
election, in which the Constitutional Court determined President Faustin Archange
Touadéra had won in the first round. Some of the political opposition parties have
also rejected the electoral outcome, citing instability that prevented voters from
casting their ballots in parts of the west and centre of the country and other
irregularities.
The election-related violence has had a significant impact on civilians,
contributing to more than 200,000 Central African citizens being forcibly displaced
internally or to neighbouring countries, fleeing attacks, threats or fears of exactions.
The armed groups coalition has sought to interrupt the provision of essential goods to
Bangui by preventing movement along the main supply route connecting it to
Cameroon. As a result, the cost of essential commodities such as food and fuel has
risen considerably, having a further impact on the lives and livelihoods of civilians.
The violence has also impeded humanitarian access to the most vulnerable in some
areas of the country and the import of critical humanitarian and medical materials in
the context of the ongoing global pandemic.
As a consequence of the ongoing violence, a number of national defence and
internal security forces deserted or defected from their posts, in some cases with their
weapons, compounding the risks to civilians, humanitarian actors and peacekeepers
and emboldening armed groups. Since December 2020, seven MINUSCA
peacekeepers have been killed in hostile acts. There are indications that the coalition
will seek to expand its control over main supply routes, in order to maintain access to
arms, ammunitions, equipment and reinforcements.
MINUSCA has responded robustly in accordance with its mandate, repelling
attacks in main localities, including the capital city, and reinforcing its presence along

21-01900 (E)

150221

*2101900*

S/2021/126

strategic routes and in Bangui. The Mission also continued to provide essential
multifaceted support for the electoral process. However, the risk of overstretch
remains. MINUSCA requires sufficient force reserves to fulfil its priority mandated
tasks of protecting civilians, facilitating humanitarian aid, ensuring the safety and
security of United Nations personnel and premises, and supporting the electoral
process, while underpinning the political strategy of the Mission.
The reinforcements from UNMISS have helped MINUSCA to adjust its
configuration with a view to enhancing its capacity to project force and improving
mobility during the electoral period. Given the situation in the Central African
Republic ahead of the second round of legislative elections scheduled for March 2021,
it would be important to mitigate the risk of overstretch and ensure that the hard -won
gains in the political process are not reversed. I would therefore appreciate the
Security Council granting approval for a two-month extension of the temporary
redeployment of the two infantry companies and the two military utility helicopters
from UNMISS to MINUSCA, subject to the extension of the mandate of UNMISS
beyond 15 March 2021.
The forces temporarily redeployed shall continue to be counted against the
authorized ceiling on military and civilian personnel of UNMISS and shall not count
against the ceiling of MINUSCA. In this regard, I am conscious of the importance of
ensuring the adequate resourcing and staffing of UNMISS for the implementation of
the peace accords of South Sudan, and I wish to assure the Security Council that this
is a temporary request brought about by emergency circumstances in the Central
African Republic and that more durable arrangements for MINUSCA will be
proposed in my forthcoming report on the Central African Republic.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter to th e attention of the
members of the Security Council at the earliest opportunity.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

21-01900
