S/PV.8482

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8482nd meeting

Tuesday, 12 March 2019, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Tshabalala
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
European Union

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-06774 (E)
*1906774*

S/PV.8482

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.

It is a path built on mediation and peacekeeping
operations, on sustainable development and the
protection of human rights, on humanitarian assistance
and on the development of, and respect for, shared rules.
Our support for the United Nations and multilateralism
is a choice based on our values and, at the same time, it
is a pragmatic choice. A decision taken in a multilateral
context is by definition more democratic and inclusive,
but also more solid and sustainable over time.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
European Union
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Her Excellency Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Mogherini, whom I warmly
welcome to our meeting today.
Ms. Mogherini (spoke in French): It is an honour
for me to speak before the Security Council for the third
time. Allow me to underscore that I am proud to do
so at a time when five European Union member States
are sitting around the table and when cooperation and
coordination among the European Union member States
in the Security Council has increased enormously. The
decision to strengthen that coordination came directly
from member States for reasons of principle, but above
all because we are aware that we are stronger and more
effective together; we are aware of our responsibility;
and we can and want to put that strength at the service
of the United Nations, multilateralism and a cooperative
approach to international relations.
We share the same values and interests, starting
with the defence of multilateralism and the United
Nations system. The European Union and the United
Nations were born from the same founding idea,
after the two world wars: the idea that, in order to
avoid another disaster, a multilateral mechanism was
needed — a mechanism to work towards building
win-win solutions as the only alternative to a new
continental and world war.
For us that idea is still valid, but over the decades
our elective affinity has grown even stronger. There is a
European path to peace and security, which is identical
to the United Nations path to peace and security.
2/23

12/03/2019

(spoke in English)
The European Union will therefore never be
heard questioning whether the United Nations serves
its interests and values, because we in Europe know
that the Organization serves universal interests and
values. And we know that precondition to be essential
for building sustainable peace and security, which is
always in our own ultimate interests. The question we
always ask as Europeans, rather, is “What can we do
to support the United Nations?”. For working with the
United Nations is the best way to serve our collective
interests — the interests of peace, security and global
progress. That is why the European Union has increased
its cooperation with the United Nations across all fields
of action. Allow me to update the Council on some of
our main fields of cooperation with the United Nations,
starting with conflict resolution.
Conflicts in our times are more complex than
ever. They always have local, regional and global
dimensions, and solutions can be built only when
those three dimensions align. That is possible only in
a multilateral framework. That is clearly true for Syria.
Since the beginning of the war, we have said that the
only sustainable solution can come from the United
Nations-led process and from the implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015). A negotiated political transition
towards a democratic, inclusive, reconciled and united
Syria — that is the only realistic path out of the conflict.
Anything else would not lead to a stable, sustainable,
secure, inclusive or prosperous Syria. That is why we
fully support Special Envoy Pedersen in his difficult
but essential work.
Precisely to support the United Nations-led
process, tomorrow the European Union will co-chair
with the United Nations the third Brussels Conference
on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region. Its
aim will be to mobilize international support to the
United Nations-led political process, gather pledges to
guarantee humanitarian aid for Syrians, both inside and
19-06774

12/03/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

outside of their country, and support the countries of the
region, starting with Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey. After
eight years of war, while war continues, the people of
Syria are still hoping and preparing for peace, and there
are some little signs of hope coming from the region.
The Stockholm Agreement on Yemen tells us that
steps towards peace can always be possible, even after
immense suffering. We are fully and actively supporting
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths. The Security Council’s
continuous engagement will be crucial to his success
and to the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement.
The possibility of peace will not turn into reality if we
do not invest all our energy in it.
That is also true for Libya, where we are working as
the European Union in the closest possible cooperation
with Special Representative Ghassan Salamé, and
we are enforcing resolution 2420 (2018), on the arms
embargo. We are coordinating our action directly
between the European Union and the United Nations,
but also through the quartet that brings together the
United Nations, the European Union, the League of
Arab States and the African Union, in coordination
that, to me, is essential. Together we can help Libyan
players to truly move towards reconciliation, through
a national conference to be held in Libya and elections
with the right conditions in place. The European Union
is and will continue to support that process with all
its means.
Another country that is clearly at a crossroads
this week, and where European Union-United Nations
cooperation is key, is Afghanistan. Last year was the
deadliest ever for civilians since the start of the war
in 2001, and yet 2019 could be the year of peace. We
are following very closely the contacts between the
representatives of the Taliban and the United States
Government. We believe the Taliban need to engage
in intra-Afghan talks with the Government in Kabul,
together with other parts of the Afghan political
spectrum. Those talks should be accompanied by
confidence-building measures and a lasting ceasefire.
The European Union has offered to support peace
in Afghanistan with five practical contributions, which
I presented in Geneva a few months ago. First, we can
serve as a guarantor of the peace process; secondly, we
can help make the process more inclusive, involving in
particular women, minorities and all sectors of civil
society; thirdly, we can help with reforms; fourthly, we
can support the reintegration of former fighters; and

S/PV. 8482

last but not least, we can promote regional trade and
infrastructure with all of Afghanistan’s neighbours. We
are now following this up with our partners, first of
all within Afghanistan, but obviously also in the region
and in the international community, starting with our
friends in the United States.
I have talked about four conflicts in our greater
region, but allow me to also look to this side of
the Atlantic. The situation in Venezuela has been
deteriorating dramatically. The crisis affecting
the country has political and institutional causes;
it is not a natural disaster. Its solution needs to be
peaceful, political and democratic. We believe that no
military development, from inside or outside of the
country, would be acceptable and a solution cannot
be and should never be imposed from the outside. We
believe that an international initiative can help build
a peaceful and democratic way out of the crisis. For
that reason, we have set up an international contact
group with European and Latin American countries
to help create the conditions for a political process
that would lead to free and fair presidential elections,
in accordance with the Venezuelan Constitution and
international standards.
Even when there is no multilateral framework, the
European Union tries to work to build or rebuild one. In
the meantime, we are working on Venezuela, together
with the relevant United Nations agencies, to ensure
that humanitarian aid reaches those in need inside and
outside the country, following the key principles of
humanitarian law and avoiding any politicization of the
aid delivery. In all these cases, our strongest interest is
to restore peace and security, and that is possible only
in a multilateral framework. We always work in support
of the United Nations and for peace.
The United Nations is the key partner for us on
conflict resolution in Africa. From the Central African
Republic to the Sudan, from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to Guinea-Bissau — wherever there is
a peace process and a United Nations peacekeeping
mission, the European Union is there to support
politically, financially and with our own missions
on the ground. New threats to peace and security in
Africa have an impact on the stability of both our two
continents — ours is the closest to Africa — and I would
mention in particular the growing terrorism threats and
transboundary criminal activities that are challenging
our security on both sides of the Mediterranean Sea.

19-067743/23

S/PV.8482

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The role of United Nations peacekeepers has
sometimes been questioned. We in the European Union
believe that it is an essential tool towards sustainable
peace and security. The European Union Member
States, taken together, contribute one-third of the
United Nations peacekeeping budget. That is more
than any other global Power, and we are proud of
that. We also believe in African solutions to African
challenges. African Union peace support operations
are a vital instrument for the promotion of international
environment of peace and security on the African
continent and globally. The African Union is pursuing
major financial and institutional reforms in order to
become a major player for regional security. I was
honoured to be present at the latest African Union
Summit, held in Addis Ababa just a few weeks ago.
This is a process we fully support, and we should do
so, including through the possibility of utilizing United
Nations contributions for African Union peace support
operations authorized by the Security Council, and in
compliance with international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law.
I would like to mention two cases I particularly care
about — which does not mean that I do not care about
the others, but these two examples are particularly
appropriate in these times.
The first is Mali. I believe that a sort of renaissance
of Mali is possible, and I believe that a solution to the
problems that Mali is facing can come only from the
people of Mali themselves. Just a few days ago, I met
with the representatives of the movements that signed
the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali. This was my second meeting with them to discuss
some key political and institutional reforms, including
security sector reform. The European Union is the first
supporter of the Joint Force created by the Group of
Five for the Sahel — a regional solution to regional
challenges. As these processes take place, a United
Nations presence must be guaranteed. We will continue
to support the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali with our two
European training and capacity-building missions on
the ground.
Something similar can be said for Somalia. The
Federal Government of Somalia is working to take
greater responsibility for the security of the country.
While Somali forces have to step up and take full
responsibility for security in their own country, which
is the only way make security in Somalia sustainable,
4/23

12/03/2019

they still rely on the support of their international
partners — first and foremost the European
Union — starting with the African Union Mission
in Somalia, which the European Union continues to
support and finance. We know that the transition of
responsibilities can only happen gradually, but it has
to happen, in connection with the path of reforms.
The United Nations and the its Assistance Mission in
Somalia have a special role to play in coordinating the
international community’s work in the country, and for
that reason we look forward to the appointment of a
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Clearly, our cooperation with the United Nations
and Africa goes well beyond peacekeeping, but in
all sectors our approach is the same. Africa wants
and needs to take responsibility for its own security,
its own economy, its own present and its own future,
and as Europeans we want to accompany our brothers
and sisters on this path. We have moved from the old
donor-recipient relationship to a partnership of equals
in particular during the Abidjan Summit a year and a
half ago. We set our common priorities together and
we try to understand how everyone can contribute to
achieving them by each playing its own role.
This new approach is also changing the way we work
together in the United Nations context. For over a year
now, we have been working in a trilateral format with
the African Union and the United Nations. Our common
work began on a common challenge — the dramatic
situation of African migrants in Libya’s detention
centres. We realized together that we could empty those
centres and save lives only by working together, and
thanks to our cooperation in one year we have helped
over 30,000 people to return voluntarily to their homes
or find international protection whenever needed. This
is probably our most innovative contribution to a more
effective multilateralism — regional organizations
joining forces on the ground and in triangulation with
the United Nations agencies.
I would like now to mention two more contributions
of the European Union to the multilateral system,
starting with reconciliation in a region closer to the
European Union reconciliation — the Balkans.
Let me thank every member of the Security Council
for their constructive approach to the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. For a full-fledged resumption
of the talks, the tariffs that have been imposed by
the Government of Kosovo must be revoked. The
19-06774

12/03/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

day the tariffs are suspended, I will immediately call
for a new meeting of the dialogue to reach a legally
binding agreement that should address all outstanding
issues and fully normalize relations between Pristina
and Belgrade.
As Council members know, I personally facilitate
the dialogue, but the dialogue does not belong to me,
the European Union or any of us around this table. The
Dialogue belongs to the parties. It is up to them to find
an agreement that would be acceptable, convenient and
sustainable to both. At the same time, a final agreement
will need to be in line with international law and
supported by the Security Council. The Council’s role
is and will be key, and we are ready — I am personally
ready — to intensify our exchanges with all members
of the Security Council on this.
Staying in the Balkans, let me say that this year we
have already seen something historical in that region.
The Prespa agreement is another positive example of
European Union-United Nations cooperation and a
remarkable example of political leadership by the two
countries, North Macedonia and Greece. A positive
conclusion to the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina would give even more hope to the whole region
and would serve as a model and inspiration to Europe
and the world.
I have mentioned a number of geographic priorities,
but we all know that most of the challenges we face have
a global dimension. So let me conclude by referring
to the European Union’s support for global solutions
to global challenges. From the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change to the Sustainable Development
Goals, progress on these agreements would have been
impossible without the strong commitment of the
European Union and, most importantly, we continue to
work and the Security Council can continue to count on
us for their full implementation.
This is a moment in human history when cooperation
among nations and respect for the rules that govern
our international systems are more needed than ever.
The concept of global governance risks being replaced
by the old law that “might makes right”. We need to
avoid our system of rules from being disrupted and our
multilateral system from being called into question.
A clear violation of the fundamental principles of
our international system came with Russia’s illegal
annexation of the Crimean peninsula and its behaviour
in eastern Ukraine. And the situation in Crimea also

S/PV. 8482

led to the militarization of the Sea of Azov. That is what
happens when international law is violated — tensions
rise, conflicts proliferate and we all lose.
Russia is an important interlocutor for the European
Union. We work well together on several files, from
Iran to the Arctic. Yet it is no mystery that we are
deeply worried about certain behaviours, not only in
Ukraine but also in Salisbury, as well as about the use of
espionage against the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons. We have also expressed
serious concerns about Russia’s compliance with the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty. We need to
work to preserve the Treaty and for Russia to return to
full compliance. Europe is not party to the Treaty, but is
clearly extremely interested in its existence.
The global architecture for disarmament and
non-proliferation is being questioned like never before.
To us that is one of the greatest paradoxes of our times,
because deterrence is clearly no longer enough for
preventing a war, given the fragmentation of centres
of power in today’s world. A new arms race — and a
nuclear arms race in particular — can only make the
world less secure. Our collective security requires a
solid multilateral architecture for non-proliferation
and disarmament.
That is why the European Union will continue
to work to preserve the nuclear deal with Iran. Iran’s
implementation of its nuclear-related commitments
has been confirmed in 14 consecutive reports of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the latest just a
couple of weeks ago. Alongside Iran’s implementation,
the lifting of nuclear-related sanctions is an essential
part of the deal. We will therefore continue to work
to preserve the economic dividends of sanctionslifting. This is a contribution to our collective security
on the part of the European Union and its member
States, and I would like to thank in particular France,
Germany and the United Kingdom. It is also a way to
prevent nuclear proliferation, especially relevant in an
extremely tense region. Finally, it is also a contribution
to preserving the credibility of the Security Council,
which endorsed the Iran deal through resolution 2231
(2015), adopted unanimously. We have serious issues
with Iran’s behaviour on other matters, starting with
ballistic missiles, human rights and regional dynamics.
But without a nuclear deal, discussion with Iran would
be much more difficult, not easier. Dismantling a deal
that works and delivers will never be a good starting
point to advance our collective security interests.

19-067745/23

S/PV.8482

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The European Union will continue to support
all efforts to strengthen and expand the global
non-proliferation regime. The Council can count on our
contribution towards the full, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. We have
imposed the toughest sanctions on North Korea and, at
the same time, have kept channels open to encourage
dialogue at all levels. We are ready to support the
difficult process under the way with our expertise and
our political support.
Our approach is always to build and never to
dismantle. We do not believe that the current multilateral
system is perfect. Nothing is perfect. That is why we
fully support the reform agenda of Secretary-General
António Guterres and are contributing in practice to a
more effective multilateral system. We need to expand
and improve the system for global governance, not
weaken or demolish it.
When the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
faced a serious funding crisis, the European Union and
its member States stepped in to fill the gap and prevent
a sudden cessation of the Agency’s work. We want
UNRWA to continue its vital reforms, but we cannot
afford the collapse of the Agency and the ensuing chaos.
The Agency’s work is essential, first and foremost to
the lives of millions of people, but also to preserve the
viability of a two-State solution between Israel and
Palestine. We believe that the only alternative to the
two-State solution is turmoil and violence in the holy
places. That is why the European Union and its member
States will continue to work together with international
partners to preserve the viability of a two-State solution
in the holy places.
Protecting and reforming the United Nations is
our collective responsibility. As Europeans we feel
that responsibility because we see the United Nations
as our common home. It is the centre of gravity of
the international system, the tool we have to build a
more peaceful and cooperative global order. The
United Nations is not only a covenant of States, it also
represents hope for millions of human beings who still
suffer from the same human rights violations that the
world collectively decided to ban after the misery of the
Second World War.
The European Union is contributing to a stronger
and more effective multilateral system. We are
investing in our cooperation with the United Nations
6/23

12/03/2019

system as never before because we want to assume our
responsibility for our common home. I believe that we
must all renew our commitment to support the United
Nations — politically, financially and diplomatically,
here in New York as well as on the ground, in all the
peace process that need a multilateral framework to
succeed. For us Europeans this is the best investment
we could make. We will continue to support the
United Nations and its work by collaborating as much
as possible with our partners and friends worldwide
that believe in a cooperative multilateral international
order, as we do.
The President (spoke in French): I thank High
Representative Mogherini for her important briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany) (spoke in French): It is a
great pleasure to see High Representative Mogherini
here at the Security Council. None of my remarks run
counter to what she has just said. I wish only to repeat
that the European Union and the United Nations have
the same foundational principles. I think that is quite
powerful. We share the same values. I endorse her
position at the end of her statement concerning human
rights — that the United Nations and the European
Union both represent multilateralism, and it is the
cooperation that she described that makes the two
organizations more robust and lend them credibility.
I do not want to repeat what she said, but it was
striking to see that the European Union is also active in
similar ways on all the issues under consideration here.
With regard to Syria, for example, she indicated that she
supported resolution 2254 (2015) and is participating in
the Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of
Syria and the Region. She mentioned that she supported
the efforts of Mr. Griffiths in Yemen. There was a
similar overlap with regard to Afghanistan, Venezuela
and the Middle East. For example, the European Union
also supports the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East at a
time of crisis for the Agency. That support is very
important in enabling young Palestinians to attend
school. The same is true of what she said about North
Korea — that the European Union and the United
Nations are working together multilaterally to set up
negotiations with North Korea. That would not be
possible without multilateralism, as there would be no
discussions with North Korea.
19-06774

12/03/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Of course, I would also like to highlight European
Union actions with regard to Africa, which is a crucial
issue. High Representative Mogherini mentioned
that she attended the African Union summit, which
the Secretary-General also attended. I think that is
symbolic of the trilateral cooperation — among the
European Union, the United Nations and the African
Union — that can contribute to resolving issues.
As Ms. Mogherini has just said, there must be
regional African solutions for African issues. Working
together is also important. She also mentioned
something that is very important to us, that is to say,
inclusive solutions for issues, in which civil society,
in particular women, is involved and participates.
That is not only because there is the Commission on
the Status of Women but it is a very clear German
position on the participation of women in negotiations,
mediation and conflict resolution. Yesterday we talked
about Afghanistan, where it is vital that women truly
participate in the talks in Doha (see S/PV.8481).
I do not want to speak for any longer but I would
just say that for Germany and France, through our joint
presidencies, one of our aims is as part of our European
Union support, thereby highlighting the shared values
of France, Germany and the European Union.
The second to last point is just to underline what
the High Representative said about the disarmament
architecture. I think that it is important that we
remain engaged on that agenda. There are too many
losses, starting with the Budapest Memorandum at
the beginning of the crisis in Ukraine and the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, in which the High
Representative herself was greatly involved — she did
a great deal towards achieving that agreement, which
is a true masterpiece of diplomacy — as well as with
regard to what she said about the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty. She has our full support.
I would like to ask a question about something that
is very important to us, namely, conflict prevention.
Could the High Representative perhaps indicate where
she sees issues or projects where the European Union
and the United Nations can perhaps work more closely
together to truly preventing conflicts?
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to welcome
Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, to the Security Council and to thank her very
warmly for her briefing.

S/PV. 8482

The European Union (EU) project has been the most
important institutional source of peace and stability in
Europe since the end of the Second World War.
In that regard, the European Union will remain
a natural partner and ally to the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and
security. Moreover, as the European community,
we are already united in striving for the collective
commitment to deliver an even more peaceful and
sustainable world, as envisioned in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change.
With the growing need to strengthen partnerships
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
there is a space to be filled by a strategic partnership
between the European Union and the United Nations
in the areas of peacekeeping and crisis management.
Apart from regular high-level dialogues with the
participation of the EU/UN Steering Committee on
crisis management, further cooperation between
missions and Headquarters is required, as more
emerging multifaceted challenges occur.
Poland clearly understands such challenges and fully
supports the need for an enhanced EU-United Nations
partnership, as defined in the EU Global Strategy for
Foreign and Security Policy. We are glad that support
for global governance and the United Nations was one
of the EU’s priorities in implementing the Strategy
until the end of the current institutional cycle.
Caring exclusively about safety and security in our
own European territory would be not only short-sighted
but certainly counterproductive. That is why the EU
has repeatedly reiterated its unwavering support for
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. Poland
and the European Union will remain active supporters
and advocates of international law and a rules-based
international order.
Our special responsibility falls to the region of the
Western Balkans, where the EU helps in strengthening
democracy and human rights agenda through its
enlargement policy. We want to welcome all those
countries into our European family in the near future.
We cannot forget about the European Union’s
active engagement in peace and security in Africa
not only through significant contributions to the
relevant financial instruments but also, to name just
a few activities, by establishing training missions

19-067747/23

S/PV.8482

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

in the Central African Republic, Mali and Somalia
or by supporting the United Nations efforts aimed at
combating human trafficking and the illicit trade in oil
and weapons on the high seas off the coast of Libya
through Operation Sophia.
The European Union is also a core partner of the
United Nations in reaching lasting solutions to the
crises in the Middle East region, exercising its influence
and using resources to address conflicts in Syria and
Yemen and to reignite the Middle East peace process.
One of the priority areas of further strengthening
and structuring the EU-United Nations partnership
should be migration. A few steps that could be
undertaken are the stronger involvement of the
international community in counteracting the root
causes of illegal migration and providing adequate
financing for humanitarian assistance.
Another priority should include strengthening
cooperation on preventive diplomacy and mediation. To
prevent conflict, one needs good development policies
and strong State institutions. The European Union
delivers necessary assistance in those areas around
the world with the United Nations helping to identify
the areas where the assistance is most needed. The EU
should maintain its commitments and continue to be a
world’s leading donor of development aid.
The last topic I would like to highlight today
pertains to the establishment of an EU-United Nations
collaborative platform on women, peace and security.
Nineteen years after Security Council adopted the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) there is still a need to
reaffirm the important role that women play in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
The European Union is increasingly active as a
worldwide security provider. The EU member States
provide almost 40 per cent of the United Nations
peacekeeping budget. Collectively, we are the largest
United Nations budget contributor.
In conclusion, we think that cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and
the European Union could and should be further
strengthened to spread our common values and fulfil
the untapped potential with the very aim to bring peace
and prosperity in the whole world.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European
8/23

12/03/2019

Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, for her
detailed briefing.
The Dominican Republic recognizes that
there are challenges are huge and complex in this
millennium, and it is therefore essential to strengthen
the links between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in order to broaden the
scope, make the work more effective and increasingly
ensure international peace and security.
We recognize that cooperation with regional
organizations is essential, as we share the
same commitment to the pursuit of solutions to
global problems.
We understand that such relations are crucial
to stability and security, Many of these regional
organizations serve as natural mediators, and
partnership with them can help to foster the conditions
necessary for finding lasting and sustainable solutions,
on the consistent basis of mutual benefit for States and
the principles of international law, and in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
We welcome the laudable and intensive efforts
of the European Union and its member States in the
promotion of international peace and security. We
acknowledge the ongoing support that the European
Union provides to various countries through various
channels, including good offices, mediation, support
for the development of national capacity and training.
Likewise, under the authority of the Security
Council, the European Union also provides financing
and equipment to peacekeeping operations and supports
institutional development. In that respect, its presence
in the international arena strengthens the scope of
multilateralism, and its contribution promotes the quest
for sustainable peace. That said, we are convinced that
the European security and defence policy is an integral
and complementary part of the architecture of the
multilateral system.
Currently 70 per cent of European Union missions
and operations are carried out in parallel with the
United Nations, reflecting the complementary nature
of the work of both organizations. Thus progress has
been made in the quest for sustainable solutions in the
Balkans by facilitating dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina and reaching an agreement on the integration
of justice, border management and the civil registry.
Most importantly, tangible progress has been made
19-06774

12/03/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

towards stability and the normalization of relations
between Kosovo and Serbia.
By the same token, the European Union-led
multinational stabilization force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has helped to maintain political and social
stability. In addition, the European Union has been
consistently working to resolve the situation in eastern
Ukraine, providing operational and practical support
such as momentum in the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. Moreover, in Africa the European
Union continues to provide training and support to
the security sector in Somalia, the Central African
Republic and Mali.
The Dominican Republic has taken note with interest
of the painstaking work undertaken by the organization
in conflict zones in promoting and protecting human
rights. My country attaches great importance to the
follow-up and monitoring of human rights in the field.
It is for that reason that we deem it crucial to have in
place early-warning systems and to be able to take
preventive measures. Experience has shown the need
for prevention, as otherwise the highest price will be
paid by the most vulnerable groups, including refugees,
internally displaced persons and migrants.
Our country is part of a region that champions
political dialogue and action at the international level
as a means of progressing towards common, beneficial
goals. We therefore welcome the fact that the European
Union, together with all its members, plays a crucial role
in the resolution of many global challenges, including
the food crisis, climate change and terrorism.
Here we welcome the 2019-2021 strategic
partnership between the European Union and the
United Nations in the fields of peacekeeping and crisis
management. We would highlight in particular efforts
related to the issue of women and peace and security.
We believe in the key role of women and youth in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, with a view to
finding sustainable solutions.
The Dominican Republic notes with interest the
policies and normative frameworks of the European
Union in the fields of the prevention of and combat
against terrorism. We believe that terrorism constitutes
one of the chief threats to international peace and
security. In addition to its toll on innocent human lives
and on the environment, terrorism represents a threat to
the rule of law, democracy, the peaceful coexistence of
peoples and social and economic development.

S/PV. 8482

Finally, we reiterate our support for the relationship
and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. We express our
confidence in the work of the European Union, as we
view it as a key global political and economic player
that contributes to the peaceful resolution of disputes.
As we commend the work of done by the European
Union throughout the world, we urge the international
community and all actors involved to continue to support
the taking of measures before crises erupt and the
preventive diplomatic efforts of regional organizations.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative
of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, and thank her for her briefing on cooperation
between the United Nations and one of the world’s
largest regional organizations.
Just the other day, on 7 March (see S/PV.8479), we
discussed the cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, at a meeting in which every single member
of the Security Council supported developing and
improving United Nations cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations on the basis of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. That
applies equally to the European Union (EU), the
African Union, the Eurasian Economic Union, the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and all the rest of our regional
organizations, inasmuch as today’s world requires
that we solve problems together based on the relative
advantages of each individual intergovernmental body.
All of those regional organizations deserve respect and
can contribute to strengthening international stability
and cooperation.
We have noted and share the European
Union’s determined focus on strengthening global
multilateralism with the United Nations taking a
leading role. There can be no question that in that
regard our interests fully coincide. However, we are
alarmed by a dangerous trend that has recently become
increasingly apparent — attempts to replace our system
based on international law with some sort of a new socalled rules-based order, which of late we have been
hearing about constantly from EU representatives. But
those rules are created based on the particular needs
of like-minded groups. Those who agree to submit to

19-067749/23

S/PV.8482

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

them are considered to be supporters of multilateralism,
while any dissenters are deemed opponents.
There is no question that the European Union
is a major political and economic player in the
international arena, contributing significantly and
sometimes decisively to solving many international
problems. It more than carries its weight in the Security
Council, considering that at present one third — five
countries — of Council members are part of the EU,
two of them with veto power. Despite the differences
that persist between Russia and the EU, our cooperation
in many areas continues uninterrupted, and we see
great potential there, particularly with regard to global
challenges such as terrorism, religious extremism, drug
trafficking, transnational crime and illegal migration.
Russia and the EU have accumulated solid
experience of close and productive cooperation
with regard to a settlement in the Middle East in the
framework of the Quartet of international mediators.
In 2016, in particular, we were able to prepare a report
together containing clear recommendations on the
resumption of the political process that still remain
relevant.
We value the EU’s role in helping to reach agreement
on Iran’s nuclear programme, an area in which Russian
diplomacy also did a great deal of work, and we are
hoping to see EU States contribute constructively to the
international efforts promoting a political settlement in
Syria. However, it will be important to refrain from
politicizing humanitarian assistance and reconstruction
in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The EU plays a major role in assisting United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts,
including in Africa. It can count on our support in that
area. The European Union member States make major
contributions to assisting international development
and implementing the Sustainable Development Goals
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In the past few years, however, there have been a
number of reasons to question the EU’s ability to play
a constructive role both in Europe itself and in the
world in general. We are left with the impression that
this major, economically powerful entity somehow
cannot manage to define its own independent political
direction. Increasingly often, its cornerstone seems
in solidarity with Euro-Atlantic interests and a bloc
mentality. And we have seen what that leads to in the
examples of Libya, Syria, Ukraine and most recently
10/23

12/03/2019

Venezuela and a number of other States. The models
proposed for resolving domestic political issues in
these countries often simply do not work. We must
not burn our bridges, or there may soon be no need for
mediation. A recent example is the stalemated dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina and the EU’s inability to
convince the Kosovo Albanian authorities to end their
provocative policies.
In today’s world, unfortunately, restrictive
measures and sanctions have virtually become a key
foreign-policy instrument, and the European Union
is also guilty of that. The effect of such unilateral
steps is highly questionable and further weakens
developing States that the international community
really should be helping. It appears that our European
partners have obediently swallowed the unreliable
United States claims about Russia’s alleged violations
of what is a foundational agreement for Europe, the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, which we
tried to save until the last moment. The result is that a
pillar of European security is collapsing before our very
eyes. And because of that same bloc solidarity, Europe
is marching in lockstep with any or all of the ridiculous
accusations against Russia, as rubber-stamping them
has pretty much become the done thing politically.
Despite all of that, we remain optimistic. Russians
believe that all prevailing circumstances will be
overcome and we will once again be able to speak of
the strategic partnership that is so important to our
shared neighbours and to many African, Asian and
Latin American States. We have not lost hope in the
possibility that through our joint efforts we will be
able to heal the cracks that have appeared in the EuroAtlantic space and prevent the emergence of new ones.
We are interested not in a European Union that is
fragmented and weak, as some often try to portray it,
but in an independent, strong European Union that has
an important role to play in world affairs and a vision
of a collective future for Europe from the Atlantic
to Vladivostok.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would first like to welcome Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, to today’s
meeting and to commend her on her excellent briefing.
As Secretary-General Guterres has rightly pointed
out, the many threats to global stability that we are
dealing with call for us to pool our efforts and means
19-06774

12/03/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

in order to meet today’s challenges. We believe that the
quest for international peace and security is a long-term
endeavour that requires all of our support. We therefore
have to work to build a world order based on fullscale cooperation in a multilateral framework. From
that perspective, the cooperation between the United
Nations and the European Union (EU), based on Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, is a concrete
reflection of a partnership based on a community built
on shared values and principles. The European Union
is an essential partner of the United Nations within a
framework of increased cooperation that encompasses
economic growth and sustainable development as well
as peace and security. We see the European Union’s
unflagging commitment in the fact that it contributes
40 per cent of the United Nations peacekeeping budget
and that EU voluntary contributions represent half of
the combined budgets of United Nations programmes.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the European Union’s
significant contributions and its pragmatic vision for
its multidimensional efforts, based on the European
Union Global Strategy on Foreign and Security Policy,
the sustaining peace agenda and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. We also welcome the
joint commitment that the United Nations and the
European Union made in September 2018 to promoting
multilateralism and a rules-based world order by
seeking innovative solutions to global challenges. The
European Union formulated its annual priorities for
the period from 2018 to 2019 on that basis, focusing
primarily on strengthening multilateralism, promoting
mediation as a tool for fostering peace, advancing
sustainable development, defending human rights and
addressing issues related to climate change.
In its implementation of the goals it has set for
itself, the United Nations is central to the European
Union’s work, as is strengthening its cooperation
and partnerships with other regional organizations,
including the African Union, thereby also supporting
their role in prevention and peacebuilding. In
that regard, my country welcomed the holding on
23 September 2018, on the margins of the General
Assembly at its seventy-third session, of the third
trilateral meeting of the African Union, European
Union and the United Nations, at which the leaders of
those organizations reaffirmed,
“Their joint commitment to promote an effective
multilateral system and ... to take further
action towards reinforcing synergies and

S/PV. 8482

coordination in tackling global challenges through
international cooperation”.
Côte d’Ivoire also welcomed the holding in Abidjan
on 29 and 30 November 2017 of the fifth African
Union-European Union Summit, under the theme,
“Investing in youth for a sustainable future”, which was
an opportunity for the two organizations to identify in
a joint declaration their shared priorities for the future
of the Africa-European Union partnership, including
the strengthening of resilience, peace and security and
governance, and the issue of migration and mobility.
Aware of the effect of new threats to regional and
international peace and security on the stability of both
continents, the two regional institutions understand
the importance of strengthening their relations and
agreeing in principle on the preparation of a framework
document that would contribute to the strengthening
of their partnership. Regardless, the European Union
remains a partner of choice for Africa, particularly in
the areas of peace and security. The EU’s involvement in
the fight against terrorism and the settlement of crises,
particularly in Mali, Somalia and Guinea-Bissau,
is eloquent proof of that. In addition to the already
excellent cooperation we have in the area of peace and
security, we continue to believe that joint investment in
youth for accelerated inclusive growth and sustainable
development, as advocated at the Abidjan Summit,
would open up prospects for building a more stable
future in Africa.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its faith in
the advantages of multilateralism aimed at establishing
a cooperative order governing international relations.
In that regard, my country supports and encourages
close cooperation between the United Nations and other
regional organizations similar to that between it and the
European Union, which will be crucial if we are to meet
the new challenges we are seeing to international peace
and security.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank High
Representative Mogherini for her excellent briefing
today. Listening to her, I am struck by just how central
the European Union (EU) is to every single issue on
the Security Council’s agenda, and it is therefore very
useful to have this level of engagement.
Today happens to be an important day for the United
Kingdom’s own relationship with the European Union.
At the beginning, therefore, I want to make it clear that
notwithstanding the United Kingdom’s forthcoming

19-0677411/23

S/PV.8482

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

departure from the European Union, it will of course
be mutually beneficial for the United Kingdom and the
European Union to continue to cooperate closely across
the three pillars of the work of the United Nations. I
would now like to touch on some of the issues that
Ms. Mogherini brought up in her presentation.
First, with regard to Syria, like others, we very
much welcome the fact that Brussels will host the
third EU-United Nations conference on the future of
Syria and the region. The United Kingdom, like the
other countries represented around this table, strongly
supports the United Nations-led political process,
and we call on the Syrian regime and those who have
influence on it to engage in the political process and
implement the regime’s obligations under resolution
2254 (2015). We particularly welcome the recent
announcement of EU sanctions against regime figures,
and the United Kingdom will remain at the forefront
of responding to the humanitarian crisis in Syria. We
have already given £ 2.8 billion since 2012 and we will
remain engaged.
Secondly, on the subject of Iran, we also warmly
welcome the EU’s work and the personal engagement
of the High Representative in support of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We completely
agree with her that it is a vital instrument in neutralizing
the threat of a nuclear-armed Iran. The United Kingdom
will remain committed to the JCPOA and will uphold
it as long as Iran continues to meet its commitments
in full. We nevertheless continue to see Iran’s actions
in its neighbourhood as harmful and destabilizing, in
particular in Syria, Lebanon and Yemen.
Thirdly, with regard to the comments the High
Representative made on the question of reconciliation
in the Western Balkans, again we very much welcome
and support the EU’s continued efforts in bringing
lasting stability to the region, not least through the
EU-facilitated dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo.
The United Kingdom was the first State to recognize
Kosovo and its independence in 2008, and we will
continue to work in full support for the recognition of
Kosovo, which will itself enable political normalization
and deliver increased prosperity for citizens across the
region. I should add, however, that we do have concerns
that a dialogue agreement based solely on border
changes could risk endangering stability in Kosovo,
Serbia and the region.
12/23

12/03/2019

Finally, turning to Africa, we welcome both the
developing dialogue between the EU and the African
Union and the EU’s growing cooperation with the United
Nations in States and regions affected by conflict. The
EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy missions,
for example in the Sahel, Somalia and the Central
African Republic, have all delivered niche capabilities
and nurtured valued partnerships, while enabling the
United Nations to direct its resources towards action
where it can add value. As United Nations mission
mandates come up for renewal, including a number
this month on Somalia, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and South Sudan, it will be important to
strengthen the complementarity between the United
Nations and EU instruments as we move forward.
In the coming period, the United Kingdom will
continue to work in the Council and with the European
Union and other partners in support of the wider
rules-based international system, whether that is in
promoting accountability in Myanmar, enforcing
sanctions against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea or defending Ukraine’s territorial integrity. A
close future partnership between the European Union
and the United Nations will be vital if we are to achieve
those important aims.
Allow me to conclude with a comment for the High
Representative. Especially given that the Commission
on the Status of Women is meeting this week here at the
United Nations, I think it would be very interesting to
hear her thoughts on how the United Nations and the EU
could cooperate more in the field of women and peace
and security, particularly when it comes to our peace
operations and involvement in political processes.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to thank the High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Ms. Mogherini, for her briefing.
As an important partner in cooperation with the
United Nations and the Security Council, the European
Union (EU) has been actively involved in strengthening
multilateralism and enhancing the role of the United
Nations. It has been deeply engaged in the resolution of
hotspot issues in regions in Europe, the Middle East and
Africa, and has played an important role in maintaining
regional peace and stability. China expresses its
appreciation in that connection.
We live in a world in which countries are becoming
more interdependent and our future is becoming more
19-06774

12/03/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

intertwined. China supports the United Nations and the
Security Council in deepening their cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations, such as the EU,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
First, the United Nations and the EU should join
hands in upholding multilateralism. In today’s world,
unilateralism and protectionism are on the rise and the
international order and the global system of governance
are under attack. Multilateralism is needed now
more than ever before. Parties must work together to
safeguard the international system and the collective
security mechanism, with the United Nations at their
core, and enhance the role and standing of the United
Nations in international affairs.
Secondly, the United Nations and the EU must
uphold the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter by respecting the sovereignty of States and the
development path chosen independently by the countries
concerned. They must further resolve disputes through
diplomatic means, such as dialogue, good offices and
mediation, inter alia, and respect the leading role of
relevant countries and regional organizations, such as
the African Union, in relevant relevant issuespolitical
settlement processes.
Thirdly, there is space for cooperation between the
United Nations and the EU in promoting sustainable
development. As a party with advantages in economic
development, the EU has a lot to offer in terms of helping
and supporting developing countries in achieving the
goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
by strengthening North-South cooperation, in line with
the needs of the developing countries and working in
synergy with the United Nations.
China highly values its relationship with the EU. We
support EU integration and welcome a united, stable and
prosperous Europe. China is ready to continue to work
with the EU through platforms of cooperation, such as
the Belt and Road Initiative, to make new headway in
the China-EU partnership for peace, growth, reform
and civilization, thereby making new contributions to
world peace, stability and prosperity.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. I would like to welcome Ms. Mogherini and
thank her for her detailed and comprehensive briefing
on the aspects of cooperation between the European
Union (EU) and the United Nations.

S/PV. 8482

We agree with her that our cooperation together
would make us more strong and effective. I would
like to highlight her reference to the EU’s attachment
to multilateralism and its commitment to providing
political, economic and financial support to the
United Nations, which is facing financial difficulties
concerning the regular and peacekeeping budgets.
We all agree that our world is facing gross and
unprecedented challenges, in addition to terrorism,
violent extremism, illegal migration, trafficking in
illicit drugs and transnational organized crime. It is
impossible to address those challenges alone. Instead,
we must pool our efforts regionally and internationally
to respond to and eliminate them.
Like China, as just noted by its representative,
Kuwait highly appreciates the role played by regional
and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. We recognize the
central and increasing role they play in preventing,
managing and resolving conflicts at all stages. We
support every effort aimed at consolidating and
developing partnerships between the United Nations
and various regional organizations under Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. We are well aware
that the goal of international cooperation, as stipulated
in Articles 1, 2 and 3 of the Charter, is to resolve
international problems of an economic, social, cultural
or political nature through multilateralism.
The
EU
has
considerable
international
weight as the largest contributor to peacekeeping
operations — its share amounting to about 30 per
cent of all contributions — which makes it one of the
most important international parties that contribute
effectively to finding solutions to the various
challenges facing the world today and listed on the
Security Council’s agenda. We therefore appreciate the
joint efforts and cooperation by the EU and the United
Nations, in particular in Africa in the maintenance
of peacekeeping operations in Mali and the Central
African Republic and for the provision of logistical
support, training and capacity-building for the national
security forces in Mali and the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel. The tripartite cooperation among
the African Union (AU), the United Nations and the EU
to fund the AU Mission in Somalia is also welcome.
Europe and the Arab region share some
commonalities in terms of history and geography
that facilitate our cooperation and enable us to create
coordination mechanisms and partnerships, thereby

19-0677413/23

S/PV.8482

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

strengthening and broadening our relations and
enhancing the common interests of our States at all
levels. The first Arab-European summit, convened
two weeks ago in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, on the
theme “Investing in stability”, demonstrates well
the true intentions of both regions to consolidate
their cooperation in various areas, such as terrorism,
migration, refugees and climate change. We welcome
the agreement to convene another summit in Brussels
in 2022.
Undoubtedly, like other regional organizations,
the EU faces various direct and indirect challenges,
including long-standing regional conflicts, as
mentioned today by Ms. Mogherini and several
days ago by the Chairperson of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (see S/PV.8479).
Some of those conflicts, in particular those relating to
the Middle East and North Africa, have an impact on
European countries, especially in the Mediterranean.
Long-standing conflicts require international bilateral
and multilateral cooperation among the United Nations,
the EU and the League of Arab States in addressing and
resolving conflicts in our region. Indeed, the tripartite
cooperation among the United Nations, the European
Union and the League of Arab States is an effective way
of reaching effective solutions to existing conflicts.
The State of Kuwait supports the efforts made by
the EU to find peaceful solutions to conflicts through
dialogue and negotiations. In that regard, I would like to
highlight the observation of Ms. Mogherini regarding
the efforts made by the European Union to relaunch
the Middle East peace process and promote the twoState solution. We always welcome that position, which
reflects the general approach of the member States of
the EU that are members of the Security Council. They
consistently call for the implementation of Security
Council resolutions that reject unilateral actions such
as the construction of settlements in contravention of
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016).
The State of Kuwait shares with the EU common
purposes, principles and values leading to the
promotion of international peace and security based on
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular the emphasis on multilateralism
in the area of humanitarian diplomacy. That common
approach is reflected on the ground by joint cooperation
in chairing various international and humanitarian
conferences, such as the international donors
conference to support the humanitarian situation of
14/23

12/03/2019

the Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh, held in October
2017 with the cooperation of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Kuwait has
co-chaired several international donors conferences
in coordination with the EU and the United Nations,
such as the Brussels Conference on Supporting the
Future of Syria and the Region, held in 2017, and the
International Conference for the Reconstruction of
Iraq, held in Kuwait in February 2018.
In conclusion, we fully support bilateral and
tripartite cooperation and coordination among the
United Nations, the EU and the AU, as well as tripartite
cooperation among the United Nations, the EU and the
League of Arab States, with a view to bringing about
peace, security, stability and development for our
countries and peoples.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): First of all, I would like to thank the High
Representative of the European Union (EU) for her
briefing and her presence here today. Belgium is of
course pleased to have this opportunity once again
to discuss the close partnership and cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union.
Ms. Mogherini’s briefing made very clear the extent
to which the European Union is a major partner of the
Security Council, as it works to find lasting solutions
to many of the crises on our agenda here at the Council.
That is the case for Syria — Ms. Mogherini mentioned
the conference being held this week in Brussels,
co-chaired by the United Nations and the European
Union. That is also the case for Iran — Ms. Mogherini
mentioned the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
which remains an essential element of the global
non-proliferation architecture and is also a very
important achievement of multilateral diplomacy. I
would also like to point out that the agreement is also
one of the most successful examples of cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union.
That is also the case for the Balkans, where
the European Union is contributing to the stability
of Bosnia and Herzegovina through the EU-led
peacekeeping force’s Operation Althea, as well as to
the strengthening of the rule of law in Kosovo through
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
under the auspices of the United Nations. Of course, we
hope that the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade
that Ms. Mogherini is facilitating can be resumed as
soon as possible in Brussels.
19-06774

12/03/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

As has been said, the European Union and the
United Nations share the same commitment to a world
based on the fundamental principles of democracy,
the rule of law and the universality and indivisibility
of human rights. The result is a natural partnership
between two organizations that are intensifying and
strengthening their cooperation. The European Union
and the United Nations share a common vision and
willingness to address the root causes of conflicts
and establish lasting peace, in particular through
an integrated approach, in accordance with both the
Sustainable Development Goals and the European
Union’s global strategy. The European Union’s role as
the largest donor of development and humanitarian aid
in the world is in line with that approach.
I would like to say that the presence of the High
Representative among us shows strong political
determination on the part of the European Union to
continue to deepen the current partnership with the
United Nations, which is based on complementarity.
The joint work of the EU and the United Nations in
peacekeeping and crisis management is a concrete
example of that complementarity. The High
Representative mentioned several cases in that context.
Allow me to highlight two particular points.
First, Belgium supports the inclusion of the women
and peace and security agenda as a cross-cutting
priority. At the level of peacekeeping operations, the
United Nations and the EU must work together to make
that political commitment a reality by significantly
increasing the participation of women both in principle
and for reasons of positive operational impact on the
functioning of those missions.
Secondly, Ms. Mogherini mentioned the example
of trilateral cooperation among the United Nations, the
European Union and the African Union, which seems to
me to be a very interesting example. I would like to ask
the High Representative if she could identify specific
good practices in that area and if she sees the potential
for doing the same with other regional organizations.
My colleague from Kuwait just mentioned the
League of Arab States and, of course, there are other
organizations, such as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. Is there a possibility for
trilateral cooperation with those organizations?
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting,
and Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of

S/PV. 8482

the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, for her very informative briefing.
We recall that, on a day like today in 1975, the first
meeting of the European Council was held in Dublin.
Although the general policies of the European Union
were already in the process of being defined, the
European Council did not become an official institution
until 2009. That is a reminder of the arduous and ongoing
process of building European unity and institutions, an
example of both integration and perseverance.
Peru attaches special importance to cooperation
between the Security Council and regional and
subregional organizations, pursuant to Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. We believe that it is
essential to stress the potential of such dynamics given
the increasingly complex challenges to international
peace and security. In that regard, we underscore and
recognize the active participation and involvement
of the European Union in the various issues on the
Security Council’s agenda, which has continued to
increase over time.
Particularly commendable is the European Union’s
ongoing humanitarian response to provide immediate
relief for vulnerable populations and develop
mechanisms and processes for peacebuilding. Similarly,
we recognize its partnership in the shared objective of
sustaining peace, such as in Bosnia and Herzegovina
through the Multinational Stabilization Force EUFORAlthea, in Kosovo through its Rule of Law Mission and
by facilitating dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
In that respect, we welcome the adoption, in
September last year, of a new set of priorities to
strengthen the European Union-United Nations strategic
partnership on peace operations and crisis management
for the period 2019-2021, based on the various tools and
instruments being consolidated in various continents.
They range from participation in peacekeeping
operations to cooperation in the development of national
capacities and the implementation of mechanisms for
the peaceful settlement of disputes.
We welcome the European Union’s firm support for
the Secretary-General’s recent Action for peacekeeping
initiative. We would like to highlight in particular
the European Union’s commitment to the prevention
agenda. We also highlight the so-called Copenhagen
criteria, which remind us of the importance of stable
institutions that guarantee democracy, the rule of
law, respect for human rights and the protection of

19-0677415/23

S/PV.8482

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

minorities. In that regard, we agree that the protection
and promotion of democracy, the rule of law and human
rights complement efforts relating to the maintenance
of international peace and security. Therefore, by
combating the root causes of conflict we reinforce
its prevention.
We would like to conclude by highlighting
that historic commitment, which has transcended
time, turned the European Union into a symbol
of multilateralism and granted it the legitimacy to
continue inspiring the values of diversity, cooperation
and dialogue in States around the world. We recall the
words uttered by Jean Monnet at the National Press
Club in Washington, D.C., in April 1952:
(spoke in French)
“It is of universal importance that Europe live
by its own means and in security, that it is peaceful
and able to continue to make a great contribution
to civilization. The path to all of its goals passes
through its unification. A federal Europe is
indispensable to the security and peace of the
free world.”
Ms. Tshabalala (South Africa): South Africa
would like to thank Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the European Union (EU) for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, for her informative briefing
on cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, which clearly illustrates
the added value that regional organizations provide to
the maintenance of international peace and security.

12/03/2019

stated that the parties to the trilateral cooperation
arrangement intended to increase their coordination
and cooperation at the political, economic and
operational levels on a range of issues, including in the
areas of peace and security, in particular on conflict
prevention and mediation, as well as on implementing
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
Agenda 2063 of the African Union (AU). Through that
trilateral arrangement we also hope to highlight the
nexus between peace and security and development by
promoting and ensuring sustainable growth, advancing
human rights and addressing issues of climate change
and migration, as well as supporting the implementation
of AU and United Nations reforms.
Of particular importance to South Africa is the
role of women in peace and security. That is another
area that was stressed by the AU-EU-United Nations
meeting, with reference to initiatives to support
women’s equal and meaningful participation, including
leadership in political and peace processes at all levels
and in peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities.
South Africa also appreciates the focus of the European
Union on women and peace and security. Too often,
women and peace and security issues are treated as
soft issues. However, they are an integral part of the
peace and security agenda. Mainstreaming the women
and peace and security agenda into broader peace and
security perspectives will have a positive impact on
peacekeeping and peacebuilding and on post-conflict
reconstruction and development.

The international community, including the EU and
its member States and millions of their citizens, played
an indispensable role in the liberation of all South
Africans and in the fight against the apartheid regime.
None of that progress would have been possible without
the efforts of regional and international organizations.
That is why multilateralism is today a core pillar of
South Africa’s foreign policy, which also underpins our
belief in the strengthening of multilateralism through
inter-organizational cooperation. In that regard, I
wish to touch on three major areas of focus — first,
the African Union-European Union-United Nations
trilateral cooperation arrangement; secondly, the
importance of elevating the women, peace and security
agenda; and, finally, the funding of peace operations.

Allow me to make a third and final point. The
adequate funding of peace missions has a significant
influence on the effectiveness of how the Council
prevents and responds to conflict situations. The
AU-EU-United Nations leaders were cognizant of
that reality. They also indicated their intention to
reflect together on how to ensure the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for African
Union-led peace support operations authorized by the
Security Council, consistent with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. In that regard, we wish
to acknowledge and welcome the contributions the EU
makes to peacekeeping missions. That invaluable role
has been most evident in Africa, where the EU has been
involved in capacity-building, training and providing
resources while working closely with the AU and the
United Nations.

At the third African Union-European Union-United
Nations trilateral meeting, the joint communiqué

South Africa, through the Southern African
Development Community and the African Union, will

16/23

19-06774

12/03/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

continue to promote inter-organizational cooperation,
as it fosters multilateral efficiency, openness and
dialogue. We thank the EU and appreciate its efforts
in that regard. We look forward to even closer
collaboration among the AU, the EU and the United
Nations in the future.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Mogherini for joining us today
and for her useful and comprehensive briefing.
The United States deeply appreciates the
contributions of the European Union (EU) to promoting
peace, security and human rights in Europe and across
the globe. The EU’s engagement and cooperation with
the Security Council in particular brings an important
degree of influence and resources to help deal with
the challenges we collectively face. The United States
considers the European Union to be one of our most
valuable partners in our effort to ensure global security
and prosperity. We recognize that Europe’s security
and success are inextricably linked to our own.
Five years after Russia’s brazen intervention in
eastern Ukraine, Moscow’s aggression continues to
threaten the region’s peace and security. We greatly
appreciate the EU’s critical role in holding Russia
accountable for its violations of international law. We
join the European Union and other partners in affirming
that our Ukraine-related sanctions against Russia will
remain in place until Russia fully implements its Minsk
commitments. Likewise, our Crimea-focused sanctions
will remain in place until Russia returns full control of
the peninsula to Ukraine.
Beyond Europe, the EU has played a key role in
other areas of concerns to the Council, including efforts
to end the crisis in Venezuela. We are pleased that 24 EU
member States have already recognized Juan Guaidó as
the interim President of Venezuela, and we urge other
EU member States to join in formal recognition as well.
We also appreciate the EU’s close partnership in
Syria. As the Global Coalition to Defeat the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) works to eliminate
the threat posed by ISIS there and across the globe, we
look forward to working together to restore security
and support good governance and economic growth
in areas liberated from ISIS. Similar efforts are under
way in Iraq, where the EU has dedicated approximately
$30 million to humanitarian aid and an additional
$20 million to development assistance. We welcome

S/PV. 8482

that important funding to help stabilize areas formerly
under the control of ISIS.
In Libya, the EU’s support of United Nations-led
mediation efforts to help the country establish a stable
and unified Government is also critical. We greatly
appreciate the EU’s dedication of approximately
$70 million there to civil society, governance, health,
economic, youth and education initiatives.
On its own continent, we commend the European
Union for counter-terrorism successes, including
sanctions implemented in January against the Iranian
intelligence service and Ir3anian officials planning
terrorist and assassination plots in the heart of Europe.
The EU’s actions send a strong signal to the number one
State sponsor of terrorism — Iran — that Europe will
not stand idly by while the regime threatens its citizens.
Further, we commend the EU for its support of
efforts to apply maximum diplomatic and economic
pressure on the North Korean regime to bring about a
final, fully verified denuclearization of the peninsula.
The second Trump-Kim summit serves as a reminder
to us all that sustained pressure is the only way to
achieve a secure and economically prosperous future
for North Korea.
In Africa, the EU has played a key role in conflict
prevention, security assistance and peacebuilding
through its support to United Nations missions
and through the EU training and capacity-building
missions. We commend those activities and greatly
appreciate the EU’s partnership with the United Nations
and the United States, especially in Mali, the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Central
African region. We express particular appreciation
for the EU’s financial contributions of stipends to the
African Union’s forces in Somalia, which have been
key to significant progress on both the security and
political fronts there, and we encourage the Somali
security forces to take ownership of their security. We
support the EU’s view of a conditions-based drawdown
of AMISOM troops.
In closing, the United States affirms unequivocally
the EU’s importance as a crucial partner to the United
States, the United Nations and particularly the Security
Council in the maintenance of peace and security
around the world.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, I thank the French and German

19-0677417/23

S/PV.8482

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

presidency for having convened this briefing. We
also join other speakers in welcoming to the Security
Council Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative
of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, whom we thank for her informative presentation
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union.
The conflicts and challenges of the twenty-first
century require new approaches and perspectives
that reflect the growing complexity of existing armed
conflicts. These levels of complexity — which go
beyond the conflict between two States and include the
participation of armed groups, terrorists and organized
transnational crime, by land and by sea — make it
difficult for States, which bear primary responsibility in
such situations, to find sustainable and lasting solutions.
That is why the cooperation and support of regional
and international organizations, such as the United
Nations, are crucial to building and guaranteeing
peace and security. For this reason, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea recognizes the important leadership
of the European Union in the resolution of conflicts
and applauds its cooperation with and support for the
peacekeeping missions of the United Nations not only
in Europe, but also in Africa, Central Asia and the
Middle East.
The partnership between the United Nations
and the European Union on peace operations and
crisis management for the period 2019-2021 reflects
the determination and commitment of the two
organizations to multilateralism, international law and
the peaceful resolution of conflicts. In particular, we
note that, among the eight priorities of this alliance, are
cooperation and support for peace operations led by
Africa, training and capacity-building, and facilitating
contributions to peacekeeping operations.
The phrase “African solutions for African
problems” is focused on the need to value and use the
wisdom and local experiences on the ground of African
institutions, organizations and experts. In this regard,
we recognize and praise the trilateral cooperation
efforts among the African Union, the European Union
and the United Nations, and we encourage those
efforts to be strengthened even more, which we would
like to see culminate with the adoption of a draft
resolution on United Nations financing of African
Union peacekeeping operations, which is still pending
in the Council. In that regard, we recall with pleasure
18/23

12/03/2019

the adoption in February of resolution 2457 (2019), on
silencing arms in Africa in 2020, under the presidency
of my country, Equatorial Guinea.
In this important month for recognizing the need
to empower and encourage the equal participation
of women and youth in all spheres, and especially in
peace and security activities, we also recognize in
particular the priority role of the joint strategy between
the United Nations and the European Union for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security.
The resolution of ongoing armed conflicts, the
consolidation and maintenance of peace and the
prevention of conflicts must be done in accordance
with Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, which note that all States have an obligation
to respect the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States. In this regard, we commend the commitment of
the European Union to sustainable development, peace
and security and human rights.
When respect among Member States exists and is
nurtured, multilateral cooperation between the United
Nations, the European Union, the African Union, and/
or other regional and international organizations can
be strengthened in a sustainable and growing manner.
This helps us all to strengthen existing efforts or to
design joint efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts and
humanitarian crises.
The need to strengthen multilateralism is central to
the execution of the mandates of the Security Council
and its allies, such as the European Union and the
African Union. We all have something to contribute
and we all have a role to play. The Security Council
can count on Equatorial Guinea to assist in every
possible way.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): First of all, let me join
others in welcoming Her Excellency Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, to the Security
Council. We thank the High Representative for her very
informative and comprehensive briefing.
Allow me to highlight some key issues.
The first is the role played by regional arrangements
as first responders in the maintenance of international
peace and security. As a founding member of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
19-06774

12/03/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Indonesia is a consistent and robust supporter of
regional organizations. Indonesia believes that regional
organizations can fundamentally shift the dynamics
of the region towards peace and security. They can
build bridges of understanding, they can transform
relations from enmity to amity, and they can bring
stability and prosperity where conflict and discord
previously reigned.
We believe that neighbours know best. We recognize
the important role played by regional and subregional
arrangements within the framework of full respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of all States in their respective regions. However, we
have to bear in mind that regional and subregional
organization must adapt to new challenges in order to
remain relevant to the pursuit of international peace
and security.
My second points concerns the importance of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The challenges of the twenty-first
century are too numerous and complex. Our world today
is witness to great and unprecedented challenges. After
listening attentively to the briefing by Ms. Mogherini,
I believe that it is clear that Europe is certainly not
immune to those challenges. We understand that there
are no easy solutions to some of those challenges,
and the European Union (EU) and other regional
organizations cannot find solutions to the difficult and
complex issues alone.
That is where the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations come into play. We
can easily find a very good example of this partnership
in the African Union. The African Union, through
its regional conflict prevention and management
mechanism, has established itself today as an essential
and credible partner of the United Nations. Indonesia
attaches utmost importance to such cooperation, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. In that spirit, we initiated a meeting
on this important topic during our presidency of the
Council in 2007 (see S/PV.5776). We also believe
in what the High Representative referred to, namely,
triangular cooperation in which regional arrangements
work with the United Nations and other partners.
Indonesia strongly believes, that to address the
collective challenges, greater emphasis must be placed
upon multilateralism. In working through multilateral
mechanisms, cooperation, dialogue and mediation

S/PV. 8482

must take precedence over unilateralism and division.
It is only through investment in a stronger multilateral
approach and adherence to the principles of the United
Nations Charter and international law that global
challenges can be addressed effectively. We also share
the view on the importance of working together on
global issues, such as the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change and the Sustainable Development Goals, and
hope for continued support of the EU on financing
for development.
The EU has made important contributions to
maintaining regional stability in other regions.
Indonesia and ASEAN, too, have benefited from the EU
role. ASEAN and the EU have survived by helping each
other through many challenges. Relations between the
two regions are expanding and developing progressively
on the economic, political and cultural fronts.
Indonesia also recognizes the work of the EU
on various issues with which the Security Council
is seized, such as the Iranian nuclear issue and the
settlement process of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Indonesia welcomes this role. We look forward to any
effort to reinvigorate the Middle East peace process
as well as many other issues addressed by the High
Representative in her briefing.
The partnership between the United Nations and
the EU is one of the major strategic partnerships with
a regional organization. It includes active engagement
on a number of conflicts and crises that go beyond the
EU neighbourhood. Indonesia commends the excellent
cooperation between the United Nations and the EU
in numerous peacekeeping contexts. Today, the EU is
a major actor in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Its
role is becoming ever more vital to a number of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, whether through
financing, military contribution or political support.
Currently, as the largest troop contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping in the Chamber, Indonesia looks
forward to the continued support of the EU, together
with other partners, on United Nations peacekeeping.
I am aware that the list of areas in which the EU
has a substantial role to play has not been exhausted
in my statement. We in ASEAN also share many
of the values of the EU in the pacific settlement of
disputes and in addressing conflict through dialogue,
mediation and political settlement, as well as the need
for neighbours to take care of neighbours. As we speak
now, a team from the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for

19-0677419/23

S/PV.8482

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management is
on the ground in Myanmar.
In conclusion, we trust that the EU will continue
to contribute to international peace and security by
helping to resolve crises through diplomatic means,
emphasizing peaceful settlement and on the basis of
international law.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of France.
At the outset, I warmly and once again thank the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the
European Commission, Ms. Federica Mogherini, for
her important briefing, which highlighted the issues
surrounding the ever-closer cooperation between the
Security Council and the European Union (EU) in New
York and on the ground.
The European commitment to multilateralism is the
fruit of a history in which the European Union and the
United Nations both have their roots and their raison
d’être. As the High Representative said most eloquently,
both organizations responded to the call of a generation
that experienced the two world conflicts — a call
that still resonates every day in this Chamber: never
again. No more military aggression against a sovereign
country; no more displacement and decimation of
entire peoples; no more civilian populations targeted
by bullets and bombs. The European Union and the
United Nations fundamentally share the same DNA and
are today linked by a strategic partnership at its full
strength. In that connection, I would like to emphasize
two points.

12/03/2019

engaged, with our full support, in facilitating the
dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia with a view to
reaching a comprehensive and definitive agreement on
the normalization of relations between those two States.
I could, of course, cite many other examples.
The European Union also works in support of United
Nations mediation. As the High Representative again
recalled, in the case of Syria the European Union has
pledged not to finance reconstruction until a credible
political solution, under United Nations auspices and
on the basis of all provisions of resolution 2254 (2015),
is in place.
In the field of peacekeeping operations, the States
members of the Union contribute at all levels. In terms
of budget, their combined contribution amounts to
32 per cent of the peacekeeping budget. The scale of
that contribution, which is by far the largest, deserves
to be better understood and better appreciated, in
particular at a time when some are reluctant to honour
their due commitments.

The first begins with the observation that the
European Union and the United Nations are no longer
limited to cooperation on a case-by-case basis; they
are complementary across the entire spectrum of
peace operations. Indeed, in accordance with the
priorities identified in the EU-United Nations Strategic
Partnership on Peace Operations and Crisis Management
for the years 2019 and 2020, the European Union and the
United Nations are working hand in hand for conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

On the ground in Mali, Libya, the Central African
Republic, Somalia, Kosovo and the Middle East,
European civilian and military missions are deployed
under the Common Security and Defence Policy,
alongside peacekeeping operations or special political
missions. Some of these European missions now play a
central role in responding to threats to peace, such as
Operation Atalante, which combats piracy off the coast
of Somalia and provides protection for World Food
Programme ships. Those missions are also essential
in supporting security sector reform. I am thinking of
in particular — Ms. Mogherini mentioned them — the
European Union training missions in Mali and the
Central African Republic, which are complementary
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
Through its African Peace Facility, the European
Union also participates in the funding of African peace
and security operations, in particular, as was said, the
African Union Mission in Somalia and the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G5 Sahel).

As regards conflict prevention, the European Union
is leading the way. The EU recently established an
international contact group on Venezuela with the aim
of finding a political and peaceful solution to the crisis
there. In Europe, the High Representative is personally

In the area of peacebuilding, the European Union
consistently supports United Nations efforts through
projects that are where development and security
issues intersect, in full alignment with the SecretaryGeneral’s priorities. It is even one of the European

20/23

19-06774

12/03/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Union’s strengths or assets. For example, in Colombia,
the EU supports the reintegration of ex-combatants
alongside the United Nations verification mission. In
many countries, the European Union and its member
States are among the main international donors. That
trend is expected to continue to increase, since the EU
adopted a record budget of €1.6 billion for humanitarian
aid in 2019.
The exceptional nature of that partnership and the
successes seen over the past 20 years should collectively
encourage us to continue with the progress made on
the common priorities of the two organizations in the
context of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. That is my second point.
Progress must be made in particular on the women
and peace and security agenda, which is one of our
main priorities, and more generally on all issues related
to human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well
as international humanitarian law. As underlined in
the EU strategic approach to the women, peace and
security agenda, that is not a priority among others
but an approach that should permeate all initiatives
common to our two organizations, as my German
colleague clearly said earlier.
We also fully support the development of trilateral
cooperation among the European Union, the United
Nations and the African Union, as mentioned by the
High Representative at the beginning of the meeting.
That trilateral cooperation is expected to play a
fundamental role, particularly in peacekeeping. I am
thinking in particular of support for the scaling up and
sustainable and predictable funding of African peace
operations, which, in our view, are essential given
the opportunity for such African peace operations to
improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping. We would
also mention the G5 Sahel Joint Force, in which the
United Nations and the European Union play a key
role as part of the technical agreement on MINUSMA
operational and logistical support to the Joint Force.
That trilateral cooperation is also evident in the area
of migration. Since its establishment at the EU-African
Union (AU) summit in Abidjan in November 2017, the
EU-AU-United Nations task force has enabled more
than 37,000 migrants stranded in Libya to return to
their countries of origin.
The conflict-prevention tools available to us also
need to be strengthened. I am thinking in particular

S/PV. 8482

of mediation, early warning systems, security sector
reform and the close coordination of political messages.
The European Union and the United Nations share
the same commitment to multilateralism not only as an
overall vision but also in their daily practices. Apart
from its role as a regional organization, that is one of the
elements or pillars of the current international order. On
the basis of that common vision of conflict management,
we, as members of the Security Council, have, I believe,
the duty to make the most of that close relationship and
Europe’s commitment to strong multilateralism.
In conclusion, in view of the High Representative’s
experience in mediation, I would like her opinion on
how the Security Council can effectively support
mediation processes in which the European Union
is engaged.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I again give the floor to High Representative
Ms. Federica Mogherini to respond to comments and
questions raised.
Ms. Mogherini (spoke in French): It would be
difficult for me to find the most appropriate words
to describe the scope, depth and importance of the
cooperation partnership between the European Union
(EU) and the United Nations following what you,
Mr. President, have just said.
(spoke in English)
I will take a few minutes first to thank all members
for having underlined from different perspectives and
angles the quality and relevance of the cooperation
between the European Union and the United Nations.
I will also not overlook the questions that were raised
very briefly.
First, with regard to women and peace and security,
it is an essential element of the EU-United Nations
cooperation. It is also an essential element of our own
European Union security agenda. I fully agree with our
South African colleague that it is not a soft issue but a
security one that is at the core of not only our military
activities, first and foremost, but also our mediation
and diplomatic work. We have a common initiative
on regional acceleration of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The EU and United Nations
promote together the elimination of sexual abuse in our

19-0677421/23

S/PV.8482

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

peacekeeping operations. That is a part of the work in
which we are engaged.
The EU and United Nations jointly promote the
priorities of the United Nations global networks of
national focal points on women and peace and security.
Most importantly and most practically, we have started
the first pilot engagement in the Central African
Republic, which is currently under way with a joint EUUnited Nations engagement in crisis management with
women and peace and security as a key element.
I would like to add that beyond the concrete work
that is ongoing, we have a common EU-United Nations
effort to promote the role of women in mediation and
negotiation processes. In particular, I would mention the
support that we give to women in Syria and Yemen in
their respective negotiation processes. I will be pleased
to be together with the United Nations Special Envoy for
Syria tomorrow in Brussels, together with some women
from Syria, in support of their views and to work for
peace and reconciliation in their country. Those are
just a few examples of our common engagement on that
very important agenda.
The same is true when it comes to crisis prevention
and mediation. That was a question raised by the
Permanent Representative of Germany. The European
Union and the United Nations already do a great deal
together. First and foremost, we took a recent decision to
establish a high-level dialogue on conflict prevention,
as both organizations have upgraded that to be our top
political priority. We are looking at conducting joint
conflict analysis, which is the basis for early warning
systems and early action that can be coordinated on the
ground. As the European Union, we already provide
expertise and capacity to the United Nations mediation
teams. Every time I travel and meet the United Nations
teams involved in mediation on the ground — I am
thinking of Tripoli or elsewhere, from Yemen to Syria
and other places — I also meet experts and people from
the European Union institutions to which we contribute
United Nations teams to strengthen capacity as well as
to create a link between us.
The next step that I believe could be of interest
is the issue of the EU-African Union-United Nations
triangular cooperation agenda. I think that the three
organizations could benefit from discussing the idea
of undertaking conflict prevention activities together.
As we know, Africa is a continent that offers many
different fields of conflict-prevention activities. But
22/23

12/03/2019

as you, Mr. President, rightly mentioned, our conflictprevention work goes beyond that because whenever
we act in the Balkans, Latin America, Asia, Africa
or Europe itself in support of political processes and
multilateralism we undertake conflict prevention. I
think we do that even when we do not realize it. The
most successful conflict-prevention activity is the one
that never gets to finding out that there was a conflict
to de-escalate.
Let me underline a few other points that were
raised by some members. I should like to underline the
shared importance we attach to the issues raised by the
Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire — investing
in young people and our common efforts to offer them
not only educational opportunities but also high-quality
jobs. This is not only an effort that is being carried out
by our African friends but is really the basic DNA of
our common agenda for the truly equal partnership we
have established with all our partners in Africa through
the African Union as well as through subregional
organizations and bilaterally with various countries.
I would also underline the importance, as
mentioned by the representative of Kuwait, of the EULeague of Arab States coordination. The summit we
held in Egypt was indeed a historic moment. We have
a common history and agenda in our region, starting
from the two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, the need to preserve Jerusalem as the future
capital of the two States and also our common efforts
to stabilize Iraq and to work on the reconstruction and
stabilization of the country.
I could never thank Kuwait enough for the role
that it is playing in the region — in particular, as its
representative mentioned, as the co-Chair of the various
conferences to which we have contributed. Kuwait can
always count on us not only to pledge but also to deliver
on our pledges, be it in the case of Iraq, Syria or with
respect to the Rohingya issue.
Let me close by making two last points.
The representative of Belgium asked me if I saw
any opportunities to develop triangular cooperation
similar to that which we have with the United Nations
and the African Union and other regions. I believe
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations could
be an excellent candidate for the next experiment in
this respect, because the European Union is already
cooperating very closely with it. I wish also to thank
Indonesia for all the investments that it is making in
19-06774

12/03/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV. 8482

this respect. As the Council is aware, the European
Union will always invest all its political and financial
capital, which is not insignificant, in supporting
the strengthening of regional and subregional
organizations. We look forward to developing a similar
kind of partnership with regional and subregional
Latin American organizations, because also across
the Atlantic, let us say, from New York on south, we
have a very deep, comprehensive and strategically
important cooperation that I am sure could be very
valuable in strengthening multilateral frameworks in
the United Nations.

The European Union will always be a solid and
reliable partner for the United Nations and for its
Security Council.

Last but not least, I would underline what the
representative of Peru said and thank him for that.
It is true that the European Union has been first and
foremost an example of perseverance and a symbol
of multilateralism and cooperation. We have learned
from our own mistakes that cooperation is the way
forward, and I think that sometimes perseverance,
even stubbornness, is what we need in these times.

The President (spoke in French): I thank most
sincerely the High Representative, Ms. Mogherini,
for being here with us this morning, for her further
statement just delivered and for the clarifications
she provided. We wish her the greatest happiness
and success.

Let me conclude on a personal note. This will be
my last briefing to the Security Council, as our mandate
expires at the end of this year. It has been a pleasure for
me to work with the Council and its members over these
past five years. I can assure the Council that whatever
happens in and around the European Union, it will
always find in our Union the strongest and most reliable
partner ever for the United Nations system.

The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

19-0677423/23
