UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/28
16 September 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3927th meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 September 1998,
in connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The
situation in Africa", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
13 April 1998 on ’The causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa’, which was submitted to the Security
Council (S/1998/318) and the General Assembly (A/52/871). It agrees with
the Secretary-General that the credibility of the United Nations in Africa
to a great extent depends upon the willingness of the international
community to act and to explore new means of advancing the objectives of
peace and security in the African continent.
"The Security Council, which has the primary responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations for international peace and security,
expresses its commitment to exercising this responsibility in relation to
Africa, and affirms that strengthening Africa’s capacity to participate in
all aspects of peacekeeping operations, including their military, police,
humanitarian and other civilian components, is a key priority.
"The Security Council encourages increased bilateral and multilateral
cooperation in the field of peacekeeping, especially capacity-building,
between Member States, the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) as well as subregional organizations in Africa. It welcomes
the efforts already undertaken by the United Nations and Member States to
promote greater transparency and coordination in multilateral efforts to
enhance Africa’s capacity for peacekeeping. In particular, it welcomes
efforts to implement the recommendations in the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 1 November 1995 on ’Improving preparedness for conflict
prevention and peace-keeping in Africa’ (S/1995/911) and to follow up the
outcome of the meetings organized by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in December 1997 and May 1998. It encourages all States and
organizations concerned to work with African States in particular on the
basis of African initiatives and proposals.

98-27153 (E)

160998

/...

S/PRST/1998/28
English
Page 2

"The Security Council encourages contributions, financial and in kind,
aimed at enhancing Africa’s peacekeeping capacity. In particular, it urges
Member States to contribute to the trust funds established by the United
Nations and the OAU to improve preparedness for conflict prevention and
peacekeeping in Africa.
"The Security Council affirms the role of the United Nations in
setting general standards for peacekeeping, and urges compliance with
existing United Nations guidelines, including through the use of the Ten
Rules Code of Personal Conduct for Blue Helmets, which were elaborated
following a request by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(A/51/230). It encourages all those involved in enhancing Africa’s
peacekeeping capacity to ensure that training for and the conduct of
peacekeeping give due emphasis to international humanitarian law and human
rights, including the rights of the child, as well as to gender issues. It
requests all those conducting peacekeeping operations in Africa to pay
particular attention to the situation of children in armed conflict, as
appropriate, both in mandates for and reports about such operations.
"The Security Council supports the efforts of the United Nations,
regional and subregional organizations as well as Member States in the
field of training for peacekeeping.
"The Security Council welcomes the readiness of the United Nations to
act as a clearing house for information on available training initiatives.
It particularly welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to
establish a United Nations database on training. With the aim of
strengthening Africa’s peacekeeping capacity, the Security Council requests
the Secretary-General to pursue these plans, and to include in the database
information about African needs in this field, possible regional and extraregional contributions to assist in achieving this goal, and available
expertise on training. It encourages Member States and regional and
subregional organizations to contribute information to the database. It
encourages the Secretary-General to consider possible further uses and
broadening of United Nations databases, for instance in humanitarian
crises.
"The Security Council also welcomes the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral to establish an informal working group composed of African and
non-African States directly involved or interested in the provision of
training assistance.
"The Security Council emphasizes the value of training aimed at
improving coordination and cooperation among military, police, humanitarian
and other civilian components of peacekeeping operations. It encourages
the Secretary-General and Member States to engage international and
non-governmental humanitarian organizations, as appropriate, in
peacekeeping training activities.
"The Security Council underlines the importance of the availability of
appropriately trained personnel and relevant equipment for all components
of peacekeeping operations. In this context, it encourages increased
/...

S/PRST/1998/28
English
Page 3

participation by Member States, in particular from Africa, in the United
Nations standby arrangements. The Council further encourages the use of
United Nations Training Assistance Teams as a useful tool in support of
national peacekeeping training. It recognizes the value of joint training
exercises, as well as the establishment of partnerships between States
whose contingents require equipment and States and organizations that are
able to assist them. It also encourages the exchange of lessons learned
from previous operations.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to study ways to
improve the availability of logistics for peacekeeping efforts in Africa.
"The Security Council stresses the need for it to be fully informed of
peacekeeping activities carried out or planned by regional or subregional
organizations and underlines that the improved flow of information and the
holding of regular briefing meetings between members of the Council,
African regional and subregional organizations involved in peacekeeping
operations and troop contributors and other participating Member States
have an important role to play in helping enhance African peacekeeping
capacity. In that context, the Council encourages the Secretary-General to
establish appropriate United Nations liaison with regional and subregional
organizations and invites those organizations and Member States to provide
the Security Council and the Secretary-General with information on their
activities in the field of peacekeeping."

-----
