A/63/PV.33

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

33

rd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 29 October 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 19
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/93)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.4)
Mr. Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda): It is an honour
for me to speak on behalf of the Group of 77 and China
in the General Assembly on agenda item 19, “Necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”.
The heads of State and Government of the Group
of 77 and China have repeatedly condemned the use of
economic coercive measures designed to prevent
countries from exercising their right to decide their
own political, economic and social systems, and have
called on all countries not to recognize unilateral
extraterritorial laws enacted that have imposed
sanctions on other States and foreign companies.
Our heads of State and Government have also
recognized that the embargo has caused and continues
to cause a high degree of economic and financial
damage, which has had a negative impact on the
welfare and well-being of the people of Cuba. The
Group reiterates its call upon the Government of the
United States to put an end to the embargo.

The promulgation of such acts not only
undermines the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and international law, but also
severely threatens freedom of trade and investment.
The Group urges the United States to effect change in
its dealings with the Republic of Cuba in a meaningful
way by ending the embargo.
The Group is committed to working towards a
better world for all in which nations, large and small,
coexist peacefully. The achievement of such peaceful
coexistence among nations requires adherence by all
nations to the rule of law, including international law.
The embargo against Cuba contravenes the
fundamental norms of international law, international
humanitarian law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the norms and principles governing peaceful
relations among States. Its continued imposition
violates the principles of the sovereign equality of
States and of non-intervention and non-interference in
each other’s domestic affairs.
We believe that the replacement of the embargo
with diplomatic dialogue and cooperation will promote
meaningful exchange and partnership between
countries whose destinies are linked by history and
geography.
Considering the impact that the embargo has had
on everyday life of the Cuban people, the
overwhelming majority of Member States are here
today in support of the draft resolution on the necessity
of ending it. The Group of 77 and China will again
support the draft resolution before us today and would

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-57511 (E)

*0857511*

A/63/PV.33

urge all Member States in good conscience to join us in
that endeavour.

implementation of extraterritorial or unilateral coercive
measures or laws.

The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to the next speaker, I would like to propose
that the list of speakers for the debate on this item be
closed.

As reaffirmed by the heads of State and
Government of the Non-Aligned Movement at their
Summit Conference held in Havana in September
2006, we once again call upon the Government of the
United States of America to put an end to the
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba, which, in addition to being unilateral and
contrary to the United Nations Charter, international
law and the principle of good-neighbourliness, is
causing huge material losses and economic damage to
the people of Cuba.

It was so decided.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the honour to
speak today on behalf of the 118 States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The Non-Aligned Movement renews its
commitment to defending, preserving and promoting
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
We refrain from recognizing, adopting or implementing
extraterritorial or unilateral coercive measures or laws,
including unilateral economic sanctions, other
intimidating measures and arbitrary travel restrictions
that seek to exert pressure on non-aligned countries,
threatening their sovereignty, independence and
freedom of trade and investment, and that prevent them
from exercising their right to decide, by their own free
will, their own political, economic and social systems.
Such measures or laws constitute flagrant
violations of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the multilateral trading system, as
well as the norms and principles governing friendly
relations among States. In that regard, the Non-Aligned
Movement opposes and condemns such measures or
laws and their continued application. The Movement is
also persevering in its efforts to effectively reverse
them and urges other States to do likewise, as called
for by the General Assembly and other United Nations
organs. Once again, the Movement requests States
applying such measures or laws to revoke them fully
and immediately.
The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that under
no circumstances should people be deprived of their
own means of subsistence and development. The
Non-Aligned Movement further expresses its concern
at the continued imposition of such measures, which
inhibit the well-being of the population of the affected
countries and create obstacles to the full realization of
their human rights. In accordance with international
law, the Movement supports the claim of affected
States, including the targeted States, for compensation
for the damage incurred as a consequence of the

2

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its deep
concern over the widening of the extraterritorial nature
of the embargo against Cuba and rejects the
reinforcement of the measures adopted by the United
States Government aimed at tightening the embargo
and all other recent measures carried out by the
Government of the United States against the people of
Cuba. The Movement reiterates that those measures
constitute a violation of Cuba’s sovereignty and a
massive violation of the human rights of its people.
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement once
again urges strict compliance with resolutions 47/19,
48/16, 49/9, 50/10, 51/17, 52/10, 53/4, 54/21, 55/20,
56/9, 57/11, 58/7, 59/11, 60/12, 61/11 and 62/3, on the
necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba.
Allow me to say a few words, before closing,
about my dear friend and colleague, Ambassador
Rodrigo
Malmierca
Díaz,
the
Permanent
Representative of Cuba to the United Nations, who will
be leaving us at the end of this week. I would like to
express my appreciation as a member of the
Non-Aligned Movement Troika and the appreciation of
all the members of the Movement for his extensive
efforts and for his able leadership as Chair of the
Movement over the past two years. I wish him all the
best in his future endeavours.
Mr. Talbot (Guyana): On behalf of the 14 States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
that are Members of the United Nations, I have the
honour to address the General Assembly on the
necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba.

08-57511

A/63/PV.33

CARICOM aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Antigua and Barbuda on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China and the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Nations Charter, and the embargo itself runs counter to
the principles of multilateralism, international law,
sovereignty and free trade that this body traditionally
champions.

At the outset, CARICOM would like to express
its concern and solidarity with the people of Cuba as
they struggle to rebuild in the aftermath of Hurricanes
Gustav, Hanna and Ike, which battered the island and
our region in quick succession. Indeed, it is in these
times of natural disaster and national crisis that the
fundamental unjustness of the embargo is brought into
sharpest relief. Cuba’s safety, advance preparedness
and pace of recovery are compromised by the
embargo’s many direct and indirect effects. When
viewed in the light of Cuba’s own sacrifice and selfless
assistance to other States in times of crisis, such an
embargo seems particularly ill conceived.

CARICOM States therefore reaffirm the positions
of the Group of 77 and China and the Non-Aligned
Movement in opposing such unilateral actions, and we
maintain the position that constructive engagement and
peaceful negotiations remain the only acceptable
means for advancing long-term peace and stability.

The punitive embargo is of particular concern to
CARICOM, which shares a history, culture and
brotherhood with the people of Cuba. Cuba is the most
populous State of the Caribbean region and an integral
part of the pan-Caribbean process. Caribbean ties with
Cuba have historical significance, cemented by years
of active cooperation at various levels. The member
States of CARICOM continue to maintain close
relations with Cuba through a wide range of
programmes of cooperation in areas including trade,
health care, infrastructure and human resource
development. Our future regional development is, in
many ways, reliant upon our collective advancement
and progress. In that context, we view the embargo not
just as a punitive act against Cuba, but as an
impediment to our shared regional development.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General on the
necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba (A/63/93), as previous reports
on the matter, outlines responses from an
overwhelming majority of Member States that share a
common perspective on the continued unilateral
embargo against Cuba.
CARICOM member States continue to reiterate
their unequivocal opposition to the imposition of the
embargo, which has been repudiated by the
overwhelming majority of the international community
for the past 16 consecutive years. The unilateral
imposition of extraterritorial laws on third States is
contrary to both the letter and the spirit of the United

08-57511

The significant effect of the embargo on the
Cuban economy continues to be of great concern to
CARICOM, and the humanitarian impact on the people
of Cuba, especially in the area of health care and food,
is saddening. The inability of Cuba to acquire
necessary medical equipment, spare parts and latestgeneration medicines because of the embargo continues
to affect the health-care system, where treatment
remains free of charge to the Cuban people.
With the strengthened and more frequent storms
and hurricanes brought on by climate change and
Cuba’s geographic susceptibility to those natural
disasters, the unacceptable humanitarian impact of the
embargo becomes even more acute. It is remarkable
that, even as Cuba struggles with its recent unfortunate
string of natural disasters, it continues to assist other
nations in the developing world, starting with its
immediate Caribbean neighbours. Thousands of
CARICOM students have attended Cuban universities
without charge, thousands have received free surgical
operations and medical assistance in Cuba, and
thousands more have been treated in their home
countries by Cuban doctors and nurses. We have
benefited from technical expertise, capacity-building
programmes, infrastructural assistance and the selfless
generosity of the Cuban people. The people of Cuba
have threatened no one, and neither the embargo nor its
deleterious side effects have prevented them from
continually extending a hand of friendship and
solidarity, even across ideological divides.
Given Cuba’s peaceful, generous and cooperative
international stance, it should not be isolated or
excluded from participation in regional and
hemispheric processes. CARICOM reiterates its
unwavering support for the right of the Cuban people
to self-determination and to the beneficial pursuit of
their social and economic development in a manner of
their own choosing.

3

A/63/PV.33

The embargo imposed against Cuba is
increasingly anachronistic and serves no useful
purpose in the twenty-first century. It has only served
to preserve a state of tension between two
neighbouring countries and to generate concern,
disquiet and discomfort throughout the Caribbean.
CARICOM States continue to enjoy friendly
relations with both Cuba and the United States. Those
two neighbours, a mere 90 miles apart, have produced
great scholars, scientists and global leaders. The two
countries possess proud and noble histories and are
populated by friendly, open and loving peoples. We
call for a new beginning between the Governments of
those two great nations — one large and one small —
akin to similar initiatives taken for negotiation of far
more difficult issues of international relations between
States Members of this Organization. We can only
imagine the positive outcome of a rapprochement
between them based on the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter.
It is against that background that CARICOM
States support the draft resolution on the necessity of
ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo
by the United States, contained in document A/63/L.4.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, it is an
honour to speak for the first time in this forum under
your leadership.
Last October, 184 Member States, in this forum,
voted in favour of draft resolution A/62/L.1, entitled
“Neccessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba” — a nearly unanimous rejection
by the international community of the interventionist
policy against the fraternal people of Cuba.
Ever since its first resolution on this topic,
resolution 47/19, was adopted, on 24 November 1992,
the Assembly has been adopting systematically, and by
an overwhelming majority resolutions that demand that
the Government of the United States of America put an
end to its hostile policy against Cuba. The United
States Government, however, has repeatedly disdained
the majority will of the General Assembly and has
refused to hear the clamour throughout the world
against the embargo. That is one of the many reasons
that amply justify the pressing need to reform the
United Nations so that the resolutions of this Assembly
are welcomed and respected by all States.

4

The enduring embargo against Cuba runs counter
to the spirit of our times. It is an obstacle to the
creation of an international order based on peace and
coexistence among all nations. The embargo is
undeniably a criminal mechanism that is designed to
crush, through hunger and disease, a dignified people
that has bravely and with determination exercised its
right to freedom and independence. For more than four
decades, the imperialist Government has been
flagrantly violating the human rights of the Cuban
people, including the right to life, health, food and
education. It has been violating the norms and
principles of international law that govern relations
among States, as well as the letter and the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Over the past year, the embargo against Cuba has
intensified and its extraterritorial implementation has
expanded. To deny medicine and food to a country in
the context of an odious sanctions regime is a violation
of international law and is proscribed in the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide.
Mohandas Gandhi, in his work “Non-Violence:
The Greatest Force”, set out his thinking, which is as
relevant now as it was then. The great herald of peace
and permanent leader of the people of India said:
“An armed conflict between nations horrifies us.
But the economic war is no better than an armed
conflict. This is like a surgical operation. An
economic war is prolonged torture.”
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba is a criminal punishment imposed
systematically on the Cuban people with no distinction
as to age, sex, religion or social status. In the context
of the devastating human toll and material damage
caused by hurricanes Gustav and Ike, the implications
of the embargo take on more unjust and immoral
connotations. Despite the embargo, the people of Cuba
and their Government, faithful to the principles of
solidarity and humanism, have maintained cooperation
and solidarity with many developing countries,
including my own, particularly in the areas of
education and health.
The embargo against Cuba is rejected not only by
the Cuban people, but also by a majority of world
public opinion, including within the United States. To
this effect, we welcome constructive rapprochement
and positive dialogue which the European Union has

08-57511

A/63/PV.33

initiated with no conditions of any type and with
respect for the sovereignty of the Cuban people. We
therefore appeal for the embargo against Cuba to be
lifted immediately and unconditionally.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela firmly
rejects the unilateral implementation of economic,
commercial and financial measures against Cuba that
affect the development of international trade and that
constitute an offensive extraterritorial application of
one country’s domestic legislation against another.
We reiterate our support for the General
Assembly resolutions that call for an end to the
embargo against Cuba. We support, in that context, the
positions of the Group of 77 and China and of the
Non-Aligned Movement and the statement soon to be
delivered by the Common Market of the South
(MERCOSUR), all of which condemn the embargo on
Cuba, as it is in violation of the provisions of the
United Nations Charter.
We hope that, on this occasion, the overwhelming
majority of countries will once again raise their voices
against a measure that is an affront to a people that has
since 1958 been flying with dignity the flags of
freedom, sovereignty and self-determination.
Venezuela will therefore vote in favour of the
draft resolution entitled “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): For
17 consecutive years, the Government of Mexico has,
in this forum, expressed its rejection of the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba, and
today it once again reiterates its opposition to the use
of coercive actions not supported by the Charter of the
United Nations.
Therefore, since 1992, when the Cuban
Government submitted a draft resolution to the General
Assembly to put an end to the embargo imposed by the
Government of the United States of America, Mexico
has repeatedly voted in favour of the resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly on the matter. My
Government has also shared with the international
community its firm opposition to the extraterritorial
application of national laws that contravene
international law.
The Government of Mexico has maintained that
position in the various agencies of the United Nations,

08-57511

system supported by the fact that the United States
embargo against Cuba, a unilateral policy that has
lasted for almost half a century, contravenes
international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, has severe humanitarian consequences that are
in open contradiction to its founding objectives and
furthermore constitutes a renunciation of diplomacy
and dialogue as ideal ways to resolve conflicts between
States.
For all those reasons, my delegation reiterates its
firm opposition to the economic, commercial and
financial embargo against Cuba, which has affected its
population in a silent, systematic and cumulative
manner.
The overwhelming outcry of the international
community against this sort of unilateral action
reminds us that any kind of political, economic or
military sanctions imposed upon States can derive only
from decisions or recommendations of the Security
Council or the General Assembly of the United
Nations.
Several agencies and entities of the United
Nations system address the negative impact that the
embargo has on the economic and social development
of Cuba. The resulting destruction tangibly affects the
economic, commercial and financial transactions of the
country and has negative repercussions on sensitive
sectors such as food, health and construction, all of
which have a direct impact on the lives of the Cuban
people.
All of those effects not only have repercussions
for third countries, since they cannot interact with
Cuba in many economic and social activities, but also
are aggravated in the context of natural disasters such
as the highly destructive storms that occurred this year,
hurricanes Gustav and Ike.
The Government of Mexico reiterates its firm
position against national laws that are imposed on
other countries and violate international law.
In that context, and in order to counteract the
economic, political and diplomatic isolation of Cuba,
the Government of Mexico has supported Cuba’s
integration into all the regional integration mechanisms,
thus promoting economic and commercial exchanges,
cooperation and development. On 23 October 1996, the
Mexican State passed the Law on the Protection of
Commerce and Investments from Foreign Policies that

5

A/63/PV.33

Contravene International Law. The law prohibits any
acts that affect commerce or investment if those acts are
a result of the extraterritorial application of the laws of
foreign countries.
At the bilateral level, Mexico is also promoting
political, economic and commercial contacts with
Cuba. An example of that is the third meeting of the
Cuba-Mexico Permanent Mechanism for Information
and Political Consultation, held in March 2008, in
which both Governments committed themselves to
promoting existing bilateral mechanisms in the areas of
migration, drug trafficking, commerce and industrial
development, shipping, agriculture and fishing, foreign
trade, tourism, health and development. The meeting
was also instrumental in establishing mechanisms to
promote economic relations through the dispatching of
business missions and the revision of agreements on
economic complementarity and the promotion and
reciprocal protection of investments between the two
countries.
By focusing on dialogue and consultation,
Mexico and Cuba have managed to strengthen their ties
of cooperation and understanding. That has led to a
relationship based on mutual respect, as evidenced by
the signing of an agreement on restructuring Cuba’s
debts to Mexico in March 2008. The agreement was
appended to the existing regulatory framework of each
country and mutually satisfactory to both parties,
helping to stimulate the development of economic and
trade relations benefiting the two countries.
In that context, we should also mention the
signing of the memorandum of understanding between
Mexico and Cuba to secure legal, orderly and safe
migratory flows between both countries. The
memorandum was signed during a visit by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, Felipe Pérez Roque, to
Mexico City on 20 October. It will help to ensure
migrants’ safety, discourage undocumented migration
and combat more effectively the trafficking in persons.
That relationship, which is based on mutual
respect, was indeed validated through Foreign Minister
Pérez Roque’s visit to Mexico City only a few days
ago. During his meeting with President Felipe
Calderón, both noted the positive state of relations
between the two countries. Besides being reflected in
the structure of the bilateral institutional mechanisms,
that relationship is furthered by the increase in bilateral
trade, which are shows great promise. During the first

6

eight months of this year, bilateral trade increased by
nearly 80 per cent as compared to the same period in
2007. That reinforces the firm historical ties between
Mexico and Cuba, which are sustained in a climate of
renewed confidence, taking into consideration the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
On that basis, through bilateral dialogue and in
the relevant regional and international forums and
mechanisms, Mexico has promoted opportunities for
cooperation and respectful dialogue, as demonstrated
recently through the first ministerial-level political
dialogue between the Rio Group and Cuba, held at the
beginning of the current session of the General
Assembly. During that dialogue, both sides stressed
their interest in discussing relevant topics on the
regional and international agenda.
The Government of Mexico bases its bilateral and
multilateral relationships on the general principles of
international law that regulate peaceful and civilized
coexistence among sovereign States. Those principles
have retained their solidity and continuity in the
relations between Mexico and Cuba. Mexico reaffirms
today that international law is the mechanism for
resolving disputes between States and that observing it
and respecting the rules and principles that govern
coexistence among nations, as well as respectful
dialogue, irrespective of asymmetries or differences,
are the necessary instruments for overcoming
differences among States and securing a climate of
international peace.
From our own experience, we know well that
societies evolve and change according to their own
circumstances and not as the result of arbitrary
measures imposed from outside. In virtue of all those
considerations, Mexico will once again support the
resolution that has been presented under the item at
this session.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): For
16 consecutive years the General Assembly has
debated the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba. The Assembly
is meeting again today to discuss the same issue
because despite the strong appeal of the international
community for it to end, the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States against
Cuba continues.

08-57511

A/63/PV.33

The resolutions on the necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States against Cuba which the Assembly
has adopted with near unanimity, have never been
implemented. We fully align ourselves with the
statements made by the delegates of Antigua and
Barbuda and of Egypt on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China and the Non-Aligned Movement, respectively, in
that connection.
The United States’ unilateral economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba
represents a violation of international law, including
international laws relating to the freedom of trade and
navigation and non-interference in the internal affairs
of States. It runs counter to universally recognized
norms governing relations between sovereign countries
regardless of their political systems and their choice of
a path of development and to the fundamental
principles, purposes and spirit enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations.
The prolonged and intensified embargo imposed
by the United States against Cuba has caused serious
economic and trade damage worth scores of billions of
United States dollars not only to Cuba, but also to other
countries desirous of conducting their normal and
mutually beneficial economic, financial and trade
relations with that peace-loving country. It has inflicted
tremendous hardship and suffering on the Cuban
people, particularly women and children. While the
Government and people of Cuba strive to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals, that unjustifiable
unilateral embargo affects their efforts to accomplish
the very goals that leaders of the world adopted at this
Assembly eight years ago.
Viet Nam is against the imposition of any
coercive, unilateral and extraterritorial economic,
commercial or trade embargo by one country against
another. We believe that disputes among States should
and can be resolved through peaceful dialogue and
negotiations on the basis of equality, mutual respect for
each other’s independence and sovereignty, and the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
States. We demand that the United States put an end to
the unilateral embargo against Cuba, the continuation
of which serves no other purpose than to intensify
tension between the two neighbouring countries and in
the region and is a disservice to regional and
international peace and security and the interests of
friendly relations among peoples.

08-57511

Viet Nam reaffirms its support for and solidarity
with the Government and people of Cuba. We will join
the efforts of the international community to help them
overcome the consequences of the embargo. Viet Nam
will again vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to extend to you, Sir, our
warmest thanks and appreciation and to applaud your
wise leadership of the proceedings of the current
session of the General Assembly. We greatly appreciate
your efforts to spread the spirit of fraternity, equality,
justice, cooperation and respect for peoples to choose
and to reject hegemony and the law of force.
For the seventeenth consecutive year, an item on
the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba is on the agenda of the General
Assembly. Throughout those years, the Assembly, by
adopting the draft resolutions presented to it, has
demonstrated its complete rejection of those unilateral
sanctions and their extraterritorial negative effects that
run counter to the principles of international
legitimacy.
The General Assembly is once again considering
the item amid an increasing awareness on the part of
the international community and its rejection of the
dangerous and unjustifiable imposition of the
sanctions. The continuous support for the resolution —
year in and year out — explicitly demonstrates the
rejection by the international community of the
unilateral imposition of the embargo on Cuba, due to
its blatant violation of the basic rules and principles of
international law, the provisions of the United Nations
Charter and the international instruments and norms
governing commercial, economic and financial
relations among States.
The long suffering of the Cuban people as a result
of the embargo serves as an appeal to the international
community to take a stand once again this year against
those unjust sanctions that threaten international
legitimacy. Those unilateral measures have had a
severe impact on the Cuban people, depriving them of
basic necessities and causing considerable losses in the
various fields of economic and social development to
the brotherly Republic of Cuba for over 40 years. My
delegation takes a firm stand against those unjust
unilateral sanctions, which have also been imposed on
my country and on other countries. We wish here to

7

A/63/PV.33

express our full solidarity with Cuba and against the
policies of exclusion and the imposition of hegemony
on other people.
We are confident that the overwhelming vote of
the General Assembly will support the desire of the
international community to achieve the noble
humanitarian principles contained in the Charter. The
draft resolution under consideration serves in its
symbolic value as an important message from the
international community, rejecting the folly of force.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): May I begin by
associating my delegation with the statements
delivered by the representative of Antigua and Barbuda
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
On New Year’s Eve 2009, we will mark the
fiftieth anniversary of the Cuban revolution. In honour
of that day we must pay tribute to former President
Fidel Castro, who led the revolution for the selfdetermination of the Cuban people. Yet three years
after the Cuban victory led by Comandante Fidel, Cuba
was hit with a unilateral economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed on it by its neighbour, the
United States of America. That means that the majority
of Cuban citizens have known no other life than a life
under coercive economic measures. But despite
everything, the Cuban people have survived. For that
reason we begin today by welcoming the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba, whose presence at the debate
is an indication of the importance we all attach to the
issue.
Throughout the unilateral embargo, which has
lasted over 48 years, the Cuban people have responded
by extending a hand of friendship and solidarity to
other people around the world. For instance, it is not
unusual to find Cuban doctors and Cuban nurses in
many parts of Latin America and Africa. Cuba’s
outstanding work in the areas of health, education and
biotechnology is recognized by the international
community. Also, through its bilateral cooperation
projects, Cuba is greatly assisting many developing
countries — including mine — in addressing skills
shortages by deploying Cuban professional workers
and trainers in a myriad of areas.
Perhaps more importantly, Cuba has supported
the struggles for freedom and justice around the world.
For instance, in Southern Africa we have recognized

8

Cuba’s contribution to our own freedom and
democracy in our subregion. The role that Cuba played
in South Africa’s own liberation history was duly
recognized this year when Southern Africa celebrated
the twentieth anniversary of the battle of Cuito
Cuanavale, which was a decisive turning point in the
struggle against apartheid and led to the independence
of Namibia and South Africa.
South Africa has consistently opposed all aspects
of the embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba for fundamental reasons that go
beyond the solidarity we share with the Cuban people.
South Africa is a country committed to working
towards a better world for all in which all nations, no
matter how large or small, coexist peacefully. The
achievement of such peaceful coexistence among
nations requires adherence by all nations to the rule of
law, including international law and respect for
territorial integrity.
South Africa views the continued imposition of
an economic, commercial and financial embargo as a
violation of the principles of the sovereign equality of
States and of non-intervention and non-interference in
one other’s domestic affairs. South Africa has therefore
repeatedly joined the vast majority of Member States
and countries in expressing its disagreement and its
opposition to all aspects of the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba.
We are guided by the basic norms of international
law and conduct and our principled support for the
need to eliminate coercive economic measures as a
means of achieving political and economic goals.
South Africa believes that constructive dialogue can
foster mutual trust and understanding and can engender
harmony and peaceful coexistence between nations.
My delegation believes that the presence of such
a large number of Member States in this Hall today and
their participation in the deliberations are indications
of their opposition to unilateral extraterritorial
measures. We are here to express our firm opposition
to coercive economic measures as a means of exerting
pressure on developing countries, as such measures are
contrary
to
international
law,
international
humanitarian law, the United Nations Charter and the
norms and principles governing peaceful relations
among States.

08-57511

A/63/PV.33

South Africa will join the majority in the
Assembly this morning in supporting the draft
resolution before us. We do so because this relentless
and unilateral action has caused untold suffering to the
people of Cuba. We believe that the overwhelming
majority of Member States present today will join us in
support for the Cuban people. It is a clear indication
that the time has come for the embargo to be lifted,
thereby ending the untold suffering of the Cuban
civilian population, who are bearing the brunt of this
injustice.
Finally, Mr. President, with your permission,
since I will not be able to join the celebrations in
Havana on New Year’s Day, allow me to just say “Viva
Cuba! Viva Comandante Fidel!”
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation supports the statement made by
the representative of Antigua and Barbuda on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China.
For more than 10 years, the Cuban delegation has
denounced each and every year from the podium of the
General Assembly the sustained economic, commercial
and financial embargo against Cuba, which has had
serious consequences for its social, economic and
environmental development. The embargo has had an
extensive impact on Cuba, especially in compromising
the right to the survival and development of the most
vulnerable groups in Cuba, such as women and
children, and has gained broad sympathy and attention.
For 16 consecutive years, the General Assembly
has each year adopted a resolution by an overwhelming
majority, urging all countries to comply with the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
international law by repealing or invalidating all laws
and measures with extraterritorial effects that
compromise the sovereignty of other States and
undermine the legitimate rights and interests of entities
and individuals under the jurisdictions of those
countries and affect the freedom of trade and
navigation. Regrettably, however, the long-term
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba imposed by its rich neighbour is still in place.
In today’s world, although international relations
are not yet democratized, dialogue, communication and
harmonious coexistence have emerged as the
mainstream of international relations. Mutual respect
and equality among countries are becoming important
issues of international consensus. In the age of

08-57511

economic globalization, exchanges and cooperation
among countries on an equal footing represent the
trend of our times. Dialogue on an equal footing and
friendly consultation are the best way to resolve any
differences and disputes. The international community
has the right to raise serious concerns over the embargo
and sanctions suffered by Cuba over the years and to
request the country concerned to end the embargo and
sanctions.
The embargo and sanctions against Cuba not only
harm the interests of Cuba and many other countries,
but also run counter to the principles of democracy,
freedom, the rule of law and human rights. First, the
practice of attempting to force another country, through
embargo and sanctions, to give up its right to
independently choose its own path of development and
even to overthrow its Government constitutes a serious
violation of the purposes and principles of the Charter
and the basic norms governing contemporary
international relations. Such practice has nothing to do
with promoting democracy and freedom.
Secondly, the embargo and sanctions imposed
against Cuba are extraterritorial in nature and therefore
in violation of international law and can by no means
promote democracy and freedom in any country. They
are opposed by all countries and run counter to the
principle of trade liberalization.
Thirdly, the embargo and sanctions have seriously
obstructed and constrained the efforts of the Cuban
people to eradicate poverty, improve their living
standards, pursue economic and social development
and achieve the Millennium Development Goals. They
undermine the right of the Cuban people to subsistence
and development. The international community is now
facing the serious challenge of a global food crisis and
the ensuing, worsening problems of hunger and
malnutrition, which make the embargo and sanctions
more unreasonable than ever.
The Chinese Government always maintains that
countries should develop their relations in compliance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter and
work to promote democracy and the rule of law in
international relations. We believe that the right of each
country to choose its own social system and the path of
development should be respected. Differences between
States should be resolved through dialogue and
cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual
respect.

9

A/63/PV.33

In view of all that, the Chinese Government calls
for the lifting of the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the country concerned
against Cuba at an early date. It is our hope that there
will be dialogue rather than confrontation, and
engagement and exchanges rather than embargo and
sanctions. We hope the country concerned will
implement the relevant resolution of the General
Assembly without delay. China therefore supports the
draft resolution submitted by Cuba under the current
agenda item.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to associate my delegation with
the statements made by the representatives of Antigua
and Barbuda on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
and of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Algeria wishes to express once again its serious
concern regarding the continuation of the economic,
commercial and financial embargo unilaterally
imposed for nearly half a century now by the United
States of America against Cuba. Algeria reiterates its
appeal for the lifting of the embargo against the Cuban
people, under which 70 per cent of Cuban citizens were
born.
Algeria considers that the economic, commercial
and financial embargo of Cuba is a violation of the
principles of sovereign equality of States and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States, and
also violates the right of the Cuban people to
development and sovereignty.
The extraterritorial nature of the legislation of
one State seeking to impose unilateral sanctions on
another constitutes a denial of the principles enshrined
in the Charter and runs counter to international law.
Algeria wishes to reaffirm its adherence to the
position adopted by the fourteenth summit of the NonAligned Movement held in September 2006 in Havana,
and to that adopted during the Second South Summit in
June 2005 in Doha, both of which rejected coercive
economic measures and extraterritorial laws imposed
on developing countries, and called on the United
States to lift the embargo against Cuba.
In renewing its appeal to the United States of
America to lift its embargo against Cuba, which has
been continuously rejected by a growing number of
countries in the Assembly, indicating that the
overwhelming majority of Member States are in favour

10

of lifting that embargo, my delegation would like to
indicate that it will vote in favour of the draft
resolution A/63/L.4.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report under agenda item 19, “Necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against
Cuba” (A/63/93). My delegation associates itself with
the statements made by the representatives of Antigua
and Barbuda on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
and of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The content of resolution 62/3, which was
supported by 184 votes in its favour last year, clearly
reflects the position of the international community
towards the long-standing embargo against Cuba. My
delegation reiterates its belief that the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba runs
counter to the principle of international law governing
relations among States and contradicts the letter and
spirit of the Charter, which calls for promoting
solidarity, cooperation and friendly relations among
nations.
Such measures continue to have an adverse
impact on the living conditions and human rights of the
Cuban people and will hamper the efforts of the Cuban
Government to achieve the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals. In that context, the embargo is
hampering the efforts of the Cuban Government to
eradicate poverty and hunger and to promote health
and education, which are indispensable to the
achievement of economic and social development.
Paragraph 101 of the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation (A/CONF.199/20) stipulates that
“States should cooperate to promote a supportive and
open international economic system that would lead to
economic growth and sustainable development in all
countries”. Paragraph 102 of the same document calls
upon States to refrain from any unilateral measure that
contravenes international law and the Charter of the
United Nations and impedes the full achievement of
economic and social development by the population of
the affected countries, in particular women and
children.
Nowadays, resorting to unjustifiable coercive
economic measures against other States on the basis of
political observations is not acceptable to the

08-57511

A/63/PV.33

international
community.
The
extraterritorial
application of domestic laws, such as the HelmsBurton Act and the D’Amato Act, creates an
antagonistic environment in international relations and
adversely affects world peace and security. Such
political acts with economic implications continue to
restrict the investment, trade, employment, technology
transfer and prospects for economic growth not only of
the targeted countries, but also of third-party countries
dealing with the affected country.
There is no doubt that the blockade is in violation
of the internationally agreed principles governing
relations among States, such as the sovereign equality
of States, non-intervention in their internal affairs and
freedom of international trade and navigation. In
previous statements, my delegation has repeatedly
stressed that unilateral coercive economic policies and
measures should be regarded as major impediments to
the international community’s pursuit of its common
causes and interests. Such measures have negative
impacts on the promotion of cooperation and
partnerships that are necessary to create a favourable
environment, to the benefit of all at the international
level.
The reports of the Cuban Government on the
impacts of the embargo imposed on it clearly indicate
that such unilateral coercive measures have been
conducive to furthering disparities in the areas of
health, economy, education and training, trade,
tourism, civil aviation and even cultural activities. The
adoption of 17 consecutive resolutions up to 2007 by
the General Assembly is the wise and laudable reaction
of the international community to such unacceptable
measures. They call upon all States to refrain from
applying such laws and measures and to take the steps
necessary to repeal or invalidate them as soon as
possible. The reason is clear. Resorting to an embargo
as a tool to achieve political objectives undermines the
collective efforts of Member States to achieve
economic growth and sustainable development at the
national, regional and international levels.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to express
its sincere hope that those Member States that still
continue to apply unilateral coercive economic laws
and measures take the steps necessary to repeal or
invalidate them at the earliest opportunity.
Mr. Shukla (India): We associate ourselves with
the statement made by the representative of Antigua

08-57511

and Barbuda on behalf of the Group of 77 in his
capacity as its Chair. We thank the Secretary-General
for his report (A/63/93) on the agenda item under
consideration today.
This is the seventeenth successive year that this
Assembly is deliberating the 46-year economic,
commercial and financial embargo on Cuba. In its
deliberations, the Assembly has repeatedly rejected the
imposition of laws and regulations with extraterritorial
impact and all other forms of coercive economic
measures. The General Assembly has also called upon
all States to respect their obligations under the United
Nations Charter and international law and to repeal and
invalidate laws and measures that have extraterritorial
affect on the sovereignty of other States, the legitimate
interests of entities or persons under their jurisdiction,
and the freedom of trade and navigation.
Despite repeated calls by the General Assembly,
its resolutions remain unimplemented, in contravention
of world opinion. The embargo, particularly its
extraterritorial aspects, continues to remain in force. In
particular, domestic United States laws, such as the
Cuban Democracy Act of 1992 and the Helms-Burton
Act of 1996, have enhanced the extraterritorial reach of
the embargo by encompassing foreign companies, as
well as foreign subsidiaries of United States
companies, doing business with Cuba or Cuban
entities. We support the categorical rejection by the
international community of domestic laws with
extraterritorial impact.
The
embargo,
particularly
through
its
extraterritorial effects, is adversely affecting the Cuban
people and the development efforts of the country.
Health care is particularly affected due to access
controls on critical medical equipment, medicines,
technologies and diagnostic aids, apart from the
enhanced cost of supplies. In that regard, Cuba’s
efforts to provide assistance to fellow developing
countries as part of South-South cooperation have also
borne the brunt of the embargo, making that another
unexpected indirect negative extraterritorial impact of
the embargo.
Various other areas of the Cuban economy have
also been adversely impacted. Those have been
elaborated upon in the report of the Secretary-General
by various United Nations entities. For example, the
United Nations Resident Coordinator in Havana has
noted that the negative impact of the embargo

11

A/63/PV.33

permeates the social, economic and environmental
dimensions of human development in Cuba, severely
affecting the most vulnerable socio-economic groups
of the Cuban population.
Further, the embargo seriously affects the
implementation of projects and programmes of the
United Nations system in Cuba, including the travel of
United Nations staff. The Economic Commission for
Latin America and the Caribbean has stated that the
embargo significantly affects the standard of living of
Cuban citizens. The United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development states that the extraterritorial
impact is considerable owing to significant United
States interests in transnational corporations.
Despite the embargo, the United States of
America continues to be a major source of imports for
Cuba, insofar as the United States Trade Sanctions
Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 permits.
That only serves to confirm the potential for trade,
commerce and investment between those countries.
The embargo also has considerable detrimental effect
on United States trade and business opportunities. The
various efforts in the United States to relax or lift the
embargo indicate the substantial interest, particularly
in the business sector, in unhindered access to the
Cuban market or contact with Cuba. We therefore look
forward to the lifting of sanctions and the embargo
against Cuba.
Before concluding, I should like to reiterate
India’s opposition to unilateral measures by countries
that impinge on the sovereignty of another country,
including attempts to extend the application of a
country’s laws extraterritorially to other sovereign
nations.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
discussion of Mr. Felipe Pérez Roque, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba. We wish to express our
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his report
contained in document A/63/93, which reflects the
unanimous and unequivocal objection of Member
States to the imposition of the unilateral and
extraterritorial economic, commercial and financial
blockade against Cuba.
Russia’s position on the draft resolution
(A/63/L.4) introduced under the agenda item has not
changed. Our country shares the view of the
overwhelming majority of Member States, which

12

resolutely condemns the United States embargo against
Cuba and calls for its end. Since 1994, Russia has been
supporting resolutions to that effect at sessions of the
General Assembly and has consistently adhered to the
position that it is inadmissible to carry out unilateral
measures of an extraterritorial nature in international
relations.
On 17 October 2008, an appeal was adopted by
the parliament of Russia, the State Duma of the
Russian Federation, entitled, “To the parliaments of
United Nations Member States and international
parliamentary organizations concerning the necessity
of ending the economic embargo against the Republic
of Cuba and helping the Republic of Cuba to eliminate
the devastating effects of natural disaster”. The appeal
emphasizes that “the continuing economic blockade
against the Republic of Cuba is an act of crude
pressure by the United States of America against a
sovereign State”.
The continuing commercial, economic and
financial blockade of Cuba by the United States is
counterproductive and out of step with the spirit of the
times in which we live. It is a remnant from the days of
the cold war that is hampering the establishment of a
new and just world order in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
We are convinced that putting an end to the
embargo and normalization of United States-Cuba
relations in general would help to improve the situation
with regard to Cuba and help to further integrate Cuba
into regional and global processes. The continuation of
the blockade is also incompatible with the efforts now
under way to reform the United Nations, for it ignores
the unanimous view of Member States regarding the
need to work together to implement the principles
underpinning our efforts to abandon confrontation and
embrace cooperation based on respect for the rights of
nations to choose for themselves their political,
economic and social systems.
Cuba was badly hit by Hurricane Gustav at the
end of August 2008. The Russian Federation gave a
helping hand and continues to assist in eliminating the
consequences of that natural disaster. We are convinced
that putting an end to the embargo and strengthening
international efforts in general to support the
rehabilitation of the Cuban economy would
significantly alleviate the situation in the affected
areas.

08-57511

A/63/PV.33

Guided by the fundamental principles of the
Charter with regard to the inadmissibility of any
discriminatory measure or interference in the internal
affairs of States, Russia will continue its policy to vote
in favour of the draft resolution calling for an end to
the blockade.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): The Angolan
delegation associates itself with the statements made
by the representative of Antigua and Barbuda on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China and by the representative
of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Each year for 16 consecutive years, the General
Assembly has adopted a resolution urging all countries,
in compliance with the United Nations Charter and the
principles of international law, to retract all laws and
measures with extraterritorial effects that compromise
the sovereignty of other States, undermine the
legitimate rights and interests of entities and persons
under jurisdiction of those States and affect the
freedom of trade and navigation.
Regrettably, however, the long-term economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba
imposed by the United States of America is still in
place. In this era of economic globalization, exchanges
and cooperation among countries on an equal footing is
the trend of our times. Normal economic, commercial
and financial ties among countries are therefore in the
interest of all and are by no means a favour done by
any one country to others.
The General Assembly has before it the report of
the Secretary-General (A/63/93) containing replies
from Member States and organs and agencies of the
United Nations system on the implementation of the
pertinent General Assembly resolutions calling for an
end to the embargo. According to that report, there has
been no improvement, i.e. action to end the embargo,
during all these years. The existing sanctions have been
applied with vigour, and the embargo measures have
continued to have a serious impact on Cuba, causing
enormous social and material loss, economic damage,
hunger, and disease to the people of Cuba, while
simultaneously affecting third countries in their
relations with Cuba.
The extraterritorial policy of the embargo
threatens the sovereignty of States and the legitimate
interests of persons, entities, institutions and
companies under their jurisdiction, as well as the
freedom to establish economic, commercial, financial

08-57511

and scientific and technical relations with the Republic
of Cuba and thus affects their social and economic
development. For that reason, we are of the view that
the issue we are addressing today is important, not only
for Cuba but also for all members of the international
community. That view has been expressed by a
majority of Member States year after year.
The United States of America has imposed the
economic, financial and commercial embargo against
Cuba for too long. The embargo does not benefit either
of the two countries. On the contrary, it serves only to
maintain a level of tension in the region and, above all,
it has been causing the severe suffering of the Cuban
people, a situation which has been exacerbated by
climatic changes and more particularly during the
hurricane season and hurricanes Gustav and Ike of this
year.
The embargo goes against the very core of the
United Nations Charter, as well as all of the principles
of cooperation and dialogue among States, laws
governing international trade and related conventions.
By adhering to the principles enshrined in the
United Nations Charter and the spirit of all relevant
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, we
reaffirm our commitment to the norms of international
law by supporting the need to eliminate coercive
economic measures as a means of political and
economic persuasion.
Attendance by delegations of the General
Assembly at debates is a good measure of the
importance of the issue on the agenda. In that
connection, I wish to warmly greet and welcome the
presence of Mr. Pérez Roque, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba.
Delegations participate very actively in the
debate on the question of the embargo imposed on
Cuba by the United States and vote overwhelmingly
year after year against that embargo, which is a clear
indication of the injustice and unpopularity of the
United States measure.
In view of the above, the Angolan Government
supports draft resolution A/63/L.4 submitted by Cuba
under the current agenda item, since the embargo
contravenes international law and flagrantly violates
the sovereign equality of States and the principles of
non-intervention and non-interference in domestic
affairs.

13

A/63/PV.33

Mr. Kapambwe (Zambia): Earlier in the day, the
representatives of Antigua and Barbuda and Egypt
made statements on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China and the Non-Aligned Movement, respectively.
My delegation wishes to associate itself with both
those statements.
My delegation would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report contained in document A/63/93,
entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”. The report
reiterates the position of the General Assembly over
the years to the effect that the embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba hurts innocent
people in Cuba.
Last year, and indeed in previous years, Zambia
was among the overwhelming majority of States
Members of the United Nations that voted in favour of
General Assembly resolution 62/3, calling for the
lifting of the embargo.
Zambia has consistently expressed concern over
the continued economic embargo imposed by the
United States against Cuba, not only because it is
unjust towards the people of Cuba, but also because its
unilateral and extraterritorial effects are a breach of the
international principles of free trade and navigation
espoused by the United Nations.
Zambia will again vote in favour of draft
resolution A/63/L.4, entitled “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo by the
United States of America against Cuba”. Our vote is
based on our firm commitment to strengthen universal
respect for international law in the conduct of all forms
of relations among sovereign States and our belief in
the sanctity of the Charter of the United Nations. We
further believe that differences between the United
States of America and Cuba should be resolved through
dialogue and negotiation.
Zambia reaffirms its appeal to the international
community to support the call for the immediate lifting
of the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against Cuba.
Mr. Godard (United States of America): The
position of the United States on this draft resolution
(A/63/L.4) is well known. Each of the States Members
of the United Nations has the sovereign right to
conduct its own trade with another country as it sees

14

fit, subject only to the treaty obligations it has freely
undertaken.
As a bilateral issue relating to the efforts of the
United States to mitigate the impact of the repressive
policies of the Cuban Government towards its own
people, we believe it is highly inappropriate that the
General Assembly of the United Nations consider that
resolution. As we have noted in the past, at various
times many other States or regional groups have taken
actions to restrict their exports to and imports from
other States for a variety of reasons. There is no doubt
that Member States represented here today would
vigorously defend their right to determine their own
national trade policy if it were called into question.
Cuba asserts that the economic sanctions imposed
by the United States on the Cuban Government cause
serious damage to the welfare of the Cuban people. In
fact, as we have conclusively demonstrated since the
General Assembly first began debating this draft
resolution in 1992, the trade policy of the United States
towards Cuba is carefully designed to allow the Cuban
people access to food and humanitarian goods, but to
limit the ability of Cuba’s repressive Government to
benefit and consolidate power through its authoritarian
control over the Cuban economy. Above all, our trade
policy seeks to keep away from Cuba’s leaders
resources that they would use to strengthen their
repressive political and economic system.
Indeed, the American people remain the largest
providers of humanitarian aid to the Cuban people. In
2007, the American people provided $240.5 million in
private humanitarian assistance. That was in the form
of gift parcels filled with food and other basic
necessities to the tune of $179.4 million. Also, there
were non-agricultural humanitarian donations of $20.6
million and medical donations of $40.5 million.
In addition to offering Government assistance,
the United States has increased existing authorizations
for
United
States-based
non-governmental
organizations to provide larger amounts of
humanitarian assistance, including in the form of cash
donations, to help address the basic needs of the Cuban
people. We have already authorized over $10 million in
private cash donations.
In 2008, the United States has been especially
sensitive to the plight of the Cuban people in light of
the devastation suffered throughout the Caribbean.
Cuba has suffered great damage from hurricanes Gustav

08-57511

A/63/PV.33

and Ike since the end of August. Some assistance has
been delivered through non-governmental relief and
humanitarian organizations, but more is needed to help
the Cuban people, and, under those extraordinary
circumstances, the United States Government stands
ready to provide that assistance.
On four separate occasions, the United States
Government has offered to provide the Cuban people
with up to $5 million in emergency humanitarian
assistance for those in dire need. On 3 September 2008,
the United States Government issued a disaster
declaration in response to the damage caused by
Hurricane Gustav and made available an initial
$100,000 in cash relief assistance to humanitarian
organizations working in Cuba.
The United States Government also offered to
provide a humanitarian assessment team — something
we usually do in such instances — to assist in
producing rapid emergency assessments of health,
sanitation, water, shelter and food supply to help in the
organization of the relief effort. That offer was rejected
by the Cuban Government.
In the wake of the damage caused by Hurricane
Ike, the United States Government set aside an
additional $200,000 for non-governmental relief
organizations and reiterated our offer to provide a
humanitarian assessment team. Again, the Cuban
Government rejected our offer.
On 13 September of this year, as information on
the extensive damage from the hurricanes became
known, the United States Government offered a relief
package of roughly $5 million that included an
unconditional offer of humanitarian assistance to
benefit 135,000 Cuban hurricane victims and continued
assistance to non-governmental organizations. For the
third time, the Cuban Government rejected our offer.
On 19 September 2008, the United States
Government offered unconditionally to provide relief
supplies directly to the Cuban Government at a value
of approximately $5 million. Those supplies are
composed of family emergency shelters and household
kits that could assist up to 48,000 Cubans affected by
the hurricanes. The Cuban Government has not
responded to that offer of assistance.
As is well known, United States law permits the
sale of medicine, medical supplies and agricultural
products to Cuba. Indeed, the United States is Cuba’s

08-57511

top supplier of food. United States producers exported
$448 million in agricultural products to Cuba in 2007.
Since Hurricane Ike struck on 7 September, the United
States has licensed $396 million in agricultural sales to
Cuba. Lumber, an important construction material, is
included in the category of agricultural sales. The
United States has authorized $53 million in
humanitarian donations by United States entities to
hurricane victims, including building materials to help
storm victims to repair their homes. We have also
authorized gift parcel consolidators to export $124
million in gift parcels to Cuba.
Despite that clear demonstration of United States
interest in the welfare of the Cuban people, Cuban
officials, including the chief of mission in Washington,
Jorge Bolaños Suárez, continue to make outrageous
statements about the nature of the United States
sanctions. It is indicative of the lack of interest that the
Castro regime has in the well-being of its own people
that it would refuse sincere offers of assistance,
choosing instead to prolong their suffering as a pretext
for proposing draft resolutions such as the one on
which we will vote today.
In conclusion, let me remind the Assembly that
the real reason that the Cuban economy is in terrible
condition and that so many Cubans remain mired in
poverty is that Cuba’s regime continues to deny its
people their basic human and economic rights. Indeed,
one Latin American observer described Cuba as an
“undeveloping” country thanks to the policies of the
Castro regime that have turned it from one of the
region’s most prosperous economies into one of its
poorest. We again invite Member States, as we have
done consistently in debating this draft resolution in
past years, to reject the false arguments of the Cuban
Government and to focus on effecting a transition in
Cuba that would restore its people’s fundamental
rights.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): As this is the first time that I have
addressed the General Assembly at its present session,
I wish to express my deepest satisfaction at seeing you,
Sir, an example of the dignity of our people, leading
our deliberations. We know that your commitment to
peace and justice will guide our work. As always, you
have Nicaragua’s full support with a view to success in
your efforts.

15

A/63/PV.33

Nicaragua aligns itself with the statements made
by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and by the representative of
Antigua and Barbuda on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China.

and demand an immediate end to this criminal
blockade. We reiterate that disputes between States
must be addressed through dialogue and negotiation,
without any preconditions and on an equal footing
between the parties involved.

Once again, we are meeting as a result of the
imperative need to put an end to the economic,
commercial and financial blockade imposed by the
Government of the United States of America against
the heroic and generous people and Government of
Cuba, and the General Assembly will adopt a draft
resolution calling for an end to that criminal and
inhumane blockade. It has been amply demonstrated
that no one in the world supports that measure. It is
truly sad to see that the Government of a people as
generous as the people of the United States is capable
of being so mean-spirited and greedy as to try to crush
the spirit of independence, self-determination and
internationalist solidarity that characterizes the
Government and the people of Cuba — a spirit that
they will never give up.

Despite this blockade, and the restrictions that it
imposes, there is no people that, at times of need or
disaster, has not received the disinterested aid, support
and humanitarian assistance of all those Cuban doctors,
teachers and technicians, who live among our people,
sharing our hopes and dreams for a more humane
world.

What suffering in human, social, economic and
cultural terms has been caused to the Cuban people by
these policies of the Government of the United States!
This blockade and this suffering must end. We cannot
allow a country to continue to manipulate international
law and the Charter of the United Nations according to
its whim. How many more draft resolutions will the
General Assembly have to adopt to put an immediate
end to this criminal blockade?
Cases such as this lead us to think about the
imperative need to make General Assembly resolutions
binding and mandatory, so that we can truly promote,
defend and deepen democracy and its values in our
great House, the United Nations family. No argument
that the United States of America can use will ever
justify this aggression against and violation of
international law, the norms of coexistence among
nations, international freedom of trade and navigation
and the United Nations Charter itself, which all of us
claim to defend and respect.
Nicaragua condemns in the strongest terms those
policies of pressure and blackmail. It was not so long
ago that Nicaragua was a victim of the same policy of
blockade and blackmail, including external military
aggression, by the Government of the United States of
that era. Once again, we express our unconditional
solidarity with the Government and the people of Cuba

16

We await the moment when good sense and
intelligence will prevail, when we will become
witnesses to a genuine change that will redress these
obsolete policies that do not contribute to peace,
development or strengthening good relationships
among peoples.
In recent months, American media have been
reporting about an historic opportunity in the society of
that country, referring to change. We hope that the
change, about which so much has been said, will be
positive change, similar to what is happening in Latin
America and the Caribbean. We hope that these
changes will support development, respect for the
sovereign decisions of our peoples and that, once and
for all, the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba will be lifted.
We wish to express our affection, respect and
admiration for the five Cuban patriotic heroes, who
have served ten years in maximum security prisons in
the United States. We demand the immediate release of
these five heroes, who sacrificed themselves to defend
their homeland and combat the terrorism that is exerted
against the Cuban people.
In conclusion, we would like to recognize
Commandante Fidel as one of the greatest fighters for
peace and solidarity of our days. The light of hope that
was lit by the Cuban revolution can never be
extinguished by this infamous blockade.
Mr. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines): Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
associates itself with the statements made on behalf of
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77 and
China.

08-57511

A/63/PV.33

The year 2008 marks the seventeenth consecutive
year that the United Nations is considering a draft
resolution on this topic (A/63/L.4). Seventeen years
ago, this draft resolution seemed to be an apt postscript
to a troubling chapter in world history. The Berlin Wall
had come down two years earlier, the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics had been dissolved and the
so-called Iron Curtain had been lifted. The cold war
logic of dividing the world into competing spheres and
separating ideological foe from friend by blockades,
walls and embargoes was giving way to a realization
that every nation is closely interconnected, and to a
commitment to link our societies and markets together
through globalization, trade and tighter coordination.
Regional cooperation and integration flourished and
accelerated, in the European Union, the African Union,
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA),
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR) and
CARICOM, to name but a few.
Today, 17 years later, globalization — for better
and for worse — has taken hold, and the world
recognizes the fundamental interconnectedness of our
markets, our economies, our commercial interests and,
indeed, our peoples. We are one global village, with a
singular mission of eliminating artificial barriers
between and among one another.
The developments of the last 17 years, therefore,
give inexorable rise to the question: why is Cuba still
the subject of a cold war embargo, when the cold war
itself has long since ceased to exist? Seldom has a
more ill-conceived, illogical and illegal measure been
applied so punitively, and for so long to a people so
wholly undeserving of such punishment.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines wishes to take
this opportunity to extend its most profound and
heartfelt gratitude to the people of Cuba, who have
graduated over 200 Vincentian university students and
who are currently playing host to 150 more, and whose
surgeons performed operations on over 3,000 patients
who required the care of ophthalmologists. Quite
literally, they brought sight to the blind. We would like
to thank Cuba for her doctors, who bring medical care
and expertise to rural areas of our country, and for her
engineers and architects and workers, who are
currently assisting us in the construction of a hospital
and an international airport.

08-57511

As far wealthier nations and institutions have
looked askance at our developmental struggles and
offered only dubious prescriptions, platitudes and trite
clichés, the Cuban people have rolled up their sleeves
and given freely of themselves in a manner that has
touched the hearts and souls of the Vincentian people.
The United States of America has the sovereign
right to trade with whom it chooses, and Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines would not presume to advise any
State with regard to its bilateral trading arrangements.
However, the extraterritorial application of domestic
law is a violation of our Charter and a contravention of
the underpinnings of our modern notions of global
trade and international relations. It does violence to the
rights of self-determination and sovereign equality.
Further, the member States of CARICOM — all
staunch friends of the United States — also suffer from
this embargo, because it affects Cuba’s considerable
potential as the largest and most populous Caribbean
island to act as an economic engine for the region, and
engenders unnecessary tension in our peaceful waters.
The economic fate of Cuba and the wider
Caribbean cannot be subject to the whims of local
pressure groups, no matter their relative influence.
Domestic considerations cannot outweigh the
inalienable rights of over 11 million Cubans or create
exceptions to the bedrock principles of our
international community and our market systems.
The specific ideological divides that drove this
embargo no longer apply. Today, Western Europe is
buying oil piped in from Russia and shipped from Iran.
The United States is one of China’s largest trading
partners, and the capitals of unfettered laissez-faire
capitalism are now embracing nationalizations and
other massive state interventions in their free markets.
The old lines have so blurred as to become
meaningless. As an ideological tool, the embargo is a
relic of a bygone era.
This embargo has not blockaded Cuban culture,
the undeniable power of which has enriched the shores
of south Florida and the world. This embargo has not
contained Cuba’s peerless athletic brilliance, which
thrills the world in countless competitive forums. This
embargo has not thwarted Cuba’s standing in the
marketplace of ideas, where it competes on an equal
persuasive footing with others. And this embargo has
not curtailed the Cuban generosity of body and spirit to
which the poor and struggling peoples of Africa, Asia,

17

A/63/PV.33

Latin America and the Caribbean can eloquently attest.
It has only caused the unnecessary suffering of a proud
and noble people, who are nonetheless neither bowed
nor broken by what is an increasingly indefensible act.
Indeed, there is troubling anecdotal evidence that
ideological zealots and washed-up terrorists seek to
exploit the existence of this embargo to suit their own
nefarious designs. Cuba, the victim of modern
terrorism as far back as the Cubana Airlines bombing
in 1976, and the United States, cruelly and tragically
attacked as recently as 11 September 2001, have
common cause in the fight against terrorism, and both
have heroic patriots standing guard, at home and
abroad, to protect their nations against such savagery.
In a world united in the war on terrorism, the embargo
cannot stand as a flickering flame to which the moths
of barbarism are drawn.
José Martí, the apostle of Cuban independence,
once said:
“Like stones rolling down hills, fair ideas
reach their objectives despite all obstacles and
barriers. It may be possible to speed or hinder
them, but impossible to stop them.”
The necessity of ending this embargo is a fair idea
whose time has come. It has been hindered by 17 years
of obstacles thus far, but its inexorable path to fruition
is undeniable. Let us dally no longer in the dusty
corners of historical recriminations. Let us instead
agree collectively that it is time to change, to move on
with our globalized, multilateral, multicultural,
multipolar experiment, to look to the future with hope
and to correct this historical travesty.
Mr. Iddi (United Republic of Tanzania): For the
last 16 consecutive years, this Assembly has been
calling for an end to the economic, commercial and
financial embargo against Cuba. It is unfortunate that
all the calls of this body have been to no avail. Today,
for the seventeenth time, the delegation of Tanzania
joins others in renewing the appeal for the expeditious
lifting of the embargo against Cuba.
We align ourselves with the statements made by
the representatives by Antigua and Barbuda on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China and by Egypt on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report in
document A/63/93, entitled “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed

18

by the United States of America against Cuba”. The
responses from Member States, as reflected in the
Secretary-General’s report, clearly show that the
international community does not support the embargo
and that it is sympathetic to the plight of the people of
Cuba.
My delegation is seriously concerned by the
negative effect of the embargo on the social, economic
and environmental dimensions of human development
in Cuba. The embargo is severely affecting the most
vulnerable socio-economic groups of the Cuban
population, as was seen during the recent hurricanes
Gustav and Ike, when there was no consideration for
humanitarian support. We are further concerned that
the embargo severely affects the implementation of
United Nations projects and programmes in Cuba. It is
ironic that that is happening when the international
community is trying to meet internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals.
Thus the need to end the embargo against Cuba
should be viewed not only against the backdrop of
politics and power, but also on moral and humanitarian
grounds. It is our conviction that lifting the embargo
would help not only to alleviate the socio-economic
conditions and suffering of the Cuban people, but also
to promote dialogue, understanding and goodneighbourliness
among
States
and,
hence,
development, peace and security.
This Assembly cannot afford to remain
indifferent to the suffering of the people of Cuba. Our
shared history and collective experience have shown
that, in comparison to cooperation and dialogue,
isolation, the embargo and unilateralism have not been
effective. Thus we feel there is a need to encourage
dialogue between the United States of America and
Cuba. We also need to explore other approaches
beyond passing resolutions, so as to persuade the
United States of America to lift the embargo against
the Government of Cuba and its people.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
sympathy for the people and the Government of Cuba
and, in solidarity with other Member States, joins them
in calling for an end to the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed on Cuba.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Felipe Pérez Roque, Minister

08-57511

A/63/PV.33

for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cuba, to
introduce draft resolution A/63/L.4.
Mr. Pérez Roque (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President — dear Father Miguel d’Escoto — I
would like once again to welcome your election and
your presence at this debate. You are the incarnation
here today of the voice of the people, the voice of the
humble. You can rely on Cuba, Father.
As in every year since 1992, we appear before the
General Assembly to call for the lifting of the illegal
and unjust blockade imposed by the Government of the
United States against Cuba for the past almost 50
years. Seven out of every ten Cubans have spent their
entire lives under that irrational and worthless policy
that attempts, with no success, to bring our people to
their knees. The blockade is older than Mr. Barack
Obama and everyone in my generation.
The vote that is going to take place within a few
minutes is occurring in very special circumstances,
after the devastating passage of two powerful
hurricanes through Cuba, when we are just six days
away from the United States elections and against the
background of a profound international economic
crisis, to which none of our countries is immune.
The more than 500,000 homes and thousands of
schools and health institutions affected, a third of
cultivated land devastated and severe destruction of the
electrical and communications infrastructure, among
other damage, are the result of natural phenomena that
have never been seen before and that are proof of the
effects of climatic changes on the countries in the
Caribbean.
The loss of human lives was minimal because of
the enormous effort made earlier by the authorities and
the people, enabling the evacuation of and protection
for 3.2 million people in safe locations. After all, it was
Cuba, and not New Orleans at the time of hurricane
Katrina. Despite the heavy damage and devastation
caused by the hurricanes, no sick person in Cuba
lacked medical assistance. All Cuban children and the
30,000 young people from 125 countries with
scholarships to study in our universities are at this very
moment attending their classes. Not one person was or
will be neglected.
On behalf of the Government and people of Cuba,
I would like to express our deep thanks to all those
who, in one form or another, demonstrated their

08-57511

solidarity with and support for Cuba at that dramatic
juncture. To date, we have received help from 64
countries.
In contrast to the extensive solidarity received
and the affirmation made here this morning by the
representative of the Government of the United States,
to which I shall reply in good time, that Government
responded with its customary cynicism and hypocrisy.
It refused to respond to our request that we be allowed
to buy food and essential materials for reconstruction
with private credits from American companies — even
for six months. On the other hand, it attempted to
orchestrate a blatant propaganda campaign in which it
tried to accuse our Government of not looking after its
people.
As for Cuba, it has acted in keeping with its
traditional principled positions. We cannot accept
so-called assistance from those who have intensified
the blockade, sanctions and hostility against our
people. Cuba has not asked the United States
Government for any gifts. We have simply asked to be
allowed to make purchases.
Once again, the Bush Administration is lying to
the international community. It is lying when it
declares that it granted licences for $250 million in
agricultural sales to our country after the hurricanes.
Food sales have existed since 2001 and are not — as in
the attempted explanation just made here — the result
of a decision made after the devastating hurricanes to
help Cuba. Food sales have existed since 2001.
Acquiring such products is possible only under strict
measures of supervision and after a complicated and
bureaucratic process of granting licences, case by case,
by the numerous institutions of the United States
Government. Cuba, moreover, has to pay in cash and in
advance. The reality is that the United States
Government is continuously setting up more obstacles
in order to limit those purchases.
If the United States Government was really
concerned about the well-being of the Cuban people,
the only moral and ethical act would be to lift the
blockade imposed on my country in violation of the
most elemental regulations of international law and the
United Nations Charter.
To give an idea about the magnitude of the
impact of the blockade policy on the Cuban people,
just in economic terms, it would enough to say that in

19

A/63/PV.33

one year it almost equals the estimated total damages
caused by hurricanes Gustav and Ike.

sanctions that are the most extensive of any ever
imposed by the United States.

Hurricanes are natural phenomena that are
aggravated by climate changes and global warming.
Unfortunately, they cannot be avoided. The blockade is
a genocidal and illegal policy. Unlike the hurricanes,
the American authorities are able to put an end to this
policy and spare the Cuban people their prolonged
suffering.

The broad and documented report of the
Secretary-General (A/63/93) with the contribution of
118 countries and 22 international bodies and agencies,
relieves me from insisting here on the examples that
prove that there is no aspect of Cuba’s economic or
social life that is not affected by the American
blockade, from the impossibility of gaining access to
consumables
and
equipment
for
paediatric
cardiovascular surgery or for the tomography essential
to modern oncology to the persecution by fines and
imprisonment of American citizens travelling to Cuba
and even of travel agencies that promote such travel,
the United States Government ought to explain to the
Assembly why it considers Cuban children who are
suffering from heart disease to be enemies. Every year,
the representatives of the Government of the United
States lie to the Assembly when they repeat that such a
blockade does not exist, that their measures are not the
main causes of the shortages and suffering that the
Cuban people have suffered, and continue to suffer,
over the course of these years.

The economic, commercial and financial
blockade imposed by the United States Government
against Cuba is the main obstacle to both the recovery
of the Cuban people after the hurricanes and our
economic and social development. Very conservative
estimates reveal that direct accumulated damages
caused by the blockade exceed $93 billion, almost
twice our gross domestic product. At the current value
of the dollar, that equals no less than $224.6 billion. It
is not difficult to imagine all that Cuba could have
achieved if, over these almost 50 years, it had not been
subjected to that brutal economic war on a global scale.
In open contempt of the expressed will of the
international community and of 16 consecutive General
Assembly resolutions, the United States Government
during this past year adopted new and tougher
economic sanctions against Cuba. It intensified
persecution against activities of Cuban companies and
those of other countries and unleashed a mad hunt
against our international financial transactions,
including when we were trying to make our payments
to United Nations bodies. Its malice has reached such
an extent that it blocks Internet sites that have links to
our country.
On the other hand, Washington has increased, to
unprecedented levels, its financial and material support
for actions to overthrow Cuban constitutional order. To
that end, it has approved an additional $46 million for
internal subversion in Cuba and another $39 million to
maintain the illegal radio and television broadcasts
against our country. Those funds alone are eight times
greater that the so-called donation offered to Cuban
people after the hurricanes. In a report drawn up by the
Government Accountability Office of the American
Government, published in November 2007, it is
explicitly recognized that of the 20 programmes of
sanctions applied to different countries, the blockade
against Cuba constitutes an ensemble of economic

20

The blockade is not exclusively a bilateral matter
between Cuba and the United States. The
extraterritorial application of American laws and
persecution of legitimate interests of companies and
citizens of third countries — countries represented here
in this Assembly — is a subject which concerns all the
States assembled here.
The blockade also flagrantly violates the rights of
the American people. It crushes their freedom to travel,
sanctified in the very Constitution of the United States.
In recent years, the Treasury Department has toughened
its strict policy of refusing licences for religious,
professional, cultural and student exchanges between
the American and Cuban peoples. Moreover, the
blockade impedes normal relations between Cubans
residing in the United States and their relatives in Cuba.
Shortly, a new President will be elected in the
United States. He should decide whether he will admit
that the blockade is a failed policy that is steadily
causing greater isolation and discrediting his country,
or if he will stubbornly and cruelly persist in trying to
wear out the Cuban people through hunger and disease.
From this podium, I repeat that the United States
will never be able to vanquish the Cuban people.
Neither blockades nor hurricanes will be able to

08-57511

A/63/PV.33

discourage us. No human or natural force will be able
to subjugate the Cubans. By way of an example, there
are those five Cuban heroes, fighters against terrorism,
who have already spent a decade of unjust and cruel
imprisonment in American jails and who are a symbol
of the determination of our people to defend their
liberty and independence with dignity.
I am grateful to the speakers who preceded me
for their words of solidarity and encouragement to the
Cuban people. I thank them for defending the right of
Cubans, which today is also the right of every people
represented here, and for upholding the Charter and
international law.
I reject word for word the remarks made here by
the representative of the United States Government. To
him I say that those representatives of the United States
Government in this Hall should feel a sense of shame.
They are alone, in the greatest and deepest isolation.
The world supports our small defiant island. I want to
make it clear that we are not anti-American. We are
anti-imperialist. We do not profess hatred for the
American people, nor a spirit of revenge. We see the
American people also as a victim, like us, of the illegal
and absurd policy of their Government. Something
other than power and military strength is needed. They
should have figured that out by now. Moral authority is
needed.
It is true that the United States has strength, but
we have reason. It has no arguments. Every year, it
repeats the same series of irrelevant and unconnected
ideas, but we have all the valid arguments. They appear
in the documents that have been circulated today and in
our words. Its Secretary of State is not at this Assembly
not only out of arrogance, but because she has nothing
to say. Fear and shame also feature in that decision.
The United States threatens. We never threaten. We ask
for support from this Assembly with respect and
chivalry. It uses lies. We use the truth. It is punishing
our children, our elderly and our sick. We do not blame
its people. Its people are also a victim. We offered it
our doctors and their expertise to save lives and
alleviate suffering at the time of hurricane Katrina. It
did not allow us to send them. One day it will have to
answer for that decision.
Its President will be leaving office in a few days.
He tightened the embargo against Cuba to
inconceivable limits. He took the economic war against
us to a schizophrenic level. He threatened us with

08-57511

regime change, yet he will leave without achieving it.
He is the tenth to leave office repeating the same failed
illegal policy. It is true that the United States and its
policy need to change. It is true that “We need change”.
It is also true that we need to change the world in
which we live, one of demands and blackmail, and we
need to build a world in which the rights of all peoples
are respected. I affirm that “You cannot fool all the
people all the time”, as the great Abraham Lincoln
asserted, whom our people also respect and pay tribute
to.
The United States has said that its policy is very
well known, and that is true. It has said that it is
defending the right to trade between countries that
wish to do so. Its policy is very well known, but what
is not understood is why it maintains that policy when
it is rejected universally and by its own people. It can
decide not to trade with a country, but it does not have
the right to persecute its own businessmen because
they want to trade with or invest in Cuba, let alone
persecute businessmen of other countries under the
Helms-Burton law or other extraterritorial legislation.
It asks the Assembly not to consider the draft
resolution that Cuba has put forward (A/63/L.4).
Before the General Assembly, we insist on the
importance and need to consider this draft resolution
and to adopt it, because what is at stake here is not just
Cuba’s right, but the right of all.
The United States has talked about a dance of
millions. It has repeated many figures — millions that
it supposedly has offered. It is true that it offered us $5
million four times and we refused it, because our
dignity cannot be bought for $5 million, or for $500
million, or for $5 billion or for $500 billion. That is
what we said, if that is what they had in mind. It has
said that the words of Ambassador Jorge Bolanos, chief
of the Cuban Interests Section in Washington, are
unacceptable. Here I say once again, word for word:
the embargo is a genocidal, illegal policy and should
be lifted immediately, respecting the cry that has
already been endorsed 16 times by this Assembly.
Finally, I would like to convey the feeling
currently rousing our people and our island. They are
closely following this debate. When my son was born
in 1995, this Assembly had already voted against the
United States blockade against Cuba. Now my son is
13 years old. When my daughter was born in 2000, this
Assembly had already voted eight times against the

21

A/63/PV.33

embargo. Now my daughter is eight years old. How
much longer will Cuban children and young people
have to wait for justice? How long will the Cuban
people, who have received the unanimous support of
this Assembly, have to wait before their rights are
recognized and justice is done? How much longer will
North American young people have to run the risk of
being fined or jailed because they want to come to
Cuba, visit our universities and meet our students? For
how much longer will it be considered a crime for a
citizen of a third country, one of the countries
represented here today, to try to trade with or invest in
Cuba? How much longer will there be an attempt to
subjugate, through hunger and disease, children such as
mine, who live in Cuba and dream and believe that a
better world is possible, a world in which the dignity,
independence and self-determination of all peoples are
respected?
The representative of the United States has asked
this Assembly not to support our draft resolution. We
respectfully call upon all members to support Cuba, to
support our rights and to support our draft resolution.
On behalf of the Cuban people, who have proved a
thousand times their heroic nature, who, despite
adversity, have not been and will not be defeated and
whose hope and happiness has not been embargoed or
extinguished, I once again call on the solidarity of this
Assembly. On behalf of the Cuban people, who put
their faith in the decision that members must make in a
few moments, I ask that members vote in favour of the
draft resolution entitled “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/63/L.4. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,

22

Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of)
Draft resolution A/63/L.4 was adopted by 185
votes to 3, with 2 abstentions (resolution 63/7).

08-57511

A/63/PV.33

The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of vote on the
resolution just adopted, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The candidate countries Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Montenegro, the country of the
European Free Trade Area Iceland, member of the
European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine and the
Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
explanation of vote.
Mr. Siles Alvarado (Bolivia), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
The European Union believes that the United
States trade policy towards Cuba is fundamentally a
bilateral issue. Nonetheless, the European Union and
its member States have clearly expressed their
opposition to the extraterritorial extension of the
United States embargo, as contained in the Cuban
Democracy Act of 1992 and the Helms-Burton Act of
1996.
The European Union cannot accept that unilateral
measures imposed by the United States on specific
countries limit the Union’s economic and commercial
relations with third countries, in this case Cuba.
Therefore, in November 1996, the Council of Ministers
of the European Union adopted a regulation and a joint
action to protect the interests of natural or legal
persons resident in the European Union against the
extraterritorial effects of the Helms-Burton Act,
prohibiting compliance with that law.
Moreover, on 18 May 1998, at the European
Union-United States summit held in London, a package
was agreed that included waivers to titles III and IV of
the Helms-Burton Act; a commitment by the United
States Administration to resist future extraterritorial
legislation of that kind; and rules of conduct in order to
protect investments. The European Union continues to
urge the United States to implement the commitments
it undertook under the 18 May 1998 agreement.
The European Union’s policy towards Cuba is
clear and was set out in a common position in 1996.

08-57511

The objective of the European Union in its relations
with Cuba is to encourage a peaceful transition
process, led by the Cuban people, to a pluralist
democracy, respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, sustainable economic recovery and
improvement in the living standards of the Cuban
people.
The President returned to the Chair.
While reaffirming the validity of the common
position of 1996, this past June the European Union
decided to lift the restrictive measures against Cuba
and propose a dialogue without preconditions to the
Havana authorities, based on reciprocity and nondiscrimination. The Cuban Government accepted the
offer, and a ministerial political dialogue session was
held in Paris on 16 October. The dialogue addressed all
the issues of common interest, including human rights,
an area in which Europeans expect concrete action
from the authorities in Havana. In addition, the
European Union will continue its dialogue with civil
society and the democratic opposition.
In recent months, the human rights situation in
Cuba has seen a few positive developments: Cuba’s
signing of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; the visit of the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the right to food
and the possibility of visits from other rapporteurs; and
the commutation of death sentences to prison
sentences.
However, the human rights situation in Cuba has
not fundamentally changed, despite a decrease in the
number of political prisoners and acts of harassment.
The Cuban Government continues to deny its citizens
internationally recognized civil, political and economic
rights and freedoms. The European Union once again
urges the Cuban Government to release unconditionally
all political prisoners. That is one of the major priorities
of the Union’s policy concerning Cuba. In particular, the
European Union expressed utmost concern about the
deteriorating health of several political prisoners who
are members of the group of 75 political prisoners
detained since March 2003, and calls upon the Cuban
authorities to release them immediately. The European
Union also reiterates its call on the Cuban Government
to grant freedom of expression and free access to
information.

23

A/63/PV.33

The Cuban Government’s achievements in health
care and education are undermined by its restrictions
on civil, political and economic rights. Domestic
Cuban economic policy and the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States
seriously hamper the economic development of Cuba,
negatively affecting the standards of living of the
Cuban people.
With regard to the United States of America, we
express our rejection of all unilateral measures against
Cuba, which are contrary to the commonly accepted
rules of international trade. We reaffirm our belief that
the lifting of the United States trade embargo would
help open Cuba’s economy, to the benefit of the Cuban
people. With regard to Cuba, the European Union urges
the Cuban authorities to bring about real improvements
in all the fields I have mentioned.
For all of those reasons, and in spite of the
serious criticisms arising as a result of Cuba’s human
rights record, the European Union unanimously voted
in favour of the resolution just adopted.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour of taking the floor on behalf of the
Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR) and
associated States: Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia,
Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and my own country, Brazil.
As in past years, the MERCOSUR States parties
and associated States voted in favour of the draft
resolution proposed by the Cuban delegation, as we
believe that the embargo against that country is in
violation of international law and is contrary to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The
embargo has previously been condemned here in the
United Nations and in other forums and international
organizations such as the Organization of American
States, the Latin American Economic System, the Latin
American Summit and the Rio Group summits.
The position of MERCOSUR is based on the
broader principle of defending multilateralism, nonintervention and the peaceful settlement of disputes,
which are the fundamental principles of diplomacy in
South America. The embargo against Cuba is not in
line with the rules of the World Trade Organization,
which regulate international trade through agreements
that are binding for its members.

24

MERCOSUR member States and associated
States condemn the application of unilateral coercive
measures that impede free trade, that cause irreparable
damage to the well-being of peoples and that obstruct
the processes of regional integration. MERCOSUR and
its associated States reject as a matter of principle
unilateral and extraterritorial measures. That is another
reason why we voted in favour of the draft resolution
proposed by the Cuban delegation.
In voting in favour of this resolution,
MERCOSUR and its associated States reiterated their
commitment to multilateralism as a legitimate tool for
dispute settlement between States and an effective
instrument to promote international cooperation,
human rights, security and understanding among
peoples.
Mrs. Phommachanh (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): The Lao People’s Democratic Republic
associates itself with the statements made by the
representative of Antigua and Barbuda on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China and by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic reiterates
its opposition to the continued unilateral imposition of
the economic, commercial and financial embargo upon
the Republic of Cuba by the Government of the United
States of America. The embargo, with its
extraterritorial implications, is in direct violation of the
principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter.
Furthermore, it continues to cause untold suffering and
hardship for the Cuban people and to hinder Cuba’s
progress in terms of socio-economic development.
The adoption of the relevant resolutions with the
overwhelming support of the General Assembly for 16
consecutive
years
indicates
the
international
community’s rejection of unilateral coercive economic
measures in general and to the economic, commercial
and financial embargo against Cuba in particular. The
resolution just adopted once again confirms the
friendship and solidarity of the international
community with the Cuban people and calls for the
immediate and unconditional lifting of the embargo
against Cuba.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic believes
in the importance of resolving differences between
countries through peaceful dialogue and negotiation on
the basis of equality and mutual respect for
sovereignty. In that respect, the Lao People’s

08-57511

A/63/PV.33

Democratic Republic reaffirms its continued support
for the General Assembly’s resolutions on this item and
voted in favour of the resolution just adopted.
Mrs. Wahab (Indonesia): The delegation of
Indonesia recognizes the importance of the Assembly’s
having adopted resolution 63/7, which deals with the
necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo against Cuba. In addressing this
issue, Indonesia aligns itself with the statements made
by the representative of Antigua and Barbuda on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China and by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Indonesia voted in favour of the resolution, as we
consistently and strongly believe that the actions
highlighted in the resolution run counter to the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and the right of peoples to life, well-being and
development without distinctions of any kind.
Indonesia is in full agreement with the rest of the
international community on this issue. We urge an end
to the economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba.
Mr. Swe (Myanmar): Myanmar joined the
overwhelming majority of Member States in voting in
favour of the resolution just adopted, entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”.
Myanmar adheres to the five principles of peaceful
coexistence, which are the cornerstone of our foreign
policy. It is our strong belief that peace, security and
stability can be promoted only through mutual respect,
peaceful coexistence and non-interference in the internal
affairs of other countries.
The embargo imposed on Cuba not only runs
counter to the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, it also violates the
fundamental principle of the sovereignty, equality and
right to development of the peoples of all nations.
Furthermore, the promulgation and application by the
United States of extraterritorial laws and regulations
that affect the sovereignty of other States, the
legitimate interests of entities or persons under their
jurisdiction and freedom of trade and navigation
violate universally accepted principles of international
law.

08-57511

My delegation strongly feels that the United
States should heed the call by the international
community and immediately put an end to the embargo
against Cuba. The embargo does not in any way
promote peace and stability in the region but instead
has serious negative impacts on the social, political and
economic development of the people of Cuba. My
delegation therefore voted in favour of the resolution.
Mr. Rachkov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
General Assembly is once again discussing the
question of the imposition on Cuba of an economic,
commercial and financial embargo. Once again, here in
this Hall, we have seen virtually unanimity regarding
the necessity of ending the embargo and lifting the
restrictions, which are damaging the vital interests of
the people of Cuba and are indeed inhumane.
Belarus opposes the sanctions and the unilateral
coercive measures imposed against Cuba. The
sanctions are particularly inappropriate at a time when
humankind is grappling with a number of global
problems. The financial crisis, the resulting decline in
economic development and the fact that the sustainable
development of States is increasingly dependent on a
wide range of factors, from building a just system of
international trade to overcoming climate change,
means that we must jointly face these challenges and
counter them. In this new global context, there is no
place for unilateral sanctions. By voting in favour of
the resolution just adopted, we are calling on the
United States to put an end to the embargo against the
Republic of Cuba, an embargo that has been
condemned by the international community.
Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to state very briefly that we align ourselves
with the statements made on behalf of the Group of 77
and China, the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Common Market of the South and associated States.
My delegation voted in favour of the resolution
on the necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba, in keeping with the principles
of international law, the United Nations Charter and the
recommendations adopted by the General Assembly.
The Government and the new constitution of
Ecuador condemn the imposition of unilateral coercive
measures, reject the threat or use of force to solve
disputes and defend the principles of multilateralism,
non-intervention and the peaceful settlement of

25

A/63/PV.33

disputes. With that vote, Ecuador would like to
reiterate its commitment to defending those principles
and express its solidarity with the people of Cuba,
whose most basic rights are being violated. Ecuador
appeals to our common reason and intelligence to put
an end to the blockade against Cuba. We feel that it is
not only a violation of international law but also an
attack on the human rights, dignity, freedom and
happiness of the Cuban people.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation too would like briefly to echo
the statements made by the representative of Antigua
and Barbuda on behalf of the Group of 77 and China
and the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. The text of our complete
statement will be available to delegations; I will now
deliver a summary of that text.
Despite repeated appeals by the General
Assembly over the past 16 consecutive years, the
Government of the United States of America has thus
far done nothing to comply with the wishes of the
international community. It deliberately and stubbornly
maintains its misguided position, disregarding the just
demands of the international community. In addition,
the authorities of the United States of America have
introduced new measures to tighten the blockade
against Cuba, a sovereign and independent State.
The behaviour of the United States and the
measures it has taken are detrimental to the
independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Cuba and constitute a direct threat to the
stability of the region and a blatant threat to
international peace and security.
In accordance with its jurisdiction, the Assembly
is duty-bound to take the necessary measures to put an
end to the economic sanctions, the embargo and the
antagonistic policies of the United States against its
immediate geographical neighbours and against other,
more distant, States.
In that connection, my delegation hopes that the
embargoes imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba and against numerous other States,
including my country, the Syrian Arab Republic, will
be lifted. We also hope that the United States of
America will respect the voice of the international
community as expressed here in the Assembly and that
the institutions and other entities of that country will
abide by the wishes of the international community in

26

full. We therefore voted in favour of the resolution just
adopted.
It was striking to note Israel’s anomalous vote
against the resolution just adopted, which was backed
by the overwhelming majority of Member States.
Israel’s vote against the overwhelming majority is
proof that it, too, pays no heed to international law and
is part of an isolated minority in the international
community. Israel’s vote was highly detrimental to the
United States of America.
Successive United States policies since the
imposition of the unjust blockade on Cuba have used a
variety of creative means to violate international law.
These have taken on dangerous dimensions, due to the
inconsistency
of
the
mechanisms
governing
international relations in dealing with misguided
United States policies towards the peoples and
countries of the world. An inability to make use of
established accountability mechanisms does not mean
that history will fail to hold the United States of
America responsible for its misguided decisions, which
are in violation of international law. These include
military invasions of States; changing Governments by
force; fabricating internal disturbances in countries to
pressure their Governments; arming aggressors;
imposing unjust blockades and unilateral economic
sanctions against States; conducting trials and
establishing mobile prisons and detention centres
outside the framework of international law; and
committing flagrant acts of aggression against the
borders of other States, including my country, the
Syrian Arab Republic.
The question is: are those misguided American
practices in conformity with the noble principles of the
founding fathers and past leaders of the United States
of America, such as George Washington, John Adams,
Abraham Lincoln and Woodrow Wilson? I leave the
answer to be given by American officials.
Mrs. Juul (Norway): Norway considers the
United States embargo against Cuba to be
fundamentally a bilateral issue. We support sanctions
when they are adopted by the international community
through the United Nations. But we cannot support the
extraterritorial extension of unilateral measures against
a third country. Therefore, we cannot accept that
unilateral measures imposed by the United States
should determine Norway’s relations with Cuba.

08-57511

A/63/PV.33

Norway is encouraged by some positive
developments in the area of human rights in Cuba.
Cuba recently signed the International Covenants on
Civil and Political Rights and on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights. The visit of the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the right to food is a positive step. We
particularly welcome the commutation of death
sentences to prison sentences.
Nevertheless, Norway remains concerned about
the protection and promotion of human rights in Cuba.
We also reiterate our call on the Cuban Government to
grant freedom of expression and free access to
information.
Norway does not consider isolation to be an
appropriate response to the developments in Cuba.
More can be achieved through a constructive dialogue
with the Government of Cuba. Moving forward,
Norway intends to contribute to such a dialogue.
For those reasons, Norway just voted — as in
previous years — for the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Butagira (Uganda): As it has consistently
done in the past, my delegation voted in favour of the
resolution opposing the economic, commercial and
financial embargo against Cuba. It has gone beyond a
bilateral matter. The embargo is unjustified. It has had
an adverse impact on the people of Cuba for too long.
Furthermore, we do not support unilateral
measures with extraterritorial application, which we
believe are inconsistent with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have now
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote.
Once again we, the international community, the
entire world, the representatives of “we the peoples”,
in whose names the United Nations was founded, have
expressed our rejection of the illegal and criminal
blockade imposed on Cuba, a heroic country of

08-57511

unfailing solidarity. We have also heard many
statements of respect and appreciation for our brother
Fidel Castro and all his noble people.
As President of the General Assembly, it is up to
me, inter alia, in all times and in all places to defend
the letter and the spirit of our Charter, taking into
account the fact that the cause of peace obliges all of
us to respect and enforce respect for the principles and
standards set out in the Charter. There is nothing more
counter to the spirit and letter of the Charter than the
blockade maintained by the United States against
Cuba. The blockade against Cuba, which has so rightly
been repudiated and condemned with a unanimity from
which it seems only the aggressor is excluded, must be
ended once and for all.
In view of recent events in Cuba and the damage
caused by Hurricane Ike, which hit the island right
after Hurricane Gustav, maintaining that blockade, in
addition to all that has been said already on the subject,
is clearly an act of extreme cruelty. Cuba deserves all
our respect, our love and our solidarity.
I pray that our dear brothers and sisters who have
insisted on maintaining that criminal blockade against
Cuba at all costs will find within themselves the moral
strength to set themselves free from this unwholesome
stubbornness and will then be able to put an immediate
end to the blockade.
To Fidel, who is undeniably a hero of
international solidarity, and to all the wonderful people
of Cuba, I express our unwavering respect and
solidarity. We will do everything possible — and
impossible — to ensure that the overwhelming opinion
manifested here in the United Nations is no longer
flouted. Viva Cuba!
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to conclude its consideration of agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

27
