S/PV.7499

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7499th meeting

Thursday, 30 July 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mc Cully/Mr. Van Bohemen/Mr. Taula. . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Augusto
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Riveros Marín
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Kononuchenko
Mr. Gracia Aldaz
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Ms. Rodríguez de Febres-Cordero

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Peace and security challenges facing small island developing States
Letter dated 15 July 2015 from the Permanent Representative of New Zealand to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/543)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-23782 (E)
*1523782*

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Peace and security challenges facing small
island developing States
Letter dated 15 July 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of New Zealand
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2015/543)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Heads of State and Government, the Secretary-General,
Ministers and other distinguished representatives
present in the Chamber. Their participation is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedures, I invite the
representatives of Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Australia, the Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Botswana,
Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus, the Dominican
Republic, Estonia, Egypt, Fiji, Georgia, Germany,
Haiti, India, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Luxembourg, Maldives, the
Marshall Islands, Mexico, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Morocco, Nauru, the Netherlands, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland, the Republic
of Korea, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sweden, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine and
Uruguay to participate in this meeting.
I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi, Prime
Minister of Samoa, to his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi, Prime Minister
of Samoa, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.
The President: I request the Protocol Officer to
escort Her Excellency Mrs. Portia Simpson Miller,
Prime Minister of Jamaica, to her seat at the Council
table.

2/87

30/07/2015

Mrs. Portia Simpson Miller, Prime Minister of
Jamaica, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I welcome
His Excellency Mr. Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi and
Her Excellency Mrs. Portia Simpson Miller.
On behalf of the Council, I also welcome His
Excellency Mr. Jean-Paul Adam, Minister of Finance
of the Seychelles.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Toke Talagi, the Premier of Niue, and His
Excellency Mr. Mark Brown, Minister of Finance of the
Cook Islands, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/543, which contains a letter dated
15 July 2015 from the Permanent Representative of
New Zealand to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank New Zealand
and His Excellency Mr. Murray McCully, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of New Zealand, for taking this very
important and timely initiative to highlight the peace
and security challenges facing small island developing
States. I welcome the high level of participation in
this debate, and thank Their Excellencies the Prime
Minister of Jamaica, the Prime Minister of Samoa
and the Minister of Finance of the Seychelles for their
participation. I also take this opportunity to express my

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

deepest thanks to the many ministers who have taken
time to participate in this debate, and thank President
Anote Tong of Kiribati for his participation.
I hope that today’s debate of the Security Council
will have a very big impact on and make a great
contribution to the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (COP 21), to be held in Paris in December.
Last year’s Third International Conference on
Small Island Developing States, held in Samoa,
increased global attention not only to their
contributions to sustainable development, but also to
their unique vulnerabilities. The issues facing small
island developing States (SIDS) are global challenges.
They are our collective responsibility. Our first priority
must be to support SIDS in achieving the Millennium
Development Goals. In spite of considerable efforts,
progress has been uneven.
Secondly, we need a post-2015 development agenda
and sustainable development goals that address the
needs of SIDS. At the recent International Conference
on Financing for Development, held in Addis Ababa,
it was encouraging to see the concerns of SIDS
reflected, including in such critical areas as debt, trade,
technology and official development assistance. Earlier
this month, I participated in a summit meeting of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) held in Barbados.
The leaders of CARICOM, whose countries are also
SIDS, all expressed these concerns and described these
vulnerabilities. I hope that our debate will really make
a great contribution to addressing the challenges and
vulnerabilities of SIDS.
Thirdly, we need to achieve a meaningful and
universal global climate agreement in Paris in December.
SIDS are on the front lines of climate change. Cyclone
Pam in Vanuatu was only the latest in a long string of
devastating events that SIDS have endured and will
continue to endure as long as climate change is not
adequately addressed. Caribbean countries sometimes
experience as many as five hurricanes in a season.
The Security Council has rightly highlighted the
threat of climate change to international peace and
security. Rising sea levels, dying coral reefs and the
increasing frequency and severity of natural disasters
exacerbate the conditions leading to community
displacement and migration. They threaten to increase
tensions over resources and affect domestic and regional
stability.

S/PV.7499

Over the years, SIDS leaders have consistently
called for global climate action. And they have been
leading by example. Many SIDS have been accelerating
their own transition to renewable energy to secure a
sustainable energy future. We must support SIDS in
their actions to combat climate change and adapt to
its impacts. To that end, we need a politically credible
trajectory for mobilizing the pledged $100 billion per
year by 2020. The Green Climate Fund will need to be
up and running before COP 21 in Paris in December,
with projects and funding ready to go, especially for
the most vulnerable. And, finally, we will need to
ensure that a meaningful, universal climate agreement
is adopted.
Climate change is not the only peace and security
challenge facing the peoples and Governments of
SIDS. SIDS are also focusing as never before on the
menace of transnational organized crime. The threats
include drug trafficking, human trafficking, piracy
and wildlife crime. Caribbean SIDS are vulnerable
to drug-trafficking and gang-related violence, which
affect security and development. And with exclusive
economic zones often larger than their land areas,
SIDS also face the challenge of managing fisheries
and preventing illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing, which undermines economies and contribute
to insecurity.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
through its Maritime Crime Programme, is focusing on
heroin trafficking, human trafficking, wildlife crime
and fisheries crime. The programme works with States
to introduce legislation, in line with international
conventions, that will help to improve investigations
and strengthen criminal justice responses against
maritime crime. On piracy, Mauritius and Seychelles
have been at the forefront of international cooperation
in the Indian Ocean to apprehend and prosecute Somali
pirates.
CARICOM and the Pacific Islands Forum
have helped focus the attention of the international
community on the heightened vulnerabilities that SIDS
face and demand that the international community be
attuned to these issues. But small island developing
States do not have the resources to combat such threats
by themselves. We can only secure their sustainable
and peaceful future through global partnership.
Some 20 years ago, in Barbados, Governments made
a global commitment to the sustainable development of

15-237823/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

SIDS (see A/CONF.167/9). That bond was strengthened
in Mauritius in 2005 (see A/CONF.207/11, Annex
II). Now we have the Small Island Developing States
Accelerated Modalities of Action (General Assembly
resolution 69/15, Annex) to guide us. Combatting
climate change, promoting sustainable development
and addressing the vulnerabilities of SIDS will demand
partnership, capacity and leadership. Today, let us
commit the resources of the United Nations system as a
reliable partner to small island developing States as we
work together for sustainable development and a life of
dignity for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the Prime
Minister of Samoa.
Mr. Malielegaoi (Samoa): Today’s debate dedicated
to addressing peace and security challenges facing small
island developing States is a rarity in this Chamber. The
Government of New Zealand is to be commended for
this timely initiative, and we are grateful to members
of the Security Council for providing a platform so
that peace and security issues from the perspectives of
small island developing States can be the focus of the
Council’s time and occupy centre stage, even if only for
just a day.
The exceptional political capital demonstrated by
the high-level of participation of small island developing
States (SIDS) this morning is a strong reaffirmation that
important issues entrusted to the Security Council are
of equal priority and importance even to the smallest
Member States of the United Nations. The SIDS
message to the Council is unequivocal. No region, no
group of countries and no selective security issues
should continue to have a monopoly of the Council’s
time, attention and resources. SIDS form an important
constituency of the Security Council in their own right,
irrespective of their sizes, economic influence, political
clout or military strength. Their concerns matter like
everyone else’s in this Chamber, their voices deserve to
be heard, their views need to be understood and their
challenges considered and addressed.
The Small Island Developing States Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA Pathway) (General
Assembly resolution 69/15, Annex) is our global
pact. It is a blueprint of the needs and aspirations of
SIDS, together with the opportunities and means to
implement them. The agreed outcome of the third
International Conference on Small Island Developing
States (A/CONF.223/10) held last year categorically
reaffirmed the importance of peace and security issues
4/87

30/07/2015

for this special group. That is a part of the record of
the United Nations, and we are not inventing something
new.
To contextualize those challenges from the
perspective of the Pacific region, one can say with
confidence that we have largely maintained a peaceful
and secure environment. On the surface of it, because
we are not situated in the world’s troubled spots nor are
we homes to any of the current conflicts, it is tempting
to equate that perceived tranquility with the absence of
security challenges for our islands.
Nothing could be further from the truth. The
Pacific’s security concerns are varied, complex and
many. A great external threat stems from globalization.
The global context is changing rapidly. Relative
isolation and remoteness no longer shield us from
globalization’s reach and impacts. Our vast ocean
adds to our vulnerability in terms of security, and the
difficulty of providing effective maritime policing
and surveillance compounds that further. We have
witnessed significant serious transnational organized
crime activities in the region. They include drugs
and firearms trafficking, financial crimes and money
laundering, human trafficking and people smuggling,
labour and sexual exploitation.
Some organized crime groups and networks are
gradually becoming entrenched in our region, which
will continue to test the ability of our capacityconstrained law enforcement agencies to combat
organized crime groups. International crime is unlikely
to decrease in the immediate future. If allowed to
take a firm foothold, it will not only be detrimental to
those Pacific island countries currently affected, but
also to the entire Pacific. In response, the Pacific has
adopted a regional approach as the only viable means
to coordinate the efforts of national and regional law
enforcement agencies to facilitate information-sharing
and avoid duplication of efforts and resource wastage.
For Samoa, our Transnational Crimes Unit works
closely with the law-enforcement agencies of our
regional and international partners to help seize illicit
drugs, arrest criminal fugitives, confiscate moneylaundering proceeds and halt the misuse of social
media, to name a few.
Global interconnectedness through fast, efficient
transport links and information technology have brought
many undoubted benefits to our region. However, even
the Internet now also comes with a cautionary note of

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7499

risks to peace and security through dangerous content
and its use for criminal activities and for inflammatory
purposes, problems that our small islands’ jurisdictions
and societies are currently not well equipped to handle.
Samoa has taken steps to try to address the risks of the
Internet, but we will need the support of our partners in
order to find fully successful solutions.

acting proactively to address the root causes of other
non-conventional security issues, including HIV/AIDS,
refugee issues, children in armed conflicts, poverty
and development, and Ebola. The global response to
those challenges is a powerful illustration of what is
possible when States collaborate and cooperate to
achieve common and critical goals.

It is therefore imperative that the United Nations
and its Member States commit to tackling threats to
international peace and security, especially through the
Security Council. Our organization was founded upon
values of collective security. We continue to see the
United Nations, through the Security Council, as the key
arbiter for the maintenance of international peace and
security, stability and prosperity. That is important for
our countries, which risk a reversal of the development
gains they have made owing to external forces over
which we have little or no control. To cement and build
upon development goals already achieved, international
peace and security must be maintained, and it is the
responsibility of all Member States, particularly those
in the Security Council, to work in close cooperation to
ensure that happens.

Without putting too fine a point on it, that is why
we are here as Pacific nations and as SIDS. It is to take
up this rare opportunity to inform the Security Council
that the challenges we face, including the impacts of
climate change, present real threats to the peace and
security of our island countries and peoples. As our
modest contribution towards our collective security,
we will continue to provide police officers to United
Nations peacekeeping missions in order to honour a
commitment we made in 2000.

A fortnight ago today, the Polynesian Leaders
Group issued their Climate Declaration in Tahiti,
French Polynesia. Our declaration accepted that climate
change and its adverse impacts are a threat to territorial
integrity, security and sovereignty, and in some cases
to the very existence, of our islands because of the
submersion of existing land and the regression of our
maritime heritage.
My reference to climate change should surprise no
one. In 2013, in their Majuro Declaration for Climate
Leadership, the Pacific Forum leaders called as a
region for collective international responsibility and
action to urgently reduce and phase down greenhouse
gas pollution, including by Pacific island countries
themselves. The Samoa Pathway again recognized
that sea-level rise and other adverse impacts of climate
change continue to pose significant risks to small island
developing States and represent for many the gravest
threat to their survival and viability, including through
the loss of territory. We will therefore continue to
advocate at every available opportunity and forum, the
Security Council included, for the need for the United
Nations community to be open-minded and not to reject
out of hand the security implications of climate change.
While the Council has traditionally focused
on inter-State conflict, it has not shied away from

Today’s event has garnered so much positive spirit
and goodwill that it would be truly most unfortunate if
the debate were to be an end to itself and a once-only
occurrence. I would therefore like to conclude by placing
before you, Mr. President, and members of the Security
Council, a special request on behalf of SIDS, namely,
to consider including in the Council’s future schedule
a day dedicated to the consideration by the Council of
the peace and security challenges facing small island
developing States. That would be a tangible outcome of
our open debate today.
The President: I now give the floor to the Prime
Minister of Jamaica.
Mrs. Simpson Miller (Jamaica): It is an honour to
address the Security Council on the occasion of this
landmark open debate. I warmly congratulate New
Zealand for its presidency of the Council for the month
of July and commend you, Mr. President, for your
visionary move to focus the attention of the Council on
the peace and security challenges facing small island
developing States (SIDS).
Last September, at the Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States, held in
Samoa, the international community addressed many
of the development challenges being experienced by
this group of countries. Today, New Zealand’s initiative
to elevate these discussions to the Security Council
takes full account of the natural linkages between the
peace and security challenges faced by SIDS and the
maintenance of international peace and security.

15-237825/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

Jamaica has long advocated for a holistic approach
to addressing matters of peace and security. In doing
so, we recognize fully the intrinsic link between peace,
security and development. The classic and relatively
narrow concept of peace and security cannot be neatly
applied to the multifaceted security threats that confront
SIDS. Our debate here today is therefore timely, as we
finalize the design of a sustainable development agenda
for our people and planet for the next 15 years.
In thanking you for your kind invitation to
participate, Sir, I would like to present a Caribbean
SIDS perspective on some of the peace and security
challenges that confront us. I will also share some
thoughts on the urgent need for tangible development
financing support for SIDS. This is critical for
building resilience in the face of climate change and
for overcoming the constraints imposed by small size,
resource scarcity, geography and inappropriate global
classification based mainly on per capita income.
Small island developing States such as Jamaica are
notable for our small size and porous borders and for
being prone to natural hazards and external shocks. We
are mostly import-dependent and constrained by high
debt burdens. We are also overly dependent on external
markets, technology transfer, international capital
flows and foreign expertise. These factors reduce
our ability to mount effective national responses to
domestic, regional and global challenges to peace and
security.
In Jamaica and the wider Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) region, transnational organized crime
represents the gravest threats to our peace and security.
Extensive open coastlines facilitate various forms
of illicit trafficking in drugs, arms, ammunition
and people, particularly women and children. In our
societies, the well-known guns-for-drug trade remains
a principal strategy of the international criminal
network. Money-laundering activities also enable
transnational criminal activity to thrive in our region.
It is further cause for alarm that in 2013, 70 per cent
of all homicides committed in the Caribbean subregion
featured the use of a firearm. It is well known that we
do not manufacture weapons or drive the demand for
drugs, yet they find their way to our shores.
It must be emphasized that these activities
account for the high levels of gun-related crime that
our countries are experiencing. They combine to
undermine law and order and impede economic growth

6/87

30/07/2015

and social development. Our location makes us a prime
transit route for international narcotraffickers. If that
were not the case, the overall level of crime in the
Caribbean would be similar to what obtains in lowcrime countries. This fact is supported by the United
Nations Development Programme’s Caribbean Human
Development Report.
The question arises as to what our response has
been in the face of these challenges. I can assure the
Council that we take these threats to our security very
seriously. We have given primary focus to safety and
security within our national development plan. We
have targeted our efforts at degrading the capabilities
of organized criminal gangs and have directed
resources at addressing the shameful crime of human
trafficking, including the appointment of a rapporteur
on trafficking in persons. We have also invested heavily
in technology, equipment and training for our security
forces within the constraints of our limited resources.
However, I must emphasize that our domestic policy
responses to those threats to our peace and security,
though significant and coordinated across the
Government, are insufficient. We therefore continue to
expand our international cooperation in improving our
national security infrastructure in order to deal with
transnational organized crime. We have made important
gains in enhancing our security environment, with
notable reductions in some categories of crime.
In spite of those efforts, the illegal flow of small
arms and ammunition into our local communities
continues to pose a significant challenge to law and
order. At the regional level, we have worked with
other CARICOM Governments to establish a regional
security framework. At that framework’s centre is
CARICOM’s implementation agency for crime and
security impacts. At the United Nations, Jamaica has
been a consistent voice in the call for multilateral action
to address the issue of the illicit trade in guns under the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects. We welcome the Council’s continued
consideration of the issue of small arms, including its
recent open debate (see S/PV.7447) and adoption of
resolution 2220 (2015) on the matter. In partnership
with our CARICOM sister States, Jamaica played an
instrumental role in securing the landmark Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT). We welcome the convening of the first
Conference of States Parties to the ATT, to be held next

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7499

month in Mexico City, and look forward to the Treaty’s
full and effective implementation.

Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, in
the Sudan.

We also look forward to participating in next year’s
special session of the General Assembly on the global
drug problem. Small countries like ours must continue
to play a role in formulating strategies aimed at more
effectively countering the global trade in illicit drugs.
The success of many SIDS in stemming the drug
trade has been nothing short of remarkable given the
constraints on our resources. While we have achieved
some promising results in tackling those threats, more
must be done. However, a limited financial base, weak
technical capacity and inadequate concrete global
support continue to hamper our efforts. Stronger global
partnerships and more efficient forms of cooperation
are needed to help SIDS in their fight against the
scourge of transnational organized crime.

There are also emerging economic and social
issues that have direct and indirect effects on the peace
and security agenda. Our limited natural and human
resource bases, together with persistent and significant
external trade imbalances, have also constrained
economic growth in the region. That is compounded by
unsustainable public debt levels that in the Caribbean
average 70.5 per cent and are made worse by large
current-account and fiscal deficits. In addition, our
middle-income designation limits our ability to access
critical development financing. That jeopardizes our
ability to finance our sustainable development objectives
from domestic public resources. I would like to draw
the Council’s attention to the proposal by the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean for a
debt-relief strategy for countries like Jamaica and other
middle-income SIDS. Comprehensive debt relief for
Caribbean States that would gradually write off 100 per
cent of our multilateral debt stock is timely. In our
view, the proposal is worthy of serious consideration
and support from the international community.

I would like to turn briefly to two areas in which
we have sought to contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security. They are counterterrorism and the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. Without question, Jamaica and
other CARICOM member States remain committed to
meeting our international obligations, particularly in
relation to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004). In 2009, CARICOM instituted a region-wide
initiative aimed at fully implementing resolution 1540
(2004). Devised and constituted within the Caribbean
community, the initiative has enabled CARICOM
member States to effectively take on our responsibilities
under the resolution. We are grateful for the support of
our international partners, including the United States,
Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, Norway and
Finland. That support has helped to strengthen our
national capacities to address the threats posed by the
spread of weapons of mass destruction.
The reality is that where there is both sensitivity
to the special requirements of our region and support
enabling us to act effectively, we are better able to
contribute to global action in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We are particularly
proud of our contribution in the area of peacekeeping.
For more than two decades, Jamaica has been making
modest but impactful contributions to United Nations
peacekeeping activities through its provision of police
officers to missions in Namibia, Liberia, Sierra Leone,
Timor-Leste and Bosnia. Currently, just under 20
officers from our police force are serving in the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the African

For small island developing States, climate change
is one of the greatest challenges to our development
aspirations, and it threatens our very survival. Most of
us have been feeling the present wave of heat in the
Caribbean and certainly elsewhere. For those reasons,
robust policy action on climate change is vital to our
national, regional and global welfare. The ecosystems
of some Caribbean SIDS are already experiencing
negative effects of climate change and are approaching
the limits of their adaptive capacities. The development
of sensible climate-change policy regimes is therefore
an urgent priority. It is for that reason, and others, that
Jamaica strongly supports the adoption of a legally
binding text at the conference of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change to be held
in Paris later this year. We are in favour of a protocol
that should be applicable to all, with measurable
mitigation efforts and equal treatment for mitigation
and adaptation measures.
For us, the link between climate change and
sustainable energy is clear. That is why we are actively
pursuing renewable energy investments in solar and
wind power, as well as promoting energy conservation.
Our strategy is designed to make us independent of
our over-reliance on unsustainable fossil-fuel energy
sources. That should reduce our trade imbalance,

15-237827/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

improve our competitiveness and increase economic
growth. We must move forward in order to address both
our shared and individual security challenges. As we
do so, I ask that full account be taken of the fact that a
one-size-fits-all approach cannot provide workable and
sustainable solutions.
Based on the experiences of Jamaica and the
Caribbean region, we see the benefits of a regional
approach complemented by support from the global
community to assist in mitigating risks to our peace and
security situation. Given the great extent to which peace,
security and development concerns are interconnected,
it is essential that the entire United Nations system
work actively to overcome the special challenges facing
small developing States. We are prepared to work with
our partners to devise practical, multifaceted solutions
to those complex security challenges. That, we believe,
offers the best chance for success in achieving lasting
peace and security for our peoples. I am convinced
that, ultimately, a more secure, just and prosperous
world is the future that we all want for ourselves and
for succeeding generations.
The President: I thank Mrs. Simpson Miller for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister of Finance of
Seychelles.
Mr. Adam (Seychelles): On behalf of President
James Michel and the people of Seychelles, I would like
to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, the
Foreign Minister of New Zealand, for having provided
this platform to discuss the security challenges of small
island developing States (SIDS). We thank all members
for their support.
I would also like to convey our appreciation to
the United Nations, through the Secretary-General,
for the recognition of the specificities of SIDS, as
outlined in the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(Samoa Pathway), adopted in 2014, and for situating
today’s event as a continuation of efforts to improve
the framework available to build the resilience of small
island developing States.
The security challenges of SIDS are situated in the
context of our unique geographic character. Surrounded
by oceans, we are our planet’s “blue guardians”. But
the governance of the world’s oceanic spaces is far
removed from the security expectations that the world
has regarding its terrestrial spaces. Lawlessness and
impunity are more often than not the norm on the high
8/87

30/07/2015

seas. International criminality is often tolerated, and
prosecutions of international crimes at sea remain
uneven. Most of the world’s illegal traffic is conducted
at sea, whether it be in people, drugs or weapons. Illegal
fishing continues to undermine both national and
international regulation. Respect for this shared space
is often extended only to the degree that economic
interests are not put into question. Meanwhile, the
threat of climate change undermines the productivity
of traditional marine resources and limits opportunities
for growth. Let us be clear: climate change is the
foremost security threat for SIDS, and, arguably, for
the world as a whole.
For SIDS, our smallness and our isolation are
structural elements of our vulnerability. The increasing
threats around our oceans and the relative lack of
governance enhance this vulnerability.
With 75 per cent of our planet made up by
oceans, the weak global governance of our oceanic
spaces undermines our global security. In fact, we
are all vulnerable. Seychelles, like many SIDS, has
not accepted, however, to simply be an observer to
these processes. We are embracing the opportunity of
being large oceanic nations, looking at our ocean as
an opportunity more than as a threat. We are aiming
to better manage our oceans, setting an example of
oceanic good governance. In the context of Seychelles,
our exclusive economic zone (EEZ) extends to
1.3 million square kilometres, while we have also
agreed a shared extended continental shelf with our
neighbour Mauritius, which extends to an additional
395,000 square kilometres.
Earlier this year, we created the blue economy
department, which is part of my portfolio as the Minister
of Finance. We are staking our economic future on
better harnessing the development potential of our
ocean. To achieve this, we must recognize that moving
towards sustainable development goals, as we hope we
will agree in September, requires breaking the existing
moulds of economic development and forging new
economic opportunities from previously unsustainable
practices. In relation to African and Indian Ocean
island States, that is what the blue economy promises.
In practical terms, we are implementing the
blue economy through the development of a marine
spatial plan, whereby we define the economic and
conservation activities to be developed throughout our
EEZ. This includes the security considerations that will
be required. We are also committing 30 per cent of our
15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

exclusive economic zone as protected areas. We are
developing enhanced fisheries- management tools to
implement appropriate stock management, and we are
in discussion with international financial institutions to
raise a “blue bond” to help provide affordable financing
for such initiatives.
These initiatives are also situated within a regional
move to bolster the blue economy, notably through the
African Union’s blue economy commitments under
Agenda 2063, as well as the African Union’s Africa’s
Integrated Maritime Strategy. The Indian Ocean
Commission and the Indian Ocean Rim Association are
also developing blue-economy approaches that build
sustainable economic opportunity through research,
trade, renewable energy, shared security and maritime
infrastructure.
The phenomenon of piracy in the Indian Ocean has
underlined the challenges of security in our region, but
also those of implementing the rule of law at sea. At
the start of the problem, many naval ships that were
operating in the Indian Ocean were frustrated by the
fact that while they could interdict pirate vessels at sea,
the lack of prosecution afterwards meant that pirates
had to be released, allowing them to regroup and attack
shipping on future occasions.
Despite our capacity constraints, Seychelles took a
lead role in piracy prosecutions, because we recognize
that the rule of law is the first step towards economic
stability and growth. As long as we allow our oceans to
be ruled by lawlessness, we will not be able to properly
harness their development potential.
Through our concerted effort with international
partners such as the European Union and NATO, we
have effectively broken the piracy business model
that was operating out of Somalia by ensuring that
prosecutions take place systematically. But we cannot
afford complacency. While piracy is on the wane, the
conditions that led to piracy are still in place. We are
seeing increased activities relating to drug trafficking
and associated criminal activities.
This leads me to also mention another major
security concern for many SIDS, which is the influx
of trafficked substances that create domestic demand
for narcotics. Our small societies are often inordinately
affected by the impact of addiction among young people
and the consequences in terms of reduced productivity
and increased criminality. We are actively engaged in
twin strategies of reducing local demand while also

S/PV.7499

aggressively targeting shipments into the country. But
these are global problems, and we have to enhance our
regional and international methodologies for combating
them.
As we work to address these issues, we must also
maintain vigilance in relation to potential terrorist
threats. Al-Shabaab in Somalia has profited from the
lack of maritime capacity in our region and has used
the sea lanes to bolster its position in certain parts of
Somalia while also creating profitable trades in illicit
goods. Our region is very reliant as well on tourism,
and we must work in concert to ensure that we protect
our livelihoods, while also ensuring that the people of
Somalia do not have to live in the fear that comes with
Al-Shabaab.
All of these security challenges require enhanced
regional coordination. Seychelles has been pleased
to host a Regional Information Fusion and Law
Enforcement Centre, which has helped build cases for
prosecution in Seychelles and across our region based
on crimes committed at sea. We thank members of the
Security Council that have supported this work.
We must continue to build this regional capacity,
and we look forward to the implementation of the
regional Maritime Security Programme, funded by
the European Union, which will reinforce and build
capacity across the East African and Indian Ocean
region. Seychelles will also continue to actively
promote regional partnerships as the current Chair of
the African Union’s East African Standby Force, while
we also look forward to our forthcoming chairmanship
of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
where we will share our experiences with a view to
implementing practical solutions to counter impunity
and lawlessness.
At the heart of improved maritime security for
small island developing States is enhanced maritime
domain awareness. We depend on partnerships to
build this capacity, and one of the messages I would
like to emphasize today is to call on all members of
the Security Council to reinforce the building of this
capacity in small island developing States. To do so not
only empowers better management of our resources; it
also bolsters our position as sentinels of the sea.
Before concluding, let me also take a moment
to remind all our partners that effectively tackling
criminality and terrorism at sea also involves improved
financial governance — in terms of the better

15-237829/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

application of anti-money-laundering best practices,
as well as enhanced tax transparency and the exchange
of information. By targeting the business model that
underpins criminal and terrorist activities, we can
better undermine those operations. Seychelles has
made a strong commitment towards those best practices
through strong anti-money-laundering legislation, and
we are complementing that through our commitment
to be an early adopter in terms of the exchange of
information for tax purposes.
In conclusion, it is essential that we contextualize
the debate on security issues on small island developing
States in relation to climate change. Climate change
is an ever present threat. The increases in global
temperatures are currently set to be well above two
degrees, which will literally wipe out the islands
of many of our nations. It will wipe out homes and
livelihoods, and I would like us today to affirm that
every island matters.
We cannot go to the Paris Negotiations on
Climate Change later this year with the idea that some
islands — that some homes — can be sacrificed at the
altar of political expediency and unsustainable growth.
We thank members of the Security Council for ensuring
that the security aspect of climate change is not ignored.
As with all security threats, the best strategy is to
pre-empt the threat. We have the opportunity to set a
standard for global governance and for enhanced global
security in Paris. Let us ensure that we take it.
Better governance of our oceans through the blue
economy can already help us ensure that we can build
climate-resilient, inclusive growth, and the fast track to
better maritime security is the fast track to establishing
our blue economy.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of New
Zealand.
I would like to start by thanking our distinguished
briefers for their informative contributions and the
heads of Government and Ministers, who have come to
New York to participate in this debate. Of the 44 small
island developing States (SIDS), only six have served on
the Security Council. We called for this debate in order
to give the Council an opportunity that it rarely has to
hear what security looks like to small island developing
States, and to give small island States, which constitute
nearly a fifth of the United Nations membership, a
chance to have their voices heard in the Council.

10/87

30/07/2015

New Zealand is a Pacific country with a significant
stake in the peace and security of the small island
developing States in our region. By their very size,
isolation and nature, SIDS often find themselves
walking a thin line between success and failure. Let us
look at some key characteristics. SIDS are small: three
quarters of them have a population of less than one
million. The majority in our region have populations
below a half a million. They are islands with exclusive
economic zones significantly larger than their land
masses and are often without the capacity to conduct
surveillance of their zones — let alone defend them.
They are developing: most receive some level of
development assistance to balance the books. Their
size and capacity limitations can make them a target
for transnational criminal networks, including those
involved in piracy or the smuggling of drugs, arms and
people.
Today I am sure we will hear directly from
representatives about the impact of climate change — as
we have just now heard from our briefers — and of
natural disasters on small island developing States. The
recent cyclone in Vanuatu caused $360 million worth
of damage — approximately 45 per cent of Vanuatu’s
gross domestic product (GDP), and Hurricane Sandy
cost $315 million in damage across the Caribbean, but
the important point here is not just the impact of climate
change or natural disasters themselves. Rather, it is their
impact on countries that are already vulnerable. Most
SIDS simply do not have the economic diversity or the
resources to handle major shocks. Being a small island
developing State is to have an inbuilt force multiplier
whenever a natural disaster or man-made conflict
strikes, and such security and development challenges
can have regional consequences.
New Zealand views its own peace and security as
being directly affected by the prosperity and stability
of the SIDS in our region, the Pacific. Therefore, the
important strategic question for the Council and for
the wider United Nations community is, in my view:
how do we take meaningful steps to make SIDS less
vulnerable in the face of threats to their security from
natural disasters and man-made challenges. I want to
discuss just two areas in which we have been working
with partners in our region to increase resilience.
Firstly, we can build the resilience of SIDS by
helping them to derive full benefit from the sustainable
use of their often limited resource base. The Pacific’s
largest asset is the only truly healthy tuna fishery in the

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

world, which should be used to make its owners more
economically sustainable than they are today. Last year,
the value of the tuna caught in the exclusive economic
zones of the Pacific countries was $3.4 billion — double
the development assistance to the region from all
sources. An additional approximately $400 million
of tuna is estimated to have been taken from the zone
illegally or through under-reporting. They — the
Pacific owners — receive approximately 14 per cent of
the market value of the resource. Many other players
clip the ticket along the way.
My point is simple: SIDS need the international
community to cooperate to ensure that they receive a
fair return from their economic assets, and we need
a concerted international effort to stamp out illegal
fishing and underreporting practices: They amount to
literally stealing from some of the poorest people on
the planet. For the SIDS in our region the practical
impact of achieving those goals would be — quite
simply — transformational for their prosperity and
security.
My second point relates to an equally
transformational change that can be made on the other
side of the economic ledger: dealing with the energy
insecurity caused by dependence on hugely expensive
fossil fuels. The Pacific region is, in common with
most of the SIDS, heavily dependent on diesel fuel for
electricity generation, yet a liter or gallon of diesel in the
Pacific costs more than double what one would pay for
it here in New York. Up to one third of the total import
bill of SIDS is the cost of oil for electricity — on average
10 percent of their GDPs. That is why my country has
been at the forefront of an attempt to quickly move the
small island States in the Pacific from fossil fuels to
renewable energy.
I can report that we are making good progress.
When one is small, one can make things happen quickly.
All three atolls in the Tokelau Islands — previously
wholly dependent upon fossil fuels for electricity — are
now effectively 100 per cent renewable through the
installation of solar generation. All five islands in
the Northern Cook Islands have been, as of this year,
moved from 100 per cent dependency on fossil fuels
to 100 per cent renewable. Most of the Southern Cook
Islands will follow in the next year. By the end of this
year, all of the islands in Tuvalu, except Funifuti, will
be 100 per cent renewable, and, in more populated parts
of the region, significant progress has been made in
substituting renewables — mostly solar — for diesel-

S/PV.7499

generated power in Tonga, Samoa, and the Cook Islands
capital of Rarotonga.
More recently, we have become involved in
transporting some of the renewable energy skills
acquired in our region to some of the States in the
Caribbean and Indian Ocean. These are not only
life-changing developments in their own right. They
also make a huge contribution to making small island
developing States more resilient and less vulnerable to
economic shocks and serious acts of nature.
In conclusion, I want to revert to a point I made
earlier. Being small has its disadvantages, but it has one
huge advantage: one can make things happen quickly.
That is the approach we need to take in ensuring that
small island developing States become better equipped
to deal with the challenges to their security today.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the other members of the Council.
Ms. Rodríguez Gómez (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We strongly welcome
the presence of more than 20 Heads of State and
Government and Ministers taking part in today’s
important debate. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
is extremely grateful for the initiative taken by New
Zealand to convene this open debate. We consider it to
be a valuable opportunity to analyse from all angles the
challenges faced by small island developing States.
We extend our greetings and gratitude to the
Secretary-General of this important Organization,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
There are 37 United Nations Member States that
qualify as small island developing States — in other
words, one-fifth of the overall membership, including
16 fraternal Caribbean States. Venezuela is also a
Caribbean country and is therefore extremely aware
of the specific vulnerabilities and asymmetries facing
those States, in particular those that limit sustainable
development. Small island developing States are mainly
characterized by small populations and extensive
maritime borders, which make them vulnerable to
external factors, natural disasters, climate change,
global economic shifts, transnational organized crime
and foreign exploitation of their natural resources.
Small island developing States suffer the full force of
the ravages of the capitalist model.

15-2378211/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

30/07/2015

The explosion of neoliberal globalization in the
1980s, including the expansion of free-trade zones, the
deregulation of financial markets and the privatization
of State enterprises, coupled with the giddying pace of
technology development in the areas of transportation
and telecommunications, exacerbated the vulnerability
of small island developing States most of which, we
must recall, were already historically victims of the
effects of late-stage colonialism, which reached the
Caribbean region with repercussions of various kinds
that continue to impact them all today.

and international organizations, and their voices should
be heard and taken into account on the basis of the
sovereign equality of States, regardless of their size
or population. It is important to amplify the voices of
those countries and expand cooperation mechanisms
in order to articulate a broad multilateralism and build
a multicentric and multipolar world that will uphold
and prioritize the leadership of States. South-South
cooperation also plays a key role in capacity-building
for small island developing States in order to address
the multifaceted challenges they face.

The greatest external threat to the security of those
States arises not from an individual State, but rather
from the pressures of the new form of colonialism
represented by the dictatorship of international financial
capital. Moreover, those islands feel abandoned
by developed countries and relevant multilateral
institutions such as the World Trade Organization, and
even non-governmental organizations that determine
the rules and options available to those countries. In
addition to all this, but no less important, is the threat
of climate change. Despite being the least responsible
for the destruction of the environment, the small island
developing States are among the most threatened and
the immediate victims of a predatory environmental
model.

I could speak at length about the extraordinary
mechanism for solidarity and unity represented by
Petrocaribe. Venezuela has been consolidating a
cooperation mechanism that goes beyond mere energy
security or energy legislation by fostering conditions
for millions of people to overcome poverty. It is based
on the premises of fair trade, complementary efforts,
social justice, solidarity and the common desire to
advance. That mechanism for integration and unity
serves as a model for the region and a key instrument
in promoting the right to development of the member
countries. I pay particular tribute to Prime Minister
Portia Simpson Miller of Jamaica because we recognize
the extraordinary efforts made by Jamaica to strengthen
that mechanism of unity.

However, the answer to the challenges and threats
faced by that group of States cannot be found by way
of predominantly police and military approaches.
The challenges and threats in the field of sustainable
development and climate change, as well as those
arising from transnational organized crime and
international piracy, should be addressed by the
international community through genuine solidarity and
cooperation, mainly on the part of developed countries,
which is definitely an unresolved contradiction in the
framework of the very model of capitalism. It is worth
noting that the Caribbean region is a peaceful territory
that is free of weapons of mass destruction.

President Hugo Chávez Frías was strongly
committed to the peoples of the Caribbean and helped
to convert the region from a premium market for
energy transnationals into a region that underpins the
economic, social and cultural development of our sister
Caribbean countries and their peoples. Of the 18 States
members of Petrocaribe, 15 are small island developing
States. Despite imperialist attempts to delegitimate that
humanist organization, which is the basis of the most
deeply cherished values of our peoples, Petrocaribe, as
stated by President Nicolás Maduro Moros, has proven
that it works and that we are people who can work in
friendship, unity and solidarity.

Despite its limitations, that group of States
has contributed significantly to the maintenance of
international peace and security and fulfilled its
obligations under international law, including those
deriving from the Council’s resolutions. They are neither
arms manufacturing States nor bellicose expansionists
intent on conquering territory and oppressing
populations. Those countries must continue to work
together to establish collective bargaining mechanisms
on the basis of their large representation in regional

Venezuela also contributes to human development
in the Caribbean region through international healthcare programmes such as Misión Milagro, whereby
more than 4 million people in Latin America and the
Caribbean have had their sight restored. To date, we
have implemented, through Petrocaribe, 488 social
projects focused on the health, housing and education
of millions of men, women and children.

12/87

Venezuela is pleased to continue to support the
small island developing States, including through,
15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

among other mechanisms and measures, the
establishment of genuine and lasting partnerships that
we hope will effectively contribute to strengthening
States’ sovereignty and the policies available to them
in facing their challenges in the fields of sustainable
development and in international peace and security.
Finally, allow me to convey the following message
from the Constitutional President of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, President Nicolás Maduro
Moros, a scion of Hugo Chávez Frías:
“The Venezuelan people, the Bolivarian
Government and the Venezuelan nation as a
whole are peace-loving people who work daily to
fulfil their vocation of peace. We pride ourselves
on that heritage and lay claim to it. We practice
cooperation in solidarity and will champion
formulas for integration that seek common solutions
to the difficulties and problems of the needy, the
dispossessed and those that have been traditionally
excluded and marginalized. We believe in direct
dialogue and ongoing communication. We are
firmly wedded to international law, as we recognize
the validity of norms and standards to provide for
peaceful international coexistence, in conjunction
with the principle of maintaining and developing
friendly and good-neighbourly relations.
“We are a country that fought for and won
our independence. We were born in a territory
inherited from those who fought for our liberty
and who emerged victorious from the shackles of
colonial and imperial slavery. Today, we can say
that we have a free, sovereign homeland and that
we practice a diplomacy that exalts the principles
of Bolivarianism and peace. We have overcome
the rough roads of neoliberalism, and thanks
to President Hugo Chavez, we have raised our
country’s flag and broken with the neoliberal
model that oppressed our people and those of Latin
America and the Caribbean.
“Despite the grave dangers threatening the
progressive Governments of the region, which
consolidate national models autonomous from
imperialist centres and which construct their own
realities and national and regional identities, we
have no doubt that the peoples, as well as those of
the small island developing States of our beloved
Caribbean, will continue to vanquish the imperialist
pretensions seeking to again impose their model of
predatory dependence on our natural resources. The

S/PV.7499

people of Venezuela are more committed than ever
to the principles and purposes of the Organization,
to the great challenges in the consolidation of a
more secure and peaceful world.
“Let us unite efforts to construct a multipolar
and multicentric world, firmly believing in the
sovereign equality of States, in non-intervention
in the internal affairs of countries and in the
independence of nations. Likewise, with the
heritage of union left us by our great Liberator,
Simón Bolívar, father of America, and with the
bicentenary this very year of the Letter from
Jamaica, we consider ourselves part of the
consolidated unity of our brothers of the Caribbean.
“When the peoples have decided to be free,
sovereign and independent, there is no force,
however powerful, that can stop them.”
Mr. Augusto (Angola): First of all, we thank His
Excellency Mr. Murray McCully, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of New Zealand, for presiding over
this open debate. We welcome and congratulate the
New Zealand presidency of the Security Council for
convening this timely debate on the security challenges
facing small island developing States (SIDS) and for
putting such an important issue at the centre of the
international community’s attention. We also thank
the Secretary-General and the high dignitaries from
Samoa, Jamaica and the Seychelles for their insightful
briefings.
Only recently due attention started being paid to the
dangers facing millions of people inhabiting this group
of nations, whose vulnerabilities have become more
dramatic in recent years with the visible consequences
of climate change and the exponential growth of
international criminality affecting them. Small island
developing States are diverse in essence, geographically
dispersed and climatically differentiated, and they
have far-reaching variations in their social, political,
cultural and ethnic matrix. However, they all share
serious environmental threats, aggravated by external
economic impacts, and are affected more frequently
and more intensely by natural disasters. Eventual
sea-level rise is the most alarming prospect. Against
such a bleak background, the international community
and SIDSs are ever more aware of the need to reverse
prevailing policies.
Countering the impact of climate change through
better environmental practices and achieving sustainable

15-2378213/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

economic and social development are the cornerstone
of policies to address huge challenges threatening the
livelihoods of those islands’ populations. Vulnerabilities
endogenous to those States, such as limited territorial
and economic scales, high demographic growth and
the slow pace of economic growth and diversification,
and high levels of unemployment and environmental
degradations are factors conducive to the expansion
of criminal and other illegal activities that undermine
the development of licit economic life, destroy social
cohesion and threaten peace and security.
Transnational criminal networks have increasingly
targeted these small island States. Their geographic
isolation and weak security structures have attracted
organized criminal networks, making them easy prey
for all kinds of trafficking in drugs, weapons and
humans, for piracy and for the illicit exploitation of
natural resources, such as illegal fishing. The proceeds
of those practices are often used to fund terrorism
and are becoming an issue of international peace and
security.
The lack of economic opportunities in many SIDS,
the challenges of climate change and transnational
crime are serious issues to be tackled. Lasting solutions
to the problems afflicting this group of countries are
possible only with international assistance. Highly
dependent on coastal and maritime activities, SIDS face
the risk of total disruption of their economic activity
in the foreseeable future, due to floods affecting more
intensely the coastal areas and cities, the economic
infrastructures such as harbours, ports, fishing sites,
fishery industries, processing plants and the very
important touristic industry.
Overfishing has reached alarming proportions,
putting at risk the very survival of many maritime
species. That has an extreme negative impact on the
maritime ecosystems and the economic basis that
sustain the SIDS.
The loss of territory caused by sea-level rise poses
another significant threat to small island developing
States and to their sustainable development. Some of
them face real existential threats. The urgent need
arises to develop a dual-track strategy in dealing with
those challenges: to provide specific assistance in areas
related to climate change and disaster-risk reduction,
and to develop approaches to sustainable development
best suited to their realities, constraints and challenges.
Since sea and coastal activities are the drivers of SIDS
economic life, in order to maximize their development
14/87

30/07/2015

potential, the approach should be based on sustained
economic growth that is environmentally concerned
and socially inclusive, and on productive investment in
strong, modern infrastructure, based upon comparative
advantages provided by maritime economic activities.
Human activity is exacerbating problems by
accelerating the pace of climate change and its
consequences. Desertification, loss of biodiversity and
food insecurity, among other problems, have reached
levels that must be urgently reversed. In connection
with the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate
change, the need arises to develop renewable sources
of energy with a view to protecting the environment
and the future of SIDS. Some of them are leading the
way in switching to renewable sources of energy. The
international community is expected to provide muchneeded assistance in technology transfers and financial
resources to help them continue on that path and to
guarantee a safer and more prosperous future.
The international community has begun to show
commitment on the issue. The Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States, held in
Samoa in 2014, renewed the political commitment to
address the special needs and vulnerabilities of SIDS by
focusing on practical actions, identifying and addressing
new and emerging challenges and opportunities
for sustainable development of SIDS, particularly
through the strengthening of partnerships. The SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action Pathway, adopted
at that Conference, emphasized inclusive economic
growth, poverty eradication and the management of
natural resource as the basis for economic and social
development and the programme of action for further
sustainable development of those States.
It is our hope that the new international climate
change agreement, currently being negotiated for
adoption at the Paris Conference by the end of 2015,
will contribute to relieving some of the economic
burden of the SIDS by reducing global greenhouse gas
emissions and the impact of climate change.
Mr. Riveros Marín (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank New Zealand for this initiative to discuss issues
affecting the promotion of international peace and
security.
The vulnerabilities of small island developing States
(SIDS) arise from their inability to address emerging
challenges and situations with global implications
that can jeopardize the stability and the livelihood

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

of these countries and regional and international
peace and security. Cooperation for development is
crucial to dealing with these threats. Chile has made a
commitment to the SIDS and has therefore contributed,
along with the countries of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), to capacity-sharing and the training of
human capital through South-South cooperation.
With all the CARICOM countries, Chile is
implementing programmes of cooperation in teaching
Spanish, international relations, disaster prevention
and support for plant and animal health systems. This
always involves a South-South approach; in other
words, experience is shared in a horizontal relationship,
particularly in order to create capacity for the design
and implementation of public policies.
I should like to highlight two specific programmes.
We are implementing one in the Dominican Republic,
entitled “Improving youth employability”, jointly with
the German agency for international cooperation. The
goal is to improve access to microcredit and to encourage
young people’s entrepreneurship in association with
local Governments. The goal of the second, more
inclusive programme seeks to strengthen the Caribbean
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Agency, whereby
two Chilean institutions — the Chilean Agency for
Food Quality and Safety and the Agriculture and
Livestock Service — have been selected by the United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization to provide
cooperation to the Caribbean.
These are two specific examples of cooperation
that are part of a much broader programme almost
always undertaken on a triangular basis. Through this
approach, Chile can share its experience in the design
and implementation of public policies that are also
carefully evaluated practices producing positive results.
We believe that this is the best way for the international
community to support SIDS in overcoming their
vulnerabilities. But there are also global activities
leading in that direction.
We are all aware of the threat posed by climate
change and of the urgent need to reach a comprehensive
and efficient agreement at the forthcoming Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (COP 21) in Paris. That
is particularly important for small island countries,
which are particularly exposed to the impacts of climate
change and cycles of natural disasters. Attention must
be paid to their impact on cultures and forms of life

S/PV.7499

and to the possible creation of such destabilizing
phenomena as forced displacement.
The exploitation and illegal trafficking of natural
resources, including illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing, create a climate of instability by preventing
access to basic livelihoods. Global governance must
incorporate ways of protecting these vulnerabilities of
SIDS. These issues are the focus of the Council’s special
attention for the first time today, and we therefore
congratulate New Zealand for this initiative. They are
regularly considered in various forums, but they cannot
be ignored by the Council.
Chile is willing to contribute in this area. In early
October, we will host the second Our Ocean conference,
an initiative aimed at adopting voluntary commitments
on the three serious threats to our ocean. Illegal fishing
is one of the principle factors affecting any project
or planning of sustainable fishing; marine pollution
from plastic products has become a global problem;
and the acidification of the ocean and its relation to
climate change make it urgent for us to adopt collective
action. Inclusive development in our societies can play
a fundamental role in ensuring the political stability,
democratic governance, development and territorial
integrity in our States, which are factors that effectively
prevent conflict.
We welcome this opportunity to discuss these issues
in the Security Council and to emphasize, from an
eminently political perspective, the importance for the
sustainability of the planet of achieving an agreement at
the COP 21 in Paris. At the Climate Summit held in New
York in September 2014, President Michelle Bachelet
noted that climate change exacerbates inequalities and
multiplies threats to global peace and security. We must
therefore tackle this problem before its consequence
become irreversible.
Chile trusts that this open debate will help to foster
realism and awareness within groups of countries and
regions. Collective inclusive action is essential in order
to promote basically preventive measures. We therefore
welcome the concerns raised today in the Council
concerning SIDS, which confirm the relevance of
South-South cooperation that we are undertaking with
the CARICOM countries.
Mr. Gracia Aldaz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate the New Zealand presidency for bringing
before the Security Council the topic of the security
challenges facing of small island developing States

15-2378215/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

(SIDS). As stated in the final document of the United
Nations Conference On Small Island Developing
States, the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
Pathway, SIDS represent a special case with respect to
sustainable development because of their unique and
particular vulnerabilities. Spain is well aware of this,
which is why I wanted to participate personally in this
debate. In my own contribution, I shall try to address
the security challenges that these countries face and to
provide a Spanish view on the matter.
The year 2015 is key for international development
agenda. The lengthy process of debates that are leading
to the definition of the post-2015 agenda as a universal
and transformative agenda has led the international
community to focus its consideration on aspects that
go beyond the traditional sectors of development.
At the heart of this reflection is the importance of
understanding how, in today’s world, the threats to
development and peace are interconnected.
The consequences of climate change, particularly
sea-level rise, represent a significant obstacle to SIDS
in their efforts to achieve sustainable development. But
also they pose a serious threat to their own survival
and viability and the security of their populations.
Similarly, and as recently revealed by the dramatic
impact of Cyclone Pam on Vanuatu and other countries
in the region, the increased frequency and severity of
extreme weather events has had serious consequences
for safety.
It is quite legitimate for small countries, whose
responsibility for greenhouse gas emissions has been
minimal, to call upon the international community to
take responsibility for tackling climate change. We
hope that at the coming Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, to take place in Paris in December of this year,
we will be able to reach a comprehensive, global and
legally binding agreement that is ambitious in terms
of emissions-reduction, duly takes into account the
adaptation needs of the most vulnerable countries, and
upholds the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities commensurate with the respective
capacities of nations, bearing in mind the different
national circumstances.
The result of Spain’s commitment in that regard
was the convening on 30 June, together with the
Permanent Mission of Malaysia, of an Arria Formula
informal meeting of the Security Council to analyze the
role of climate change as a threat multiplier affecting
16/87

30/07/2015

international peace and security. The United Nations
Deputy Secretary-General, six ministers, a large
number of Permanent Representatives and a robust
showing of civil society representatives participated
in that meeting. That gave us the space to take stock
of the extent to which the international community
acknowledges that the growing consequences of climate
change have clear implications on international security
and especially on the SIDS. During the meeting, there
were multiple calls for an updated version of the 2009
Secretary-General’s report entitled “Climate change
and its possible security implications” (A/64/350) to be
made prepared. That is something that we support once
again today.
The challenges faced by SIDS are a priority for
Spain’s cooperation policy, as evidenced by the active
participation of our Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation in the Third International Conference
on Small Island Developing States, which took place
last year in Samoa. For that reason, Spain has signed
memorandums of understanding with 13 SIDS countries
to support cooperation projects funded by Spain and the
United Nations Development Programme Fund, aimed
at attaining the sustainable development goals and by
the Fund for Humanitarian Aid of the Spanish Agency
for International Cooperation and Development.
Through that support Spain addresses the
specific needs and priorities of each country in areas
such as combating climate change, strengthening
response-capacity to natural disasters, strengthening
capacities in the health sector and ensuring adequate
water supply. Commensurate with all of this, Spain
has contributed €1 million in conncection with the
memorandum sponsored by Italy, together with other
countries, which was set up to finance priority actions
for SIDS in the area of boosting their resilience to the
impacts of climate change.
Insecurity, piracy, drug trafficking, violence
and transnational organized crime also pose a
serious threat to SIDS, putting at risk their security,
hampering the normal day-to-day functioning of their
public institutions, undermining respect for human
rights, damaging economic sectors that are crucial to
growth, and negatively impacting their development
perspectives.
It is essential therefore to dovetail the efforts
of the international community and the United
Nations — particularly the efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Vienna — to
15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

help those countries to reduce their levels of criminality
and their exposure to illicit trafficking. Aware of that
need, Spain has been supporting cooperation projects
in the Caribbean to prevent violence and youth
marginalization. In a similar vein, we participated
in the Caribbean Basin Security Initiative and have
participated in the group of donors for security issues.
Spain, with its thousands of kilometres of coastline and
a geographical position that often makes us a gateway
to Europe for illicit traffickers, is more than willing to
make available its experience in the area of monitoring
its national waters and airspace to the SIDS.
We are aware that the oceans and the seas, as well
as their marine and coastal resources, are a core element
of the identity and of the economy of SIDS, and we are
therefore aware of the importance of preserving that
heritage. For Spain the fight against illegal, unreported
and undocumented fishing is a priority, whose adverse
impact on the conservation and management of fishery
resources is, in our view, unacceptable. Spain has
an unwavering commitment to the sustainability of
fisheries resources, which is reflected in the way we
manage our own national fishing fleet, which is held to
the highest standards of monitoring and compliance in
the world. In a similar vein, I am delighted to announce
that next October Spain will host a meeting in the city
of Vigo celebrating the twentieth anniversary of the
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, an event
whose goal is to foster a debate on the need to adopt a
future strategy that would guarantee the sustainability
of fisheries.
Our election campaign for the Security Council was
based on dialogue, partnership and commitment. To
implement those principles we have made transparency
and accountability our standards, and they have guided
our actions within the Council since becoming an
elected member. In order to live up to both of those
principles we held numerous meetings with SIDS
throughout our election campaign, in which we were
able to hear clearly what their priorities and concerns
were. And we are very aware today, more than ever,
that it is vital that the international community robustly
support these States in order to help them to effectively
overcome the aforementioned vulnerabilities. For that
reason, I want to conclude my statement by reiterating
Spain’s implacable commitment to standing with the
SIDS in their fight to achieve sustainable development
in all three of its dimensions: peace, security and
development.

S/PV.7499

Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
the presidency of New Zealand for having convened
this meeting on the challenges to threats and security
facing small island developing States (SIDS). I also
welcome all of the distinguished personalities and
ministers present here today. I thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, the Prime Minister of Samoa, the Prime
Minister of Jamaica and the Minister of Finance of
Seychelles for their statements.
The United Nations Conference on the Environment
and Development, held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992,
recognized the existence of a group called the “Small
Island Developing States” (SIDS). That recognition was
formalized by the Programme of Action to assist them,
which was adopted at the Global Conference for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States in 1994 in Barbados. The Mauritius Strategy for
the Further Implementation of the Barbados Programme
of Action listed a number of priority fields.
If small island developing States share a great many
specificities with other States, it has been recognized,
however, that they also face challenges that are specific
to them. They suffer from excessive vulnerability in
terms of their environmental systems, economic and
social factors and humanitarian disasters related to
climate change. Threats to peace and security are not
related solely to armed conflict, but can also stem from
nature herself as a result of humankind’s activities and
their impact on the environment. Global warming of the
oceans has led to the melting of glaciers and to the rise
in sea levels, which has threatened the future of many
islands around the world. That constitutes a real threat
to international security and requires urgent measures
and the firm commitment of mankind to find a rapid,
global solution to that problem.
The impact of Cyclone Pam, which struck the
coastlines of Vanuatu and took place during the third
United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk
Reduction in Japan last March, claimed many lives
and caused great material damage. It was, of course,
a strong signal sent to us by nature herself. We must
learn to listen to nature so as to better understand the
new types of challenges to international peace and
security. To that end, the Security Council should think
deeply about its role and its place in tackling those new
challenges to international peace and security.
Small island developing States also face a great
many other challenges relating to access to international
markets for their products, energy requirements, access

15-2378217/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

to new technologies, and the development of tourism.
That is also compounded by human trafficking,
transnational organized crime, cyber crime and, of
course, piracy, which continue to undermine the
development efforts of many countries, including SIDS.
To better assist small island developing States in facing
up to the aforementioned challenges, it is important to
focus on the establishment of early warning systems at
the national, regional and international levels, as well
as on the strengthening of international cooperation
and international strategic partnerships.
The Third International Conference on Small
Island Developing States, which was held from 1 to
4 September 2014 in Apia, was an opportunity for the
international community to renew its commitment
to assist the development of those countries during
the upcoming decade and to determine the path to be
followed. This path needs to be reflected in the post2015 development programme, whose main objective
is the building of a better future for succeeding
generations without leaving anyone stranded on the
sidelines. In that regard, we call upon the solidarity of
the international community as a whole to assist small
island developing States.
In conclusion, I would like to welcome the
appointment by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon of a
high representative responsible for the least developed
countries, landlocked developing countries and small
island developing States.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join previous speakers
in expressing Malaysia’s appreciation to you, Sir, and
the delegation of New Zealand for convening this
important and timely open debate. I wish to acknowledge
the presence of many leaders and ministers in the
Chamber this morning, which underscores the urgency
of discussing the international peace and security
dimensions of the multifaceted challenges faced by
small island developing States (SIDS) today.
Malaysia welcomes this debate, which, in our
view, provides a valuable platform for discussing and
exchanging views on how we can collectively address
the peace and security challenges faced by SIDS in
their quest for sustainable development and universal
prosperity. My delegation also wishes to thank the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
the Prime Ministers of Samoa and Jamaica, as well as
the Finance Minister of Seychelles, for their respective
briefings, which we followed with much interest.

18/87

30/07/2015

Malaysia believes that the plight faced by SIDS,
particularly the devastating impact of climate change
on their countries and populations, must be given due
attention by the Council. We subscribe to the view that,
if left unchecked, climate change could, in fact, be the
greatest threat multiplier endangering global security.
What seems clear is that climate change threatens SIDS
at the environmental, social and economic levels. The
adverse impacts of climate change, such as coastal
erosion and rising sea levels, threaten territorial
integrity, food security, water, energy, health, and more
broadly, efforts by SIDS to eradicate poverty. In the
long run, climate change poses an existential challenge
to SIDS.
We share the view that the challenge posed by
climate change to SIDS is exacerbated by certain
factors. For example, their small size limits their
capacity to harness growth opportunities and restricts
their options for economic diversification, leading to
increased dependence on trade and commerce. Those
challenges, which are quite specific to SIDS, deserve
our attention and special consideration. We should
not allow those factors to erode States’ capacities or
eventually threaten State stability. Peace and security
cannot exist without development, and development
cannot be achieved without peace.
Another key area of concern is the fact that, to
date, adequate financial resources have not been
made available to SIDS for the implementation of
climate-change adaptation and mitigation projects. In
that regard, Malaysia is pleased to note the decision
of the board of the Green Climate Fund to aim for a
floor of 50 per cent of the adaptation allocation for
particularly vulnerable countries, including SIDS.
Malaysia believes that SIDS must be equipped with
the necessary capacity to gain access to the Fund. At
the same time, more vigorous efforts towards reducing
climate-change impacts on SIDS could be achieved,
if agreement on greenhouse gas emissions reduction
targets at the forthcoming twenty-first session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change could be
found.
With a view to better understanding such challenges
and in an effort to make further progress in addressing
them, Malaysia was pleased to join Spain in hosting
an Arria Formula meeting of the Council on a similar
topic last month. Among the main views shared during

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

the meeting was the need for the Council to be more
engaged on the security impacts of climate change.
Successive agreements concluded in Barbados
and Mauritius paved the way for the Samoa Pathway
(General Assembly resolution 69/15, annex) adopted
just last year at the third International Conference on
SIDS, which sought, inter alia, to boost capacity of SIDS
to achieve more sustainable development. Among other
things, the Samoa Pathway has called on the United
Nations system to support the SIDS by incorporating
their priorities into the relevant frameworks of the
system.
Malaysia remains committed to assist SIDS in
their pursuit of sustainable development. Malaysia
believes that human resource development and
capacity-building are two key elements for achieving
sustainable development. We have been providing
technical assistance and sharing our experience in those
fields through the Malaysian Technical Cooperation
Programme. Since its inception in 1980, the Programme
has seen the participation of approximately 3,400
participants from 41 SIDS. Apart from short courses in
Malaysia, we also offer the services of experts to SIDS
in areas where Malaysia has the relevant and proven
expertise. Since the SIDS Conference in Samoa last year,
Malaysia has increased its allocation to the Malaysian
Technical Cooperation Programme for courses and
programmes relevant to SIDS. In 2015, to date, a total
of 58 participants from SIDS have attended 19 short
courses. Malaysia remains committed to sharing its
development experience with the SIDS, particularly in
the field of poverty eradication and capacity-building,
at both the regional and the international levels.
The peace and security issues facing SIDS will
have far-reaching impacts over the decades ahead. We
must continue to highlight the unique challenges that
confront those countries in order to mobilize greater
international support for their developmental needs.
We urge the Council to listen to the voices of SIDS and
undertake the action necessary to ensure that their path
to a resilient future is stable and secure.
Mr. Kononuchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Security Council has already held open
debates on the threats posed by transnational organized
crime, piracy, illicit drug trafficking and climate
change. A recent example of that was the Arria Formula
meeting on climate change held last month.

S/PV.7499

We hope that today’s discussion will enable us
to focus on the consequences and other threats being
faced by one of the most vulnerable groups, namely, the
small island developing States (SIDS). It is significant
that we are focusing on SIDS today, at a time when the
international community is on the threshold of adopting
a post-2015 development agenda, which includes a
broad spectrum of means and resources to implement
the new agenda. The pressing needs of the 50 million
inhabitants of SIDS are worthy of being appropriately
reflected in the new agenda.
The location of SIDS along the important trade
routes and the serious gaps in global security systems
turn them into convenient transit points for traffickers
in natural resources, wildlife, drugs and weapons. The
threats posed by the financing of terrorism through
the proceeds of crime are high, as was rightly noted
in resolution 2195 (2014). We are convinced that an
effective response to the threats of transnational
organized crime, drug trafficking and piracy hinges on
the actions of the international community as a whole,
with a leading role being played by the United Nations.
It is important to continue to strengthen the legal
and treaty basis for international cooperation to counter
transnational organized crime and piracy. We cannot
relent in our efforts to create and develop mechanisms
for bringing pirates and the sponsors of criminal trade
to justice. We acknowledge the existing experience
accumulated by SIDS in that field. The provision of
specialized technical assistance to SIDS for capacitybuilding in law enforcement agencies and the bolstering
of border security are particularly important.
We would like to separately underscore the role
of public-private partnerships in combating criminal
challenges. It is important at the national level to create
the conditions needed to forge full-fledged cooperation
between business and State bodies in that area.
As a result of climate change, the oceans are
gradually wresting territory from SIDS, changing the
balance of ecosystems and the traditional economic
structures of SIDS, and threatening their lifestyles.
The Russian Federation has consistently advocated a
comprehensive and integrated approach to addressing
climate change within the framework of the specialized
international forums and formats, particularly the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC). We urge all Member States, in
accordance with the Lima Call for Climate Action, to

15-2378219/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

submit to the UNFCCC secretariat information on the
parameters of their potential obligations under a future
climate agreement, as Russia and a number of other
countries have already done. We believe that only an
understanding of our collective responsibility and a
willingness to seek compromise will enable us to make
progress at the UNFCCC Climate Conference to be
held in Paris in December.
At the same time, no agreement can have positive
results without creating the financial and institutional
mechanisms required for their implementation. The
mobilization of financial assistance and transfer of
environmentally clean technologies — as provided
for in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, adopted a few
days ago by the General Assembly (see A/69/PV.99) in
resolution 69/313 — and the operationalization of the
Green Climate Fund are essential tools for successfully
adapting the socioeconomic systems of small island
developing States to new conditions. Another
important component for improving the preparedness
of small island developing States for disasters will be
ensuring that the final document of the Sendai Third
World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction (General
Assembly resolution 69/283, annex II) is implemented
as soon as possible.
The Russian Federation actively assists small
island developing States. In 2010, our support for that
group of countries amounted to about $20 million. Our
joint project, with the United Nations Development
Programme, on improving Pacific small island
developing States’ preparedness for natural disasters
is in the final stages of preparation with total funding
of about $10 million. Since the Security Council does
not possess comprehensive expertise on issues of
socioeconomic development and the protection of the
environment, we believe it can do more to emphasize
the importance of supporting small island developing
States in grappling with new challenges and threats on
their path to achieving sustainable development.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French):
Ms. Annick Girardin, France’s Minister of State for
Development and Francophonie, would have liked to be
here to speak on the subject of small island developing
States dealing with threats to peace and security, an
important issue for France and one particularly close
to Ms. Girardin’s heart, since she herself is from the
archipelago of Saint Pierre and Miquelon in the north
Atlantic. She was unavoidably detained in Paris on
important business and has therefore asked me to

20/87

30/07/2015

convey the following statement to the Council on her
behalf.
“I had hoped to be in the Council today, but
unfortunately that has turned out not to be possible.
I would first like to thank the New Zealand
presidency for organizing today’s debate on such an
important subject. France endorses the statement to
be delivered later on behalf of the European Union
and would like to emphasize on the following
points.
“I would like to reaffirm the message that
there can be no development without security
and no security without development. France has
conveyed that message to Africa, Mali and the
Central African Republic, but it is true everywhere,
and security in small island developing States also
involves anticipating climate risks. In 2015, the year
of sustainable development goals and the twentyfirst session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (COP 21), I would like to emphasize that
aspect and offer a concrete proposal for progress.
“In the face of the increasing numbers
of climate disasters, I hardly need stress the
importance of warning systems to the Council. We
all remember Cyclone Pam, which hit Vanuatu in
the middle of the Sendai Third World Conference
on Disaster Risk Reduction. At the Conference,
France proposed the simple goal of mobilizing the
international community’s support for the most
vulnerable countries, including small islands and
least-developed countries (LDCs), in developing
climate warning systems. France considers it part
of its responsibility to share its know-how and
expertise in order to help those countries that are
most vulnerable to climate change. That topic will
be central to the success of СOP 21, and it is why we
devoted a round table to the issue at the Caribbean
Climate 2015 Summit, chaired by our President,
François Hollande.
“The international community is already
mobilizing around the teams from the World
Meteorological Organization (WMO), the United
Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
(UNISDR) and the World Bank. The Global
Framework for Climate Services has enabled much
progress to be made. But we are still far from our
goal. Currently, not all least-developed countries
and small island States possess working warning
15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

systems, and only four or five of almost 40 small
island developing States have them. The numbers
for LDCs are very similar. According to the WMO,
54 per cent of surface meteorological stations and
71 per cent of satellites deliver no data.
“However, warning systems help save lives and
reduce the economic cost of disasters considerably.
That is why France, in close coordination with
Norway, the WMO, the UNISDR and the World
Bank, has launched the Climate Risk Early Warning
System initiative. Its objectives are simple. They
are, first, strengthening and expanding action on
the part of the international community in support
of warning systems in vulnerable countries;
secondly, mobilizing additional financing for
supporting and strengthening actions already
under way in order to help achieve global coverage
for populations exposed to extreme weather events
between now and 2020. We must mobilize to fill
the gaps and enable the actors on the ground, at
the regional, national and local levels, to work in
good conditions, so that the populations concerned,
almost all of whom now who now have mobile
phones and other modern means of communication,
can be alerted in a timely manner when a disaster
threatens.
“Finally, there is the question of means. They
are within our reach. If we can mobilize about
$100 million by 2020, we should be able to change
the game in most countries. France is ready to
commit to that, and I hope all those here can too. I
will be putting our proposal on paper and hope that
between now and September we can work together
to raise the money. We also have genuine interest
from countries such as Mexico, Cuba and others
with experience that they are willing to share at the
regional level, for example. Businesses, especially
insurance and new-technology companies, should
also be mobilized. Together, we can make progress
with this project, which can be so useful to small
islands’ security and development.”
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important and unique
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
the Prime Ministers of Samoa and Jamaica and the
Finance Minister of the Seychelles for their instructive
briefings, and all the other ministers for their presence
here today.

S/PV.7499

Let me begin, Mr. President, by applauding your
initiative in bringing this issue to the Security Council.
Small island developing States (SIDS) are a valuable
part of our diverse United Nations family, forming more
than a quarter of our membership. From the Caribbean
to the Pacific, they are important partners on so many
issues, whether they involve trade, migration or tackling
crime. And through their membership of organizations
such as the British Commonwealth, many bring shared
history and values to bear on issues of mutual interest
and concern.
But as the Secretary-General and the briefers
have made clear, small island developing States face
significant challenge that are directly relevant to
the business of the Council. Vulnerability to natural
disasters and food and energy insecurities can all have
a disproportionate and destructive impact on their
development.
In Grenada in 2004, Hurricane Ivan caused
damage that cost double the island’s entire gross
domestic product. In March this year, Cyclone Pam
left thousands homeless in Vanuatu and other Pacific
islands. Sadly, the Council requires no introduction to
the damage caused by the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, the
consequences of which Haiti is still dealing with today.
It is because of these vulnerabilities that small
island developing States are often the first countries
to face the impact of emerging global problems. They
can be a bellwether for us all, so it is incumbent on
the Council to pay close attention to their situation and
offer our support in response. The challenges they face,
if left unaddressed, could eventually challenge us all.
Climate change is the clearest example. We have
seen countless instances of climate change multiplying
interlinked threats in small island developing States. For
example, in Tuvalu sea-level rises and in Palau coastal
erosion have degraded arable land and undermined food
security. In the Pacific region, ocean acidification has
damaged fish stocks, impacting both food security and
economies, and in Marshall Islands, changing weather
patterns have increased extreme weather events such as
cyclones and king tides.
If unchecked, these factors can lead to mass
migration. Kiribati is already buying land in Fiji to help
secure its future. We are already seeing real damage
to economies, lost development gains, setbacks to the
eradication of poverty and an increase in piracy and
arms trafficking. These challenges affect small islands

15-2378221/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

directly; they place additional burdens on neighbouring
countries; and they can damage interconnected
economies globally.
As an island nation ourselves, the United Kingdom
will not be immune to such climate pressures. Nor will
we be passive in the face of the climate challenge. That
is why we have committed $6 billion to climate finance
between 2011 and 2016. It is why we pledged $1.2 billion
to the Green Climate Fund and are committed to
spending 0.7 per cent of our national income on
development. The risk that climate change poses goes
beyond our shores and those of small islands. Left
unaddressed, climate change could constitute one of
the gravest threats to international peace and security
for generations.
It is clear that we all need to make climate fragility
a key consideration in our foreign policy planning,
particularly in our partnerships with small islands. For
it is through partnership that the United Nations can
offer the greatest support to small islands. Through
engaging with bodies such as the Alliance of Small
Island States, the Pacific Islands Forum, the Caribbean
Community and the Commonwealth, we can share our
collective expertise to deal with these issues together.
We saw the benefits of this approach at last year’s SIDS
conference, hosted by Samoa.
There are some further opportunities for
partnership in the months ahead. Just a week before the
Paris Summit, many small island States will take part
in the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting,
where they will discuss climate change. A strong
Commonwealth message on this issue ahead of Paris
would be a welcome call for wider action.
Beyond climate change, I look forward to the
General Assembly special session on drugs, to be held
in April next year. Issues of organized crime and illicit
financial flows linked to the drug trade are of particular
concern to many Caribbean small islands. Here, too,
we need to recognize in the Council the importance of
international cooperation to tackle organized crime and
the threat it poses to the stability of States.
So let me conclude, Mr. President, by thanking
you again for bringing this issue to the Council. It is an
excellent example of how the Council, by working with
partners, can look ahead and identify risks upstream.
In doing so, we can pre-empt issues that could lead to
instability and conflict, and address them together:
conflict prevention in action. We hope that we will

22/87

30/07/2015

continue this approach with small island developing
States in future.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to welcome you here to the Security
Council, Mr. President, and to thank you and your
delegation for having given us this opportunity to
discuss this very important topic, namely, peace and
security challenges facing small island developing
States (SIDS). I should like also to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Prime Ministers of Samoa and Jamaica,
as well as the Minister of Finance of Seychelles, for
their presentations.
SIDS face several challenges, such as climate
change, natural disasters, transnational organized
crime and the illicit exploitation of natural resources.
All of these challenges are threats to peace and security
for humankind as a whole. These States have several
unique features, including their small size, their
isolation or remoteness, and the smallness of their
resource base, all of which means that we all need to be
more watchful and responsive to their needs.
On the issue of climate change, I think that it is
important to talk about the protection of SIDS against the
adverse impacts of that phenomenon. That will require
the implementation of an international network that is
more robust and has a higher profile so as to mobilize
international support to tackle this phenomenon. It
is also important that we make available all of the
necessary resources and financing so as to help these
countries to be in a position to better tackle and meet
these challenges, which constitute a real survival issue
for their populations.
There are many consequences for the rights and
the sovereignty and independence of those countries,
because entire territories could disappear, along with
entire nations. The Security Council must play a key and
leading role in meeting these challenges and responding
optimally to them. An example of this would be the
lack of resources available to those countries, which
might lead to conflicts and tension. It is important that
we be vigilant in meeting these challenges and find
solutions through dialogue and mediation, so as to avert
inter-community conflict.
We would like also to thank the French Government,
which will shortly host the Conference of the Parties
of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, in December this year. We call on all
countries that will participate in the meeting to reach an

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

agreement to counter that phenomenon when we meet
in December, so as to reach an agreement that fully
meets and responds to the needs of SIDS in particular.
Illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons
also constitutes one of the major threats with which we
are faced and a serious form of criminality, organized
crime in particular. This is a threat to the security
and to the economies of those countries, because the
criminal activities supported by such weapons have
been ramped up. Such criminality can threaten both
foreign and local investment. SIDS are a hub for
organized criminal gangs in many cases because of
their many unique features, including their geographic
remoteness and the difficulty of their authorities
effectively tackling trafficking owing to a lack of
resources. The international community, therefore,
commensurate with the requests of those countries,
must make available the requisite aid in order to make
sure that they can tackle phenomena such as these. The
Governments of those islands also need to shoulder
their responsibility to implement and roll out strategies
to address trafficking.
Turning to regional issues and initiatives, the
Governments of neighbouring island countries must
continue to coordinate with their neighbours in
order particularly to address the issue of illegal arms
trafficking, which often involves small arms, and
they must cooperate in a similar way with their larger
neighbours. The threats to international peace and
security for SIDS are often responded to in Security
Council resolutions. We have moved from a general
economic embargo to a targeted sanctions regime that
focuses on terrorism, cross-border attacks and crimes.
There are currently 15 sanctions regimes in place in
the United Nations, and fulfilling the mandates of the
sanctions Committees is a major challenge to small
island developing States. They have problems when
it comes to fully implementing sanctions regimes, in
particular because these countries are more exposed
to the activities of terrorist groups and organizations
and those who work to proliferate weapons of mass
destruction. Those sanctions regimes are often
very complex, particularly with regard to assessing
dual-purpose items, traffickers, travel bans, the
freezing of companies’ assets and the illicit use and
transportation of natural resources.
There is therefore an unprecedented need
for enhanced capacity to fight such phenomena.
Accordingly, in the framework of the 2014 high-level

S/PV.7499

review of the United Nations sanctions regime, Jordan
reaffirmed the importance of focusing on capacitybuilding and to aid those countries who have gaps in
the implementation of the sanctions regime. That can
be achieved through the establishment of a mechanism
allowing such countries to fulfil their legal international
commitments under the sanctions regime, thereby
enabling us all to remain confident that those sanctions
regimes are fully implemented.
In conclusion, we call upon the international
community to take the necessary steps to tackle those
peace and security challenges — in particular in
SIDS — and to work collectively to achieve the stated
objectives.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative of New Zealand to hold this
open debate on the security and peace challenges facing
small island developing States (SIDS). China welcomes
Foreign Minister McCully to New York to personally
preside over the meeting. I am grateful to Prime
Minister Malielegaoi, Prime Minister Simpson Miller
and Minister Adam for their respective briefings.
SIDS represent a major driving force in promoting
the realization of global peace, security and
development. In recent years, SIDS have become united
and strong and active in international cooperation and
thus have made major contributions to the maintenance
of global peace and promotion of common development.
However, for historical reasons and geographical and
resource limitations, SIDS are faced with the task of
pursuing further economic development while faced
with such non-traditional security threats as organized
transnational crimes, rampant piracy and climate
change. The international community should pay close
to attention to the concerns of SIDS and continue to
strive to safeguard their interests. In that connection, I
would like to offer the following points.
First, a sound concept of common development
should be established. In order to promote the
comprehensive development of SIDS, problems should
be addressed at their roots. Since development holds the
master key to a solution to all problems, the international
community should step up the implementation of the
measures found in the Barbados Programme of Action,
the Mauritius Strategy, the SIDS Accelerated Modalities
of Action, and the outcome document of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
designed to help SIDS achieve sustainable development.

15-2378223/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

In the meantime, efforts should be made to
establish, develop and deepen partnerships with SIDS
and establish mechanisms, in order to further open
markets to SIDS in support of their participation in
the global economy and international economic and
technical cooperation. All of that will create an inviting
environment for the development of SIDS. Efforts should
also be made to promote South-South cooperation,
explore innovative means of funding, strengthen
infrastructure development, establish interconnectivity
and promote the common development of SIDS. The
foreign debts of SIDS should be reduced so that their
own development capacity can be increased. Developed
countries should honour their commitments in the areas
of resources and capacity-building and step up the
transfer of technology so as to help those countries to
respond to special challenges, such as climate change.
Secondly, the non-traditional security threats
faced by SIDS should be properly addressed. In this
globalized world of ours, no country can address
these non-traditional security challenges on its own.
The international community should strengthen
international cooperation and help SIDS to better
respond to the above-mentioned challenges. When
addressing the challenges of non-traditional threats,
the voice of SIDS should be better heeded and
their sovereignty better respected, and constructive
assistance should be provided in accordance with their
needs.
Thirdly, more attention should be paid to the
capacity-building of SIDS. The emphasis should be on
providing comprehensive and coordinated support in
the area of information-sharing, technical training and
equipment assistance.
Fourthly, regional organizations such as the Pacific
Islands Forum and the Caribbean Community should
play an even greater role in responding to non-traditional
security challenges and form synergy by formulating a
unified strategy and coordinated course of action.
Fifthly, relevant agencies and organs of the United
Nations should work within their mandates and bring
into full play their respective advantages. The General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and the specialized agencies all have
their own mandates and functions. When helping
SIDS address challenges and pursue comprehensive
development, there should be a clear division of labour,
so as to avoid redundancy in functions and waste

24/87

30/07/2015

of resources. The international community should
also support the Office of the United Nations High
Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island
Developing States in playing a greater role and
stregthen its monitoring of the implementation of
various mechanisms and initiatives.
Helping SIDS pursue comprehensive development
is a requirement of the global cause of development.
It is also a shared responsibility of the international
community. We support the efforts of SIDS to accelerate
their own development and to improve their situation.
We are ready to join hands with the international
community to make a greater contribution to the
maintenance of social order and the achievement of
development and prosperity in small island developing
States.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General, the Prime Minister
of Jamaica, the Prime Minister of Samoa and the
Minister of Finance of Seychelles for their briefings,
and I thank all of the other distinguished leaders who
are present to participate in this open debate today.
In particular, I would like to thank New Zealand for
focusing the Council on such an important and too
often overlooked topic.
Rusina Rusin lives in Majuro, the capital of the
Marshall Islands, on land that has been in her family for
generations. She told journalists that she has never seen
storms like the ones she has seen in recent years, which
occur with much greater frequency and without the rain
and wind that used to signal their imminent arrival.
Rusina told reporters that in 2014, one of those storms
flooded her home, pulling many of her belongings and
those of her grandchildren who live with her out to
sea. More floods followed in February and March of
this year. Rusina, who described herself as not having
anything precious except land and grandchildren, said:
“Every time it floods, it affects the land, and it
costs me. I depend on the crops — the coconut
trees, bananas, and herbs for medicine. I could
never manage a subsistence life if this continues”.
Rusina’s story is the story of so many people
living in the small island developing States, who are
disproportionately bearing the consequences of global
and man-made problems. Today, I would like to speak to
three of those problems and what we as the international
community must do to address them.

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

The first is climate change. As President Obama said
recently, “This is not a problem for another generation.
It has serious implications for the way we live right
now”. Fourteen of the hottest fifteen years on record
have fallen in the first fifteen years of this century.
Last winter was the warmest winter the world has ever
recorded. Storms are getting stronger, droughts are
getting longer and, as Rusina’s story demonstrates, the
consequences of climate change impact virtually every
aspect of our lives, from our health to our livelihoods,
from our habitats to our security. The science is real,
the problems are real, and so too is our commitment to
addressing them and to doing so together.
One of the most effective ways to help small
island developing States and other territories already
experiencing the dramatic effects of climate change is
to reduce the activities that cause it. The United States is
committed to leading that effort, as is demonstrated by
our commitment, in March, to reduce our greenhouse
gas emissions to 26 to 28 per cent below 2005 levels by
2025. But in order to reach the crucial goal of limiting the
global temperature increase to two degrees Celsius, all
countries must reduce their footprint and work together
to reach an ambitious climate change agreement at the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change Conference in December, in Paris.
Many small island developing States are making
important contributions of their own to mitigate
climate change and adapt to its impact, as the Marshall
Islands recently did by committing to reduce emissions
by 32 per cent below 2010 levels by 2025. But they
cannot do it alone. We in the international community
have a critical role to play in supporting their efforts.
To give just one example, the United States Agency
for International Development’s Climate Change
Adaptation Project Preparation Facility — ADAPT
Asia-Pacific — is helping to build the capacity of
Governments to access and manage funding to meet
needs ranging from coastal resilience to food and water
security. In just two years, the ADAPT programme has
helped Pacific small island developing States to access
some $67 million from multilateral adaptation funds.
The second challenge is energy security. Small
island developing States lack large natural energy
resource endowments and dependence on highcost imported energy creates profound economic
vulnerability. As with their response to climate
change, small island developing States have shown real
leadership in addressing that challenge, in large part

S/PV.7499

by developing renewable energy sources. Samoa has
committed to achieving 100 per cent renewable energy
electricity-generation by 2017, and Aruba is well
on its way to meeting that goal by 2020. In Jamaica,
ground was broken earlier this year on the country’s
largest private sector renewable energy project — a
36-megawatt wind farm.
The United States has been and will continue to
be a key partner to the small island developing States
in developing clean energy sources. That is the aim of
President Obama’s announcement, in April, together
with our Caribbean and Central American partners, of
the creation of an energy security task force to drive
investment in renewable alternatives. It was also the
aim of a series of meetings the United States co-chaired
with the International Renewable Energy Agency and
the Secretariat of the Pacific Community just last
week in Hawaii — in which a number of small island
developing States participated — to share best practices
in generating clean energy alternatives.
And the third and final challenge I would like
to address today is ensuring the protection and
sustainability of our oceans. As Secretary of State John
Kerry said at the June 2014 Our Ocean conference he
convened,
“The protection of our oceans is a vital
international security issue…The connection
between a healthy ocean and life itself for every
single person on Earth cannot be overstated.”
While that connection holds for all people, there are
few places where the health of communities and the
oceans are more inextricably linked than in small island
developing States.
The United States understands the imperative
to protect our ocean and coastal environments –
particularly when they are endangered by pollution,
overfishing, acidification and other threats. To that
end, we have partnered with the Nature Conservancy to
implement a five year Caribbean Marine Biodiversity
Program, aimed at reducing threats to marine-coastal
biodiversity in the Caribbean.
We are also taking new action against illegal,
unreported, and unregulated fishing and seafood
fraud. Last year, President Obama tasked United States
Government agencies with developing concrete steps to
address that problem. The resulting 15 recommendations
include strengthening international enforcement and
developing a traceability system for all seafood sold in

15-2378225/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

the United States. We urge other countries to undertake
similar efforts to tackle that transnational threat to
sustainability.
Families like Rusina Rusin’s are already
experiencing the acute impact of man-made threats
to international security like climate change. Their
communities and nations are on the front lines, bearing
the disproportionate impact of problems that others
bear responsibility for causing. That, in itself, should
be enough to motivate us to take action.
If that is not enough — and it should be — if it is
not enough, consider this: if we do not act swiftly to
address those problems, all of the threats manifested
in Rusina’s community to health, livelihoods,
security — all of those threats will eventually be felt
in all of our communities. They are not someone else’s
problems, they are all of our problems. And they are
problems we must tackle with determination, with
speed and with unity.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I want to thank you, Sir, and
your delegation for organizing this seminal and timely
debate. We thank you, especially, for the concept note
(S/2015/543, annex) that you have provided to guide our
discussion.
We are greatly indebted to the Secretary-General,
the Prime Minister of Jamaica, the Prime Minister of
Samoa and the Minister of Finance of Seychelles for
sharing their profound and insightful perspectives on
the peace and security challenges confronting small
island developing States (SIDS). These challenges are
aggravated by the inherent geographical circumstances
of SIDS, including their relatively small size,
remoteness, narrow resource base and exposure to
environmental degradation. In turn, these factors
conspire to impede not only their socioeconomic and
security aspirations, but especially their capacity to
fulfil some of their international obligations.
Over the years, SIDS have consistently demonstrated
their resolve to address their problems. However,
due to the transnational nature of those problems,
the imperative of forging creative partnerships for
effective redress at both the regional and international
levels, is crucial. What we believe is indicated is that
strengthening regional cooperation mechanisms among
SIDS is pivotal in addressing their unique difficulties
and bridging their capacity gaps. The Caribbean
Community, the Pacific Islands Forum and the Indian
Ocean Commission are notable institutions that can

26/87

30/07/2015

fill those important roles. We acknowledge their
achievements in functional cooperation in various
sectors, including education, health, culture, sports and
security. They have also recorded an appreciable level
of coordination in foreign trade and economic policies.
At the international level, the significant role
played by the Alliance of Small Island States, as an
all-encompassing representative group, provides
the necessary impetus for protecting the interests of
SIDS. Through the activities of the Alliance of Small
Island States, United Nations Member States have
been regularly updated on the growing threats to the
peace and security of those States. That effort led to
the convening of three United Nations conferences on
SIDS, with significant outcomes: the 1994 Barbados
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States, the 2005 Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States and the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action Pathway of 2014.
We welcome those outcomes and urge Member States
and all stakeholders to work assiduously towards
implementation of the commitments made at the
conferences. We must also emphasize the imperative
for a more integrated approach to the sustainable
development goals of SIDS, especially an increase in
foreign direct investment.
The unique challenges facing SIDS in our time
deserve the special attention of the Council, as many
speakers before me have noted. Those challenges in
some cases clearly constitute threats to international
peace and security. The first step in that direction,
in our view, is to strengthen the partnership between
the Council and the small island developing States.
A mechanism for regular reporting to the Council on
developments that could impact the peace and security
of small island developing States could be instituted.
That, we believe, would facilitate the Council’s
strategic responsiveness to the security concerns of
the small island developing States and determine the
level of assistance required to enhance their peace and
security needs.
Ultimately, we believe that broad-based support that
includes predictable financing from the international
community is essential for the development of SIDS.
We reiterate the need for increased multi-stakeholder
partnerships and a pragmatic approach towards
addressing the security challenges of SIDS. The

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

urgency of the threat to SIDS requires focus, deliberate
multilateral action. The unique mandate of the Security
Council places it in an undisputed position to lead that
great effort.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate.
I would certainly like to thank the Prime Minister of
Samoa, the Prime Minister of Jamaica and the Minister
of Finance of Seychelles for their insightful briefings.
This debate provides a rare opportunity to discuss the
specific challenges faced by the small island developing
States (SIDS) in relation to international peace and
security.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union later
today.
The outcome document of the Third International
SIDS Conference in September 2014, the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action Pathway (Samoa
Pathway), acknowledged the particular vulnerabilities
of SIDS and called for the coordinated action of the
international community to address them in a coherent
and comprehensive manner. Its implementation is of
vital importance for the SIDS, some of which are facing
today, in their own words, “an existential threat”.
The concept note (S/2015/543, annex) provided
for this debate lists a number of challenges they
face. Among them, climate change — which, inter
alia, reduces access to and the availability of vital
resources, such as food and fresh water — threatens
the very subsistence of local populations, exacerbates
migratory, health and humanitarian pressures, and
contributes to human insecurity and potentially to new
conflicts. Land is literally disappearing from under
the feet of some of the SIDS. In 2005, Vanuatu’s Tegua
residents were among the first to be relocated as a result
of climate change. Climate-related relocation is also the
fate of the people of the Carteret Islands of Papua New
Guinea. They are among the first, but certainly not the
last to be threatened by rising waters.
The Government of Kiribati was forced to buy land
in another country, Fiji, to grow food and eventually
resettle its population. With the continuous rise of
sea levels, States like Tuvalu, Maldives, Seychelles,
Micronesia, Vanuatu and others, as well as also large
parts of low lying countries like Bangladesh, risk going
underwater. The consequences of such developments
would be very serious and have an inevitable impact

S/PV.7499

on the wider regional and international security. But
as Samoa’s Prime Minister said during the Third
International SIDS Conference last year, “Sympathy
and pity will not provide solace nor halt the devastating
impacts of climate change”. Small as they are, these
countries are taking important initiatives and are at
the forefront of very important progress being made in
terms of renewable and sustainable development.
The Security Council should fully recognize
climate change-induced risks and tensions and the role
of climate change as a threat multiplier to international
peace and security, and act in a preventive and proactive
manner. Resolute, coherent and consolidated action by
the international community aimed at strengthening
State and regional capacities to manage the effects of
climate change amd promote resilience, sustainability,
and resource and energy security at the global level
has never been more important. In that context, there
is a pressing need to reach a universal and ambitious
climate change agreement in Paris this year.
Oceans hold about 96 per cent of the Earth’s water.
Further, ocean acidification, increased flooding and
shoreline erosion, fish-stock depletion and rising
seawater temperatures would have inevitable security
consequences for all humankind. Protecting the oceans
and marine environment from further degradation is a
question of our common future. One issue specifically
mentioned in the Samoa Pathway is the need to address
the long-term effects of sea-dumped munitions and their
impact on human health and the marine environment.
As the main sponsor of General Assembly resolution
68/208 on sea-dumped chemical munitions, Lithuania
fully shares the concerns of SIDS in that respect and
looks forward to close cooperation on related matters.
Due to their size, remoteness and institutional
capacity constraints, SIDS’ vulnerabilities are many
and varied. Besides environmental threats, drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime, maritime
security and piracy, as well as the less immediate
threats related to cybersecurity and terrorism, are huge
for any one country to tackle, but especially for small,
geographically isolated developing island States. Since
2011, Lithuania has taken part in the international
efforts against piracy off the coast of Somalia in the
Indian Ocean, as part of the European Union Naval
Force Atalanta, Operation Atlanta. We are pleased
to note that such efforts have shown positive results,
leading to a dramatic reduction of pirate attacks since
2013. We appreciate the efforts of Seychelles in that

15-2378227/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

respect, which established a vigorous judicial system
enabling the quick prosecution and conviction of pirates
and thus made a significant contribution to the common
effort of tackling the threat of piracy.
Among the multiple challenges that SIDS face,
the illicit trafficking, destabilizing accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons remain a
major concern. My delegation was happy to initiate and
negotiate resolution 2220 (2015) in May, and we hope
that its full implementation will contribute to tackling
those very serious issues, because in the smallest of
States, even a few hundred weapons in the wrong hands
have the potential to plunge countries into chaos.
In the Caribbean region, as the Prime Minister
of Jamaica reminded us, the illegal smuggling of
weapons is a key driver of violence, criminality and the
empowerment of criminal gangs and accounts for up to
70 per cent of murders. The loss of life, predominantly
among the young, hampers long-term socioeconomic
development, with destabilizing effects. While each
situation is different, stockpile management, an
accountable security sector and the rule of law are key
to tackling armed violence. Comprehensive firearms
legislation, including import, export and transit controls,
is also essential. In 2011, the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) countries adopted a Declaration on Small
Arms and Light Weapons as their regional framework
for tackling the problem. Such regional cooperation
initiatives are very important and can offer useful
examples for others.
The adoption and entry into force of the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT) represents a unique opportunity to
make relevant legislation more rigorous and uniform
across the regions. We welcome the fact that the
majority of SIDS have either signed or ratified the ATT
and have taken steps to develop model legislation for its
implementation. While terrorism is not yet a major issue
among SIDS, one cannot lower one’s guard. Porous
marine borders can be easily exploited by criminal
and terrorist groups, also in view of the evolving links
between terrorism and transnational organized crime,
the pernicious presence of which is already felt by many
of the SIDS. For countries that rely heavily on tourism
as a source of revenue, rampant criminality or an attack
against foreign tourists can cause a serious blow to
local economies, with considerable effects. Preventive
efforts should be taken to ensure that relevant national
legislations are compliant with international norms and

28/87

30/07/2015

standards and that necessary capacities to deal with
such deadly phenomena are put in place.
While some SIDS have made impressive strides
in building such capacities and fostering regional
cooperation, the CARICOM Implementation Agency
for Crime and Security and the Regional Intelligence
Fusion Centre can be mentioned in that respect.
Support and assistance by relevant United Nations and
other bodies, including on counter-terrorism, remain
of critical importance given the limited resources and
capabilities of those States.
In Samoa last year, the Secretary-General
called SIDS a magnifying glass whose lenses reveal
vulnerabilities that demand an international response.
In the processes affecting SIDS today, we may be
seeing a harbinger of a global tomorrow. If we fail to
act with all due urgency, the threats and vulnerabilities
affecting small island developing States today may
spread to affect much larger communities, threatening
international peace and security. More often than not,
in terms of prevention the Council has been lacking,
doing too little too late. Acknowledging early and acting
together on the security challenges to SIDS offers a rare
opportunity to take preventive action. That opportunity
should not be missed.
The President: I request the Protocol Officer to
escort His Excellency Mr. Anote Tong, President of
Kiribati, to his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Anote Tong, President of Kiribati, was escorted
to a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I welcome
President Anote Tong and give him the floor.
President Tong: Let me begin by thanking you,
Sir, for this opportunity to address the Security Council
at this open debate. Let me also take this opportunity
to thank the Prime Ministers of Samoa and Jamaica,
together with the Minister of Finance of Seychelles, for
their very informative statements early in this meeting.
I believe that as a global community, we have
gone well past debating what should and should not
be considered global security challenges, and what are
and are not immediate threats to global security and
survival. As Pacific island leaders, through the Majuro
Declaration adopted in the Republic of the Marshall
Islands in 2013, we declared climate change to be a
security threat to Pacific island nations and even sought
to bring the matter to the attention of the Council for

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

consideration. The initiative to hold this open debate of
the Security Council is therefore particularly welcome.
It is also encouraging to note the growing momentum
in the level of global acknowledgement of the issue of
climate change. This is an issue borne from the actions
of the whole of humankind, and yet remains lacking in
effective global leadership and global accountability,
and remains peripheral in the considerations of those
with the capacity and capability to address and mitigate
the relentless advance of climate change impacts.
Ironically and regrettably, it is also those with the least
capacity and the least capability who are bearing the
full brunt and impact of a security challenge that has
the capacity to wreak extensive damage — a security
challenge that has the capacity to wipe out whole
nations and whole cultures and indeed wipe out life as
we know it today on this planet.
The science forthcoming from the fourth assessment
report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change and elsewhere, together with our individual
experiences in our own countries and events taking
place in different regions as we speak today, provide
more than ample evidence that something is terribly
wrong. It is evidence that we are nearing the point of
no return, and yet we continue to procrastinate and to
remain hesitant, willing and hoping our neighbours
will take the first step, rather than taking the crucial
first step ourselves that will set the tone for the global
community to follow.
We have come all this distance, at considerable
cost, to attend this event because for us it is of vital
importance. Our people are asking the question: What
is it that we can expect to come out of this Security
Council event? Can we as leaders return today to
our people and be confident enough to say: yes, your
existence and your lives are important and we, your
leaders of the global community, have formulated
options to ensure that no matter how high the sea rises
and no matter how severe the storms get, there are
credible technical solutions to raise your islands and
your homes, and the necessary resources are available
to ensure that all will be in place before it is too late.
For those of us in Kiribati and other countries on
the front line of climate change, the impacts began
happening yesterday — last year. For us, any incremental
rise in sea level threatens our very existence and our
very livelihoods. Time is of the essence, and the urgency
of climate change as a global security threat cannot be
stressed enough. The quiet onslaught of climate change

S/PV.7499

lulls us into a false sense of security — into the belief
that the cost of addressing it now is far too high and can
be deferred to the next generation. This makes it even
more deadly and dangerous as a security challenge that
should not be ignored or treated with complacency. We
have all experienced to some extent the severity and
frequency of changing weather patterns and we can
all understand that when — not if — these climate
change-related disasters grow more frequent, the
entire global community will suffer from increasing
instability and increasing conflicts.
However, we all as global leaders must provide the
needed leadership to do something now and to ensure
that this meeting of the Security Council can deliver, be
decisive and agree on a set of actions that will provide
some guarantees of future security to all. We owe our
children, our grandchildren and their children more
than that. We need action that can guarantee that no
one will be left behind and, most importantly, urgent
action to address the security and existential challenges
from climate change for the most vulnerable peoples in
front-line States.
The sad reality is that we cannot do this alone;
hence our appeal today to the Council and, of course,
to the rest of the global community. For as responsible
global citizens of this planet, which we share as a home,
it is our moral obligation to ensure its preservation. It
is our moral obligation to ensure that the future of our
children, our grandchildren and their children is safe
and secure. For their sake, we must us do the right thing
as a matter of urgency.
Let me conclude by sharing our very traditional
Kiribati blessings of Tå Mauri, Tå Raoi, ao Tå Tabomoa.
The President: I thank President Anote Tong for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Premier Talagi of Niue.
Mr. Talagi: In our discussion with respect to
security threats to the Pacific islands, I shall focus my
attention and comments on climate change. As we have
heard today from all speakers, security in the Pacific is
not confined to climate change alone, but I see climate
change as the being the most challenging and the most
critical to the people of the Pacific and the world.
I believe that we should set a visionary target of
1.5 per cent carbon dioxide levels for 2100, and that we
should then also set targets on a decade basis to ensure
that we can achieve that visionary target. Currently,

15-2378229/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

each country decides its own target. It is a unilateral
target based on its own assessment of roughly what
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change has set.
There is also a vast difference in the perception
that we have and the responses to the disasters that
occur. The larger countries respond regionally, within
the country itself. The impacts are considered localized
and may or may not impact the whole country a great
deal at all. For the small island countries, however, a
disaster is not isolated in a region; the whole country is
affected. Consequently, national disasters often occur
with respect to droughts, cyclones, tsunamis, flooding
and other phenomena that are becoming regional
disasters.
I will now talk about some of the issues that have
been raised by members of the Council today, the
economic impacts that these will have on our countries.
But the way in which we perceive climate change and
disasters, or true national disaster, are different. Why
is that? Why do we perceive climate change and the
disasters that occur differently from how the larger
developed countries perceive them? For the larger
economies, for the large countries, it is a blip; for small
economies, small islands, it is a major disaster. That is
why responses to climate change are so vastly different
and why we cannot reach agreement on what we should
be doing.
One of the things that I wanted to raise in this
Chamber is that we come here with the information
given to us by climate scientists. We are politicians.
That is not our role. Our role is to figure out the politics
of climate change and determine and make decisions
on that basis, using climate science to underpin the
information, the decisions and the policies we make in
that respect. We all know that there is a commonality
in the disasters that occur. Psychological trauma,
debilitating illnesses, lack of hope from loss of lives
and livelihoods are the social and human impacts of
natural disasters. The funny thing is that it is true
not only for small island countries, but also for large
countries. Those present here have this effect with their
own people.
The only other thing that is important with respect
to climate change, as far as I can see, at the present
time is funding. Unfortunately, we need funds to enable
us to continue to rebuild our gross domestic product
(GDP) after major disasters. And, as I have already
pointed out, they are major in the sense that they have
30/87

30/07/2015

an impact. The President of this Council today just
said that 45 per cent of Vanuatu’s GDP was affected
by a cyclone. For some of us it is almost a 100 per cent,
so we have to rebuild again. Some here have to do the
same thing within their regions.
The question that is asked is: what does this have to
do with the Security Council? So far, nothing. We talk
a great deal about climate change, but has the Security
Council responded to climate change in a manner that
it should? I like the example given by Minister Murray
McCully. The Government of New Zealand recognized
that we needed some support with our energy, to
reduce our dependence on energy, and it turned up and
installed solar plants, and away we go. Now some of
those countries have reduced their imports of oil to
virtually nothing.
I like that response, and I would like the Council
to consider that response. Some States represented here
spend lots of money hiring consultants who come and
tell us, “This is what we believe you should be doing”.
Clearly, that is a slightly different approach to what
we perceive. Most of the time most of the money is
spent on consultants. In fact, I sometimes think, sitting
under my coconut tree in Niue, that 80 to 90 per cent
of the funds that are provided by countries, by their tax
payers, to help us is spent by consultants, with your
support. It cannot be right, surely.
The final thing that I want to talk about is fish and
minerals of the Pacific. We hear ourselves described as
being poor — and we are poor. We have got plenty of
fish, but we are still poor. We have minerals in the sea
now and on land, and we are still poor. Why is that?
Because countries represented here are not helping us.
Give us a fish here, off the returns from the fish that
you catch in our waters. Countries need to do that, to
help us. Countries need to do that with the minerals that
we are looking to develop at the present moment under
the sea. We are not poor. We are rich.
But Jamaica is poor, some countries are, and my
plea for all here today is to rethink that perception of
the Pacific and work with us in true partnerships to
help us. Exploit and harness sustainably the resources
that we have in fish and minerals in the sea.
I hope I have not caused too many problems today.
Obviously, Mr. President, you have given me two new
islands to work from. I thank you very much for the
time you have given me to say my little piece about how
I perceive it on my coconut in the middle of the Pacific.

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I thank Premier Talagi of Niue for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Charles Fernandez,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Trade of
Antigua and Barbuda.
Mr. Fernandez (Antigua and Barbuda): I welcome
this opportunity to exchange views with all those
present on international security matters that are of
interest to small States and the larger, more powerful
States and members of the Security Council. At a time
when the Council’s agenda is packed with a multitude
of crises, conflicts and issues that threaten peace and
security, and which are more headline-grabbing, the
chance to share the perspective of the security concerns
of small States is indeed welcome.
Small island developing States (SIDS) face a
multifaceted set of security challenges that require
a pre-emptive response. Ours are not the type of
challenges that easily grab headlines, yet they must be
tackled to safeguard our very existence.
The current international security structures and
mechanisms, in particular the Security Council, are not
set up to adequately address the security challenges of
small island developing States in concrete, actionable
ways. The types of threats we face today, such as climate
change, are not the same as those faced when such
structures were created. Additionally, the geopolitical
landscape has changed significantly, leading to changes
in the nature of threats to our peace and security. They
are not combative, not based on military considerations
and sanctions. The threats to our peace and security go
far beyond the military dimension; they are intricately
entwined in the social, economic and environmental
pillars of sustainability.
The threats to the borders of SIDS, the shorelines
of the Caribbean and the State of Antigua and Barbuda
are real and present threats. To the concerned citizens
of SIDS, these threats appear to be irreversible, but if
acted upon with determination and zeal by the Security
Council and regarded as high priority by the international
community, these peace and security challenges can be
curtailed, insulated and even reversed.
Climate change and sea level rise are unquestionably
the most urgent threat to the environment and the
sustainable development of SIDS. Climate change, if
not addressed, has the potential to threaten the peace
and security of all SIDS, including their socioeconomic
well-being, particularly since it could have negative

S/PV.7499

impacts on the tourism industry, the driver of most of
our economies. In the case of Antigua and Barbuda,
because tourism accounts for 70 per cent of our gross
domestic product, it is a matter of economic survival.
Within SIDS, infrastructures and human health
will be threatened by the effects of climate change.
This threat is further magnified by the relatively
small land masses of our countries and the fact
that our populations and economic activities are
concentrated in coastal areas. Our high dependence on
coastal ecosystems for food, livelihood, security and
protection from extreme events makes the threat of
climate change all the more challenging. Furthermore,
unresolved problems stemming from poverty, scarcity
of resources, constrained governance, increasing crime
and the demands of adaptation make SIDS even more
vulnerable to natural hazards.
The peace and security challenges to SIDS are
worsened by failure to build capacity and by insufficient
financing for the implementation of strong policies
and mitigation mechanisms. In addition, available
resources are channelled predominantly to post-disaster
operations instead of to disaster risk reduction. The
impact of the international drug trade and the prevalence
of small arms are also a significant security threat that
requires collective international collaboration if we are
to successfully tackle the problem.
SIDS economies are also highly exposed to
external shocks resulting from our heavy dependence
on a few markets and the erosion of trade preferences
within these markets. SIDS are inherently economically
vulnerable due to, among other factors, our remoteness,
our limited ability to diversify, our heavy dependence
on a narrow range of exports and the high costs of
importation; for the most part, prices for essential
goods such as food and fuel are highly volatile.
These challenges are best illustrated by some of the
major trade imbalances. For example, Caribbean SIDS
have witnessed the erosion of our trade preferences with
our traditional trading partners, which has resulted
in an increase in the global market share of our trade
competitors, while in some cases crippling some of the
industries within the Caribbean. Antigua and Barbuda
has been facing such a challenge for the past 10 to 12
years.
SIDS, and in particular Caribbean SIDS, are
regarded as some of the most indebted countries in
the world. This debt burden poses peace and security

15-2378231/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

challenges beyond our shores. A few years ago, the
global financial crisis decimated capital flows, savings
and investment in every small island State, resulting in
negative growth and economies that are now teetering
on the brink of bankruptcy. For example, Antigua and
Barbuda lost 25 per cent of its gross domestic product,
and many other small island States in the Caribbean
have also suffered from contracting economies. These
are examples of the peace and security challenges that
threaten the existence of small island developing States.
In conclusion, I would like to paraphrase the Prime
Minister of Antigua and Barbuda, the Honourable
Gaston Browne, who warns that not acting to address
these challenges, not acting and doing nothing, will
redound to the detriment of larger more secure States
as they will be forced to cope with the agony of
human displacement of determined refugees and the
consequences of the human misery of people flooding
their borders on a quest for peace and security. We
congratulate New Zealand for recognizing that there
ought to be a greater push at the highest level within
the United Nations to highlight the peace and security
challenges facing SIDS. Finally, as the saying goes,
“men argue, nature acts”. Let us hope that after today’s
debate the international community will join with SIDS
to act.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Immigration of the Bahamas.
Mr. Mitchell (Bahamas): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Government of New Zealand for this very
timely opportunity to discuss the peace and security
challenges of small island developing States (SIDS)
and to highlight in this forum some of their specific
vulnerabilities. My Prime Minister asked me, in
recognition of the special assistance New Zealand gave
to the Bahamas over the last year as it implemented its
new tax system, to attend today’s meeting so we could
express our hopes for its success and support this
laudable effort. I would also like to say at the outset
that we align ourselves with the statements made by the
Prime Minister of Jamaica and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Antigua and Barbuda.
The Bahamas has stated in many forums that, for
our country, there are no higher priorities than the
environment, fighting crime and containing illegal
immigration. These matters for the Bahamas go to the
very root of our existence. That was the point I made
when I spoke in the general debate at the General
Assembly last year (see A/69/PV.20). I would now add
32/87

30/07/2015

to that list of priorities the issues of unemployment and
the economy. All of our efforts are intended to go to
the root of peace and security. The main themes are
buttressed by our work to ensure that we have a safer,
more prosperous, modern, peaceful and ultimately
stronger Bahamas and region.
Climate change represents the most serious
global environmental and development challenge,
with far reaching security implications. As a country
particularly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of
climate change, the Bahamas believes that the security
implications of climate change must be primarily
addressed at the multilateral level by bodies that
are inclusive, representative and transparent. We
underscore that if urgent and ambitious actions are
taken to comprehensively address climate change in
this context, the security implications associated with
climate change will be reduced, thereby diminishing
the existential threat faced by some SIDS, including
those of us in the Caribbean Community.
The Bahamas is entirely convinced that the
international community must attach the highest priority
to completing ongoing climate change negotiations
within the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change on a new legally binding agreement
that results in the achievement of substantial emission
reductions in the shortest possible time frame and
significantly increases the level of resources available
to vulnerable developing countries, including SIDS, in
order to assist them in adapting to the adverse impacts
of climate change. What is important is that access to
these resources must for all SIDS and low-lying coastal
developing States be at the concessional rates and
not made available based on the determinant of gross
domestic product per capita.
The Bahamas has also been grappling with serious
crime in our society, related, in large measure, to the
inability of young males to settle disputes without
recourse to violence and the resultant proliferation of
gang activity and illicit drugs, small arms and light
weapons, and ammunition trafficking. The Bahamas
was therefore actively involved in the negotiations
leading to the successful adoption of the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT) and considered that adoption a
landmark accomplishment for the United Nations.
Our Government believes the entry into force of
the ATT will contribute to peace and security in the
Bahamas. Accordingly, we deposited the instruments
of ratification of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

to the Arms Trade Treaty on 25 September 2014. We
continue to fight the illegal drug trade and trafficking in
persons and have been investing in social intervention
programmes in order to fight crime.
I spoke earlier of the adverse effects of illegal
immigration on our national security. In this regard,
we have made serious efforts to stop the flow of
undocumented non-Bahamian nationals into our
territory. New policies are now in place and there will
be strict adherence to these measures in order to stop
that flow. Last year, the Bahamas entered into important
agreements with our immediate neighbours — Cuba,
the Dominican Republic and Haiti — to come to
terms with the vexing situations that impact our good
relations, including reaching accords on fishing and on
migration. We fully intend to bring illegal migration
under control.
A moment ago, I added unemployment and the
economy to the list of my country’s highest priorities.
On that front, the Bahamas is now facing an existential
threat to good governance— the realization that,
if not properly managed, a single investor can seek
to destabilize the governance of a country through
dominance of its economy and deliberate and improper
interference in its local politics. Add to that the efforts
of various multilateral bodies and some Member
States to undermine the economies of many Caribbean
Community States by imposing mandates on the
financial-services sectors that are now an essential part
of our economies. Such imposed mandates are inimical
to fair trade. While these multilateral bodies and
Member States may see their zeal for tax collection as
a moral triumph on their part, the resulting destruction
caused by moving the goal posts and changing the rules
without consultation is a moral negative rather than a
triumph. If the economies of our countries collapse,
leading to our citizens’ departure from their homes, the
migration that would cause could only be destabilizing
around the world. That is a threat to peace and security.
We have been asked today to consider the role that
the Security Council might play with regard to the
assistance provided to SIDS in addressing challenges to
the maintenance of peace and security, including those
I have highlighted. In response, the Bahamas would
say that while we see a role for the Security Council
in combating such threats and challenges as part of a
multifaceted and collaborative global response, it bears
repeating that those threats and challenges must be
addressed primarily at the multilateral level by bodies

S/PV.7499

that are inclusive, representative and transparent.
Finally, in that connection, I would conclude by
calling for reform of the Security Council, which we
support — a change that is long overdue, that would
reflect twenty-first-century realities, and that could see
a rotating seat for the small island developing States.
Once again, I am grateful for this opportunity to
address the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade of Barbados.
Ms. McClean (Barbados): It is a pleasure to see New
Zealand seated among the 15 members of the Security
Council, where, typically, the perspectives of small
island developing States (SIDS) are not articulated. My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on the peace and security
challenges facing small island developing States,
which for the first time brings the focus of the Security
Council to the specific concerns of SIDS.
At the Third International Conference on Small
Island Developing States in Samoa, the importance
of peace and security was reaffirmed. The preamble
to the Conference’s SIDS Accelerated Modalities of
Action (SAMOA) Pathway outcome document (General
Assembly resolution 69/15, annex) reaffirmed
“the importance of freedom, peace and security,
respect for all human rights, including the right to
development and the right to an adequate standard
of living, including the right to food, the rule of law,
gender equality, women’s empowerment, reducing
inequalities and the overall commitment to just and
democratic societies for development.”
The Government of Barbados continues to oppose
the proliferation of nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons. On a day-to-day basis, however, we must
focus on the trade in small arms and light weapons that
facilitates traffic in illicit drugs and other organized
crime, undermines our economy and can destabilize
society. In the 2011 Declaration on Small Arms
and Light Weapons of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), Heads of Government emphasized the
grave threat posed by small arms and light weapons and
their ammunition, and committed to implementing all
necessary actions at the national and regional level to
fully combat their illicit trade. Moreover, in 2013 the
Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community
adopted a CARICOM crime and security strategy
entitled “Securing the Region”. It lists a number of

15-2378233/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

immediate significant threats to the region, such as
transnational organized crime, gang crime, cyber
crime, financial crime and corruption.
The situation is of course made worse by the
many vulnerabilities peculiar to or common among
SIDS. They include narrow resource bases, small
domestic markets, a susceptibility to external shocks
owing to high degrees of openness, and environmental
vulnerability. The threats are made more significant
by the geography of SIDS. Often made up of small
land masses, SIDS have air and maritime borders
that are multiple times larger. The cost of protecting
national borders is thus prohibitive, and difficult in
circumstances where SIDS find it equally challenging
to exploit their important maritime resources and are
therefore unable to benefit fully from them. Taken
together, these threats to peace and security require the
diversion of already limited resources at a significant
cost to national development. They have a grave
impact on the socioeconomic development of Barbados
and other CARICOM States, extracting a high toll in
human lives and productivity, lowering the quality of
life, impeding social development and undermining
economic growth.
In Barbados and throughout the Caribbean region,
we are aware of the need for international partnerships
in facing challenges to peace and security. We are
pleased by the decision of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to re-establish a presence in
the Caribbean, and expect that its contribution as a
global leader in crime prevention will help us in the
burdensome task we must undertake. We look forward
to an early commencement of the project in Barbados.
It is often said that there can be no peace without
development, and no development without peace. SIDS
have made dedicated efforts towards both those ends.
We call on developed States and international financial
institutions to support small island developing States,
which are engaged in a constant fight to raise the level
of development they have attained. In the SAMOA
Pathway, member States recalled how critically
important international cooperation and partnerships
are to achieving SIDS’ sustainable development. Peace
and security are integral enablers of that development.
We maintain that these issues are inextricably linked
and that a holistic approach must be taken to them in
order to ensure success.
As ocean States, SIDS attach particular importance
to maintaining healthy seas. We remain concerned by
34/87

30/07/2015

the myriad threats facing our oceans. They include
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, pollution,
acidification and coastal runoff. As a region, we are
acutely aware of the deleterious effects that these
threats can have on our communities’ food security
and livelihoods. We therefore welcome the ongoing
discussions taking place here at the United Nations
aimed at formal recognition of how important the
conservation and sustainable use of our oceans, seas and
marine resources are to the sustainable development of
SIDS. Barbados congratulates New Zealand and other
members of the Security Council for the constructive
role they continue to play in this issue.
As we engage in this dialogue on the peace and
security challenges facing small island developing
States, it is clear that the narrow postwar definition
of peace and security that has guided the work of the
Council in its 70 years of existence must be broadened.
Much has changed since 1945. The Organization must
keep pace and step into the twenty-first century. Change
can only serve to make it more inclusive and dynamic.
I would like to briefly mention the issue of climate
change. The existential threat posed to SIDS by
climate change can only be tackled by a comprehensive
international effort grounded in the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
Barbados is supportive of the various arenas in
which this peril is being tackled and appreciates the
supportive framework that these multiple processes
offer. However, we maintain that the negotiations
process under the UNFCCC remains the pre-eminent
and most appropriate space for discussions on climate
change to take place.
In conclusion, the Government of Barbados thanks
you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative during your
presidency to organize this special event dedicated to
the unique challenges faced by SIDS. We look forward
to a time in the near future when the peace and security
challenges facing SIDS are an integral part of the work
of the Security Council. It is our hope that this debate
will be a step in that direction.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Fiji.
Mr. Kubuabola (Fiji): Fiji aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the President of Kiribati, His
Excellency Anote Tong, on behalf of the Pacific small
island developing States (SIDS).

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7499

I thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation to
participate in this Security Council debate. I wish in
particular to convey Fiji’s gratitude to you, Foreign
Minister McCully, and the Government of New Zealand
for convening this debate. I also take this opportunity
to extend Fiji’s congratulations to you on the occasion
of your presidency of the Council for the month of July.

greenhouse-gas emissions, causing climate change
and ocean acidification. This has to stop, or at least be
severely curtailed, if we are going to have sustainable
development on this planet. We therefore call for a
much greater share of global capital to be directed at
the development of renewable energy sources and green
growth frameworks for the future we want.

By way of introduction, may I also make the point
that many small island developing States are actively
contributing to the management of global security
problems. Fiji, for instance, has been participating in
United Nations peacekeeping operations since 1978.
Our participation has come at a considerable cost to
our country. We have lost precious, innocent lives in
the course of Blue Helmet duties, and the provision
of peacekeeping personnel has cost our Government
substantial amounts from our national budgets. Despite
these burdens, Fiji remains steadfast in its commitment
to the cause of United Nations peacekeeping.

I turn now to the threat to the biodiversity of the
world’s environment, with particular emphasis on
oceans and seas. It is essential that we protect and
restore the health, productivity and resilience of our
oceans, marine ecosystems and fisheries. We are
challenged to maintain their biodiversity, enable their
conservation and manage the sustainable use of their
resources for present and future generations.

Climate change has emerged as the biggest threat
to the security of small island developing States, and
Fiji is no exception in this regard. Climate change
has been accurately described as a risk multiplier.
The man-made causes of climate change are now well
established, and it must be clear to all by now that small
island developing States are the victims of a problem
not of their creation.
In the south-west Pacific, we face a future in which
sea levels will rise to the great detriment of our island
foreshores. Likewise, we will be attacked by tropical
storms of unprecedented severity and frequency. While
the rest of the world debates the implications of climate
change, we in the small islands and atolls of the Pacific
are having to deal with the problem, because it is
already upon us.
To respond to the security threat of climate change,
we need strategic investment in adaptation measures.
We need to move from rhetoric to a more pragmatic
and action-oriented response. We believe that it is for
the Security Council and development partners to bring
greater international effort to ensuring that we have the
capacity, both human and institutional, to deal with
this existential threat to the security of the small island
developing States.
One obvious response measure is to address
the issue of sustainable energy in a meaningful way.
Supplying energy through burning fossil fuels for
electricity, heat and transport is a major source of

The marine environment provides opportunities
for sustainable economic growth for SIDS, but only
if we can overcome existing threats. The ongoing
overexploitation of ocean resources through illegal,
unregulated and unreported (IUU) fishing is a
significant security threat to SIDS, in relation to
both sovereignty issues and the overall sustainability
of marine resources. IUU fishing deprives coastal
communities of their source of livelihood and income
and is thus a security threat to the economies of SIDS.
We call on bodies such as the Council to help small
island developing States overcome this problem by
coalescing in international cooperation and technical
support mechanisms to strengthen the monitoring,
control and surveillance of our oceans. It is largely
because of these security threats to our marine
environment that the Triennial Oceans and Seas Global
Conference process is being constructed, in order to
ensure the integrity of the forthcoming sustainable
development goals on the sustainable use of marine
resources.
The third area we wish to address is that of the
vulnerability of small island developing States to
the criminal activities of the wider international
community. By definition, SIDS are vulnerable owing
to their small size, developing economies and isolated
locations. Many struggle to adequately control their
sovereign boundaries. The resources of organized
crime from larger countries often exceed those of SIDS.
It is thus that many of them are fighting losing battles
against the illegal activities of drug traders and human
traffickers.

15-2378235/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

Transnational organized crime is a security
threat to small island developing States because of
the aforementioned control capacities, particularly in
relation to effective border controls. But it is also a
security threat because of the ways and means by which
organized crime introduces corruption to vulnerable
small island developing States. As the sources of this
organized crime are the supply-and-demand markets
to which these illegal activities are ultimately directed,
we call on the countries concerned to give greater
cooperation, assistance and resources to small island
developing States to combat these illegal activities.
In conclusion, we join with others in calling for
the Council to remain seized of the security challenges
faced by SIDS. We repeat the conclusions of the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities for Action (Samoa Pathway) on
the urgent need to strengthen international cooperation
and ensure genuine and durable partnership at the
national, regional and international levels as the best
means of overcoming these challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Immigration of Papua New
Guinea.
Mr. Pato (Papua New Guinea): Papua New Guinea
supports the position to be advanced by Tonga and
Maldives, as Chairs, on behalf of the Pacific small
island developing States and the Alliance of Small
Island States.
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for ably steering
the work of the Security Council this month. We
commend New Zealand’s initiatives and facilitation
of this important yet rare dialogue for small island
developing States (SIDS).
The General Assembly has recognized the unique
vulnerabilities of SIDS. We therefore strongly urge
the Security Council to give greater consideration to
the special circumstances of SIDS in relation to both
traditional and non-traditional security concerns. Much
has been said by the other speakers before me on this
issue.
The United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change remains the primary forum to address
climate-change concerns. But more agencies of the
United Nations system and others are needed to be
engaged, including the General Assembly, the World
Bank, the Global Green Growth Institute, the Green
Climate Fund and the Global Environment Facility,
alongside SIDS plans, the implementation of which
36/87

30/07/2015

is constrained by lack of resources. A good example
of United Nations system team work is the One UN
office in Papua New Guinea, which coordinates all of
the activities of the United Nations agencies consistent
with national development priorities and programmes
for development, including on the impacts of climate
change.
The nexus between sustainable development,
peace and security is clear. Without peace and
security, sustainable development will be difficult. To
achieve sustainable development requires meaningful
partnerships, which requires the United Nations system
to enable SIDS’ adherence to the rule of law and to
building effective, accountable and inclusive institutions
and societies that promote and protect human rights
consistent with the United Nations Charter.
In that context, Papua New Guinea has committed
$150 million to Pacific SIDS over the next five years to
address some of their challenges in education, health,
capacity-building, climate change, and infrastructure
rehabilitation and development following natural
disasters such as the cyclone Pam in Vanuatu. Papua
New Guinea is also setting up and funding a small
islands State office for the Pacific Region.
On transnational crimes, human trafficking and
people smuggling, the United Nations system and the
Security Council should adopt methods to weed out
the root causes of illegal migration in countries of
origin and deal with the challenges faced by transit
nations — like Papua New Guinea — and destination
countries. Under Papua New Guinean national security
policy, necessary measures are being taken to combat
transnational crime, including scaling up efforts in
border monitoring, surveillance and control. But more
needs to be done.
For most SIDS, the ocean is the main source of
food security and an important resource, that is, the
blue economy, which needs protection so as to be able
to ensure sustainable development. SIDS are hampered
by resource constraints from being able to ensure
sustainable management and exploitation of fishery
resources and the blue economy. There is little or no
surveillance protection for those resources, some of
which problems, Mr. President, you have addressed.
Our fisheries and other marine resources are being
exploited by illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing. We request that United Nations agencies
provide relevant support through institutions such as
the Pacific Islands Forum and the Forum Fisheries
15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Agency, which are functioning effectively in SIDS
regions — particularly in the Pacific — so as to enable
sustainable management and protection.
All of that cannot be discussed without recognizing
the importance of increasing women’s participation in
all gender-related activities aimed at preventing and
resolving armed conflict, the maintenance of peace and
security, and post-conflict peacebuilding. The lessons
that we have learned from our civil conflict on the
island of Bougainville in the 1990s is a case in point,
which has proved to us that women are just as capable
peacemakers and peacebuilders as men and that they
must be integrated in the decision-making process and
given leadership roles so as to enable development.
In conclusion, the challenges faced by SIDS are
serious. We need to take practical measures directed
at achieving the outcomes that we want. If the work
required is to develop templates for accessing resource
support for SIDS, the United Nations system must
accept responsibility for formulating them, so that,
over time, we can together build a sustainable and
prosperous world based upon the rule of law that
guarantees protection for all of us.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Foreign Trade, Commerce and
Information Technology of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines.
Mr. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines would like to begin
by fully aligning itself with essentially all of the
statements that have been made, in particular with the
statements delivered by our Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) colleagues — the Prime Minister of
Jamaica and the Ministers of Antigua and Barbuda, the
Bahamas and Barbados. Although the Foreign Minister
of Trinidad and Tobago has yet to speak, I am sure that
I can comfortably align myself with what he will say. I
would also like to endorse very strongly what was said
by the Foreign Minister of the Seychelles, particularly
in describing small island developing States (SIDS) as
essentially large ocean developing States that extend
beyond the rocks upon which we live.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines applauds New
Zealand for its decision to focus the attention of the
Security Council on the peace and security challenges
facing small island developing States. New Zealand is
an island State, surrounded by small island developing
States, and it has demonstrated strong understanding

S/PV.7499

and commitment to the specificities and challenges
confronting SIDS.
I would like to commend you as well, Mr. Minister,
for your own display of stamina today, as we have
worked through the luncheon interval — a threat to
your own food security. I see that the faces around the
table have all changed except for yours, and I salute
your stamina in that regard. New Zealand’s use of its
tenure as President of the Security Council to highlight
SIDS is of particular importance, given the Council’s
historical indifference, even antipathy at times, to small
island States and our peace and security challenges.
While the Council has from time to time pronounced
itself, at various levels, on matters involving SIDS, it
is nonetheless true to say that small island developing
States, our issues and perspectives have been, by and
large, excluded from serious and sustained consideration
by the Security Council.
Within the Caribbean region — with the exception
of Haiti, which has benefited from missions and
multilateral engagement by this organ — the Council
has only occasionally become engaged when hegemonic
dramas have been enacted on island stages, as in the case
of the 1983 invasion of Grenada or the Cuban missile
crisis. However, other significant incidents — ranging
from election violence in one CARICOM State,
which claimed over 800 lives in the 1980s, to
Hurricane Ivan’s 2004 multi-island swath of death and
destruction — many episodes have come and gone with
barely an acknowledgement from the Council. To date,
the Council remains silent on the obvious threat to
peace and security posed by the Dominican Republic’s
decision to forcibly expel thousands of individuals born
within its borders. Except in those rare instances when
an island happens to be the fulcrum upon which global
Powers balance, we are ignored.
Indeed, one of the most compelling arguments
in support of a comprehensive reform of the Council
is its demonstrated failure to adapt to a world where
SIDS are significant multilateral actors with unique
perspectives and issues that merit consideration at all
levels of diplomacy. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
has put its name forward as a candidate for the Council
for the 2020-2021 period, because we believe that we
have practical lessons and perspectives to share in
contributing to peace and societal harmony without
a surfeit of cash or weapons to throw at potential
problems. We are candidates also because, in the
history of the United Nations, only eight small island

15-2378237/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

developing States have ever served on the Security
Council; because only three of the 14 CARICOM
States have ever brought their perspectives to bear as
members of the Council; and because a full 40 per cent
of the countries that have never served on the Council
are small island developing States. The result is that, in
the great majority of cases, even during the few times
that the Council formally considers a small island
developing State, there are no small island developing
States on the Council to add context and perspective to
the deliberations.
The special threats to peace and security in SIDS and
their solutions must be understood through the prisms
of size, openness and exogenous influence. Hurricane
Ivan was a localized disaster in the United States, but
a national disaster in Jamaica, Cuba, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, and Grenada. Flash flooding such
as the type that occurred in the eastern Caribbean in
2013 was relatively brief and isolated, but caused death,
damage and instability in Saint Lucia, Dominica and
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines — damage from
which we are still recovering. As has already been said
today, climate change is obviously a threat, but it is not
simply a multiplier of threats to peace and security. It is
a grave and destabilizing threat in and of itself.
A relatively small, poorly armed gang of thugs in
a large developed country may present a localized or
municipal law-enforcement challenge. In a small island
developing State, that same gang’s power is multiplied
exponentially, and its potential to destabilize a society is
immense, particularly in States with modestly equipped,
unarmed constabularies with limited experience in
thwarting transnational crime. In addition, unlike most
of the challenges confronted by the Council, SIDS are
probably unique in being beset by largely exogenous
threats. The causes of climate change, transnational
crime, illicit small arms trafficking, resource theft,
cross-border threats and global financial instability are
all beyond our borders. That is an important factor in
the Council’s consideration of the recommendations
and measures available to maintain peace and preserve
security on behalf of SIDS.
As we speak, almost half of the countries of the
Caribbean Community are either participating in or have
recently emerged from painful, externally orchestrated
structural adjustment programmes. Collectively, we are
one of the most heavily indebted regions in the world,
with high rates of unemployment, particularly among
our youth. In the aftermath of the global economic and

38/87

30/07/2015

financial crisis, our rates of economic growth have
been anaemic at best.
The combustible post-crisis mix of low growth,
youth unemployment and fiscal straitjackets has already
fuelled global unrest and instability elsewhere, with
tremendous negative consequences for international
peace and security. SIDS are not immune from that
threat. Indeed, the apparent belief that the instability
besetting other regions will somehow bypass SIDS is
rooted in wishful thinking, neglect and a misplaced
faith in the stereotype of islands as paradises populated
by carefree carousers. However, that stereotype is
belied by facts rooted in low growth, high debt, high
unemployment, high murder rates and a lack of fiscal
or policy space to engage in transformative social
investments. Those facts point to a different and likely
outcome of continued multilateral neglect.
The Council’s mandate is not simply to restore
international peace and security, but to maintain it
and to prevent instability, through both military and
non-military means. Today’s open debate must serve as
a wake-up call for a Security Council that all too often
has turned its back on the needs and views of SIDS. The
Council must formally determine that climate change,
transnational crime, non-State actors and economic
strangulation pose special and specific threats to
peace and security among small island developing
States. It must then consider which recommendations
and measures are within the scope of its powers. At
a minimum, they must encompass restraints on the
actions of external State actors and empower SIDS,
at an economic and policy level, to confront internal
challenges effectively, all the while fully taking on
board the Bahamas’ very correct caution against the
Council usurping the role or authority of existing
multilateral bodies that are grappling with those issues
in an inclusive and transparent manner.
These issues and those delineated by those who
have spoken before me are not academic, nor are
they theoretical exercises in divining a laundry list
of potential challenges on some distant horizon. They
are real, existing and intensifying threats to our peace
and security. Our challenges, however, are neither
intractable nor insurmountable. They are imminently
solvable. Yet all that is needed for those multifaceted
threats to become complex and contagious sources of
global instability is the inaction of powerful multilateral
partners. Today there are over 50 countries, with over
50 million people, that are expecting the Council to

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

fulfil the letter and the spirit of its Charter obligations.
Please do not let us down.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Trinidad and Tobago.
Mr. Dookeran (Trinidad and Tobago): May I join
the many others who have commended New Zealand
for its ground-breaking and high-level initiative to
address peace and security challenges facing small
island developing States. We view this debate as a
way to further strengthen multilateralism, which is the
most crucial vehicle to resolve the peace and security
challenges we face. This is an important first step in
deepening effective multilateralism, as the absence of
it is a threat in itself to peace and security. Trinidad
and Tobago will support all initiatives to advance the
multilateral engagement that you, Sir, have initiated at
the highest level here today at the United Nations.
I also join with my colleagues in commending the
Prime Minister of Jamaica for her very comprehensive
statement today, as well as my colleagues from the
Bahamas, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados and Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines for their contributions and
for bringing to the fore at this forum some of the critical
risks we face in the Caribbean region in relation to the
issue of peace and security.
Transnational organized crime and its global
networks pose daunting challenges to the security of
all States, but especially to small island developing
States (SIDS). Small States and large States alike must
accept the responsibility and meet their obligations to
cooperate in the multilateral arena in addressing those
threats. Indeed, transnational organized crime has been
identified in the Caribbean Community Crime and
Security Strategy as an “immediate, significant threat”.
Transnational organized crime attacks the functioning
of our State institutions, adds new vulnerabilities to
our governance mechanisms and fosters instability in
the system. In doing so, it undermines the fundamental
premises of our democracies, the rule of law, human
rights and development itself.
Trinidad and Tobago cannot be a bystander to
such destabilizing developments. We have and will
continue to join multilateral efforts aimed at repelling
the peace and security challenges that not only affect it,
but affect all Member States. That is why Trinidad and
Tobago is pleased to have co-sponsored resolution 2220
(2015), on concrete measures to counter and eliminate
the illicit transfer and misuse of small arms and light

S/PV.7499

weapons. In the same context, we and our Caribbean
sister countries outlined our steadfast commitment to
the full implementation of a robust and effective Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT), which is a matter of record.
The ATT offers the promise to address a number of
security problems faced by the international community.
In order to fully achieve its purpose and objectives,
the ATT must become universal and be implemented
by all States, whether manufacturers, exporters or
importers of conventional arms. The failure of some
States to embrace the ATT will serve to continue to
facilitate the illegal transfer of arms to SIDS. Available
statistics confirm the fact that such illicit trade has a
direct linkage to the increased incidence of violence
and criminality in the Caribbean region.
As a firm believer in the role of the United Nations
in leading the way in resolving major international
problems such as terrorism, Trinidad and Tobago
co-sponsored resolution 2178 (2014), on foreign
terrorist fighters. In keeping with the provisions of
that resolution, Trinidad and Tobago will continue to
collaborate with other Member States in several areas,
such as terrorism financing and exchanging information
on the transit of foreign terrorist fighters.
Lasting peace can be achieved only if women are
more involved in decision-making processes related to
peacebuilding and post-conflict development, which
are necessary for the sustainable development of our
societies. The empowerment of women is an integral
aspect of national development, as well as an essential
pillar in the maintenance of peace and security. It is
with that conviction that Prime Minister Kamla PersadBissessar of Trinidad and Tobago introduced at the
General Assembly the first-ever resolution on women,
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control. We
therefore continue to be a firm believer in devising
solutions to peace and security and using the United
Nations apparatus where appropriate, but we know it
is necessary to go beyond that. That is why, as a newly
elected member of the Peacebuilding Commission, we
are committed to working with others to support peace
efforts in countries emerging from conflict and to add
our voice wherever it is appropriate in that respect.
All States have a role to play in designing new
additions to the global peace and security architecture.
Peace and security is indeed the business of all nations,
large and small alike. With that in mind, Trinidad and
Tobago offered itself as a location for the secretariat of
the Arms Trade Treaty. We do so with the confidence

15-2378239/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

30/07/2015

that we possess the required infrastructure and other
prerequisites to host that important institution. It is
our hope that State parties to the ATT will reaffirm
the principle of equitable distribution in the location
of major global bodies when taking a decision on the
siting of that organization.

of mass destruction or genocide. It threatens entire
communities and nations, entire countries and regions.
We have to take this challenge very seriously before it
is too late. We need to put on life vests and act now in
order to prevent the catastrophic consequences of the
climate change faced by SIDS.

This open debate on global peace and security
has far-reaching possibilities in building consensus
on acute social risks facing the issue of security, and
with particular reference to the small island developing
States, in ushering in a new diplomatic momentum on
an effective multilateral approach and in designing
concrete instruments, whether in the field of climate
change or elsewhere, so as to ensure that we have a
safe world and a more secure planet. For all this we
are indeed indebted to you, Mr. Murray McCully, as
President of the Security Council and to New Zealand,
for the leadership you have displayed so far.

As we all know, the people of Kiribati have already
started to leave their sinking lands. The same forced
displacement and migration is rapidly approaching
others — Tuvalu, Vanuatu and the Maldives. The
Security Council should therefore take concrete
preventive steps. In order to avoid possible issues
and tensions caused by this forced migration and
displacement, which can be quite long-lasting, there is
an acute need to address the legal status of the people
who are forced to leave their homeland owing to the
loss of territory caused by ocean-level rise. Given the
serious safety and security implications, we should take
into account all possible legal and human rights aspects
of this phenomenon.

The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.
Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): When a vessel or a person
is sinking in the ocean an S.O.S. distress call is sent,
and it is the moral and legal duty of all others at sea
to render immediate assistance to that sinking ship or
person, without asking why that has happened to them.
Certainly the reasons for the situation are important,
but let us agree that they are secondary compared to
the life of a single human being. An S.O.S. call is being
sent right now from the small island developing States
(SIDS) that are losing their territories, populations
and resources, and thus their very existence, due to
the grave impacts of climate change. It is our common
obligation to hear their call and to respond to it without
any further delay.
The long-lasting debates on climate change are very
important because that is exactly what threatens small
island States. These talks should be continued with a
view to making a success story of the upcoming summit
in Paris. But in those sophisticated debates we should
not forget about the lives of hundreds and thousands of
our brothers and sisters populating the sinking islands
in the Pacific, Indian and Atlantic oceans. It is not just
a formal political matter of combating climate change;
it is a matter of the security of 44 small island nations,
a matter of their own very existence. They are being
threatened not by guns and missiles. They are being
threatened by a much worse enemy — a climate-related
natural disaster, a rise of ocean levels caused by climate
change. That enemy is no less serious than weapons
40/87

Ukraine stands by the side of SIDS and is committed
to the relevant Security Council agenda and elsewhere
in the framework of the United Nations and its agencies.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for International Development Cooperation of Sweden.
Ms. Lövin (Sweden): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden. I
should like to start by thanking Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and by recognizing
the important statements made today by the Prime
Ministers of Jamaica and Samoa, and by the Minister
of Finance of the Seychelles and other Ministers. I
should also like to commend New Zealand for drawing
the Security Council’s attention to this important issue,
and to thank Foreign Minister Mc Cully for presiding
over today’s open debate.
For far too long, we have assessed security in a toonarrow sense. True security is found through fighting
the widening gap between rich and poor countries. True
security is found through fighting famine and social
ills. True security is found through fighting for the
protection of the environment. The responsibility of the
international community and of us as States Members
of the United Nations is to lead that fight. That is why
I decided to come here to be a part of this important
debate.

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Small island developing States (SIDS) are
undeniably among the hardest hit by climate change,
and they face unique security challenges. Their very
existence is threatened not by tanks, missiles or troops
but rather by extreme weather events, marine pollution,
rising sea levels and ocean acidification. That was
clearly expressed in the landmark SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (Samoa) Pathway.
It was evident from the Arria Formula meeting on
climate change and security held last month that climate
change would inevitably affect access to land, food
and economic opportunities, which in turn can drive
conflict and forced migration. The Security Council
can, and should, play a role in that regard.
Confronting the peace and security challenges of
SIDS demands a global response. Allow me to outline
eight points that we as Nordic countries believe need to
be part of that response.
First, it is without doubt that the effects of global
warming are the single most important long-term
security challenge affecting SIDS. Hence we need
to do our utmost to halt and mitigate the effects of
climate change. The Nordic countries will remain
steadfast partners of SIDS in that fight. A legally
binding agreement at the climate conference in Paris in
December is a crucial step towards a safer world.
Second, we need to back up words with action.
That is why the Nordic countries have made significant
commitments to the new Green Climate Fund. We are
also among the largest donors to other multilateral and
bilateral climate actions.
Third, we need to understand that sustainable
development is not a choice but a necessity for security.
This is a top priority for the Nordic Governments, as
demonstrated by our prioritization of peace and security
aspects of the post-2015 agenda and our emphasizing of
the connection with other facets of development.
Fourth, in order to reduce reliance on imported fossil
fuels, we need to integrate climate change mitigation
policies, with a particular emphasis on renewable
energy, along with energy security and longer-term
development programmes. Nordic countries are top
supporters of the Sustainable Energy for All initiative,
and we have several bilateral energy programmes with
SIDS in place.
Fifth, we need to support capacity-building and
strengthen resilience to severe weather events, natural

S/PV.7499

disasters and conflict due to environmental problems.
A lot of work needs to be done to build resilient, quality
infrastructure and to plan for an effective emergency
response. The Sendai Framework should be a guiding
document in that regard.
Sixth, the illicit exploitation of natural resources,
including illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing,
constitutes yet another challenge. Capacity-building,
including capacity to ratify the Food and Agriculture
Organization Port State Measures Agreement, is
essential to safeguarding food security as well as
advancing a blue economy for long-term sustainable
development. The United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea remains the centrepiece framework for
the conservation and sustainable use of the ocean and
its resources.
Seventh, SIDS obviously face numerous other
security challenges. I should mention transnational
crime, including trafficking in arms, human trafficking,
piracy and illicit drug smuggling. Nordic countries have
been partners to SIDS for decades through capacity
building, including in developing legal frameworks.
The implementation of applicable conventions and
frameworks, including the Arms Trade Treaty and the
SAMOA Pathway, will be essential in order to support
and strengthen ongoing efforts.
Finally, an inclusive approach is needed. And civil
society, local authorities and the private sector must take
part in the dialogue. The full and equal participation
of women everywhere must be indisputable — no
sustainable peace and development can be achieved if
half of the population is excluded.
In conclusion, I am under no illusion that we can
find a comprehensive action plan today. But today’s
open debate serves as a reminder that halting and
mitigating the adverse effects of global warming is
not simply an environmental issue; it is a security
issue. That must be borne in mind when approaching
December’s crucial climate meeting. I can assure you,
Sir, that the Nordic countries will remain a close ally
of all SIDS in addressing the complex challenges they
are confronted by. We look forward to working together
with everyone towards resilient and safe SIDS.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
of Finance of the Cook Islands.
Mr. Brown: Please allow me, Mr. President, to
greet you in my mother tongue of the Cook Islands and

15-2378241/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

say “kia orana”. I thank you, Sir, and the members of
the Security Council for this opportunity to share the
Cook Islands perspective of security and how it relates
to our islands and to the broader Pacific islands and the
small island developing States family.
If I may, I should like to provide a very brief
explanation of the meaning of “kia orana” which I
believe encapsulates the spirit of why we are here
before the esteemed Council. “kia orana” is how we
greet each other and visitors to our islands. Literally
it means “may you and your lineage live on”. That is
a blessing that a Cook Islander will bestow upon those
that we come into contact with. That is in essence what
we are asking for: to be given the chance by the rest of
our global family to live on in our own islands and to
guarantee that we can still say “kia orana” long into the
future.
We the Pacific islanders are the custodians of
165 million square kilometres of ocean and the last
remaining healthy fishery stocks in the world. The
Cook Islands is steward to 2.2 million of those square
kilometres. That in itself is significant coverage for a
small island nation. Despite our best efforts at vigilance
in guarding that space, not only for our own good but
also for our neighbours and the wider global community,
we cannot deny the fact that we are disadvantaged in
terms of the readily available resources to police our
area as effectively as we desire against transnational
crime and illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing.
Nonetheless we are trying.
Fisheries for the Cook Islands — as with the rest of
our Pacific family — are a mainstay of our economy.
The riches of our ocean are primary resources that we
are taking major steps to utilize in a sustainable manner.
That is why the Cook Islands has declared its entire
exclusive economic zone as the Cook Islands Marine
Park. We are certain that the Marine Park will provide
the necessary framework to promote sustainable
development by balancing economic growth interests
such as tourism, fishing and deep-sea mining with
conserving core biodiversity and natural assets in the
ocean, on our reefs and islands.
The establishment of areas of sustainable
management is a trend that is spreading across the
Pacific. We are leading the world in marine-resource
management, with innovative initiatives such as
the regional vessel-monitoring system, ship rider
agreements with the United States Coast Guard, the

42/87

30/07/2015

Pacific-wide boat- and aircraft-surveillance Kurukuru
programme and our own quadrilateral observation
relationship with New Zealand, Australia, the United
States and France.
However, those national and regional efforts can be
futile without the cooperation of distant-water fishing
nations in ensuring compliance with signed agreements.
Equally important is the attitude of the international
community with regard to our collective Pacific call for
stronger control over the high seas and the international
waters bordering our respective jurisdictions. The Cook
Islands has made significant progress in delineating its
maritime boundaries, and is has signed treaties with
its neighbours where our borders are shared. It is our
belief that, given our experience of illegal, unregulated
and unreported fisheries, we will be better served
with a buffer no-fishing zone between our individual
and collective maritime boundaries and international
waters.
We have raised that issue at the Western Central
Pacific Fisheries Commission and will continue
to advocate for it in various settings. We implore
the international community to extend its support
in advancing stronger measures to ensure the
sustainability of our fisheries. Furthermore, I welcome
your comments, Mr. President, on encouraging greater
returns to Pacific Island countries from their fisheries
resources. I look forward to initiatives to improve the
fisheries management framework to that end.
We cannot address peace and security without
considering the obvious threat of sea-level rise and
other adverse impacts caused by climate change. Those
impacts range from the serious to the catastrophic.
The increasing acidification of the oceans threatens
our food and pir economic security. the intensification
of cyclones can wipe out decades of infrastructure
development progress. Receding shorelines will
eventually mean the complete disappearance of islands.
We are already experiencing those impacts on our
islands.
We cannot stress enough the urgent need for the
global community to confront the climate change
crisis. We share this world, and the world does not
end at our respective borders. Give us a fighting
chance against the changing climate. A legally binding
agreement must be reached at Paris, one that also takes
into account our special case and vulnerabilities as
small island developing States. We are engaging with

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

you, Mr. President, and with the Security Council with
sincerity. We seek its understanding, and we hope that
it will reciprocate with sincerity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Vedova (Italy): Thanks to the initiative of
New Zealand, I am pleased to have this opportunity
to intervene today on a crucial topic. I wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing, as
well as the Prime Ministers of Samoa and Jamaica
and the Minister of Finance of the Seychelles for their
contributions to this important debate.
The challenges affecting small island developing
States (SIDS) deserve the attention of the Security
Council. Italy, as a peninsula surrounded by the sea, is
deeply convinced that those challenges are both specific
and global, with wide-ranging consequences that can
affect our common security. Helping to improve the
food security, sea defences, renewable energy systems,
natural risk-management and economic competitiveness
of small island developing States is also an opportunity
to build a comprehensive and sustainable development
model that will also benefit other countries.
Climate change is a key element of the equation.
On a national basis, Italy has gathered broad expertise
in learning to face natural disasters, floods, soil erosion
and rising sea levels. For example, the rising level of the
Adriatic Sea poses a risk to the world heritage city of
Venice. To address that challenge a highly sophisticated
system — called MOSES — has been developed to
protect the city from tides that are up to three metres
high.
Many other countries face similar challenges,
as therefore the international community must stand
together in providing needed answers and support.
As a follow-up to the 2014 Samoa Conference, I have
pleasure in confirming that Italy will host a stocktaking event at ministerial level, which will take place
in Milan from 14 to 15 October in connection with
EXPO 2015. We look forward to welcoming everyone
to that event, which will allow us to assess the progress
made by SIDS and donors, monitor the commitments
undertaken in Samoa, and connect them to the global
debate on food security and nutrition promoted by Italy
through the EXPO, whose theme will be “Feeding the
Planet, Energy for Life”. As a founding member and
permanent supporter of the Global Island Partnership,
Italy will also host the annual Steering Committee

S/PV.7499

meeting of the Global Island Partnership in Turin next
October.
Energy is another crucial element of the equation.
Renewable energy sources are among the main points
of focus of cooperation with Pacific SIDS through the
regional environmental partnership that since 2007 we,
together with Austria, Luxembourg and Spain, have been
supporting financially. The scope of that partnership
was expanded recently to include climate-change
adaptation. Another programme supported by Italy,
and implemented through the International Union for
Conservation of Nature, seeks to carry out targeted
renewable energy projects in response to the problem
of energy dependency.
More recently, we have been developing a
cooperation programme to help meet the specific
challenges and needs of our Caribbean partners. In early
July, we hosted in Italy a specialized training course
on illegal financial flows for experts and officers from
the Caribbean Community countries. Since the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway
recognizes sustainable tourism as an important driver
of sustainable economic growth, Italy is financing a
World Bank pilot project to strengthen agro-tourism
clusters and foster growth prospects in the area.
Finally, I have pleasure in announcing that Italy is
launching a new regional cooperation programme in
the Caribbean in the field of disaster risk management
and rural development. The project will assist local
institutions in dealing with disaster risk management
and better responding to the evolving needs of farming
communities.
It is my privilege to address the Security Council,
and I wish to conclude by underlining the importance
of ensuring that the voice of small island developing
States reaches the Council. Italy attaches great
importance to the reform of the Security Council. We
share the goal of assuring better representation for
certain categories of States, cutting across traditional
United Nations regional groups. Small States make up
one such category, including small island developing
States, whose specific needs and aspirations should be
addressed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representatiave of Timor-Leste.
Mr. De Oliveira Soares (Timor-Leste): At the
outset, on behalf of the Government of the Democratic

15-2378243/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

Republic of Timor-Leste, let me congratulate New
Zealand on its successful presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July, and to convey to you, Sir,
our appreciation for convening this important debate.
Timor-Leste
emerged
from
centuries
of
colonization and occupation, and 13 years ago restored
its independence. In that short period, we established
our critical State institutions and now enjoy political
and security stability. We are very proud of the fact
that, in December 2012, the situation in Timor-Leste
was removed from the agenda of the Security Council.
That reflects the determination of our people and
leadership to live in peace and prosperity. And we share
our success with the international community and with
the United Nations, for which I thank them. On behalf
of the Timorese people, I would like in particular to
extend our sincere gratitude to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his personal engagement and commitment
to our peacebuilding and State-building efforts.
Small island States face multifaceted security
challenges. I shall focus on three topics that are of
particular interest to Timor-Leste.
First, climate change is a threat multiplier that has
the potential to unravel development efforts, exacerbate
tensions and lead to conflict. It has an impact on food
security and poverty, resource availability, health and
access to clean water. The rising sea level is the biggest
threat to many countries in the world, particularly
small island States. It can lead to loss of territory and is
a serious threat to national sovereignty. The pressures
of climate change will force populations to leave their
homes. That is already happening in some of the small
island developing States (SIDS), notably in the Pacific,
exacerbating existing problems in already vulnerable
islands.
This body issued a Presidential statement in July
2011 (S/PRST/2011/15) that expresses concern that
possible adverse effects of climate change may endanger
the process of consolidating international peace and
security. It is therefore vital that there be globally
coordinated actions to tackle such threats. Timor-Leste
has adopted a national adaptation programme of action
that includes nine priorities. We work closely with our
development partners in addressing those priorities, as
we are fully conscious that climate change is not merely
an environmental issue but is about our security and
survival.

44/87

30/07/2015

My second point is that access to natural resources
and the equitable distribution of revenue among the
people are paramount to security. That is why we are
proud to be at the forefront of the world’s best practices
in relation to the management of our natural resources.
We have put much effort into building our institutional
and legal capacity transparently and effectively to
manage our extractive industries. We take great pride in
complying with the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative, meaning that every dollar of petroleum
revenue is publicly disclosed and matched with records
of resources companies.
While our petroleum industry is critical to economic
growth, prosperity and capacity development, however,
we are also fully aware that where local communities
fail to share the benefits of resource exploitation,
resources can be a driver of conflict. The Government
of Timor-Leste advocates the fundamental principles
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea to safeguard its sovereign rights over our national
territory, including our maritime boundaries. We
firmly believe in the respect for international law in
the peaceful settlement of disputes through multilateral
frameworks.
My third point is that, due to their geographic
constraints, transnational organized crime poses a
serious security risk to island States. Reports indicate
that Timor-Leste has been used by organized crime
syndicates as a destination and staging area for drug
and human trafficking. In that context, our Government
has enacted legislation to fight organized crime, and
has also created a criminal investigation police unit
within our national police that is mandated to fight
drug and human trafficking, money laundering and
cybercrime. The cross-border nature of this type
of crime calls for greater cooperation in the region
and globally, especially on information-sharing and
capacity-building. In that regard, Timor-Leste actively
participates in the Southwest Pacific Dialogue, a forum
for dialogue for Australia, Indonesia, New Zealand,
Papua New Guinea, the Philippines and Timor-Leste to
exchange views on important issues, namely, regional
security.
These issues are transnational in nature. While they
affect SIDS in particular, they also have an impact on
global peace and security. The international community
must therefore pursue ways of addressing these issues
in a coordinated and collaborative manner. In that
context, in the spirit of solidarity and partnership,

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Timor-Leste has contributed $38 million for the period
2008 to 2014. The bulk of our financial contribution
has been disbursed to assist countries, namely SIDS,
affected by natural disasters.
The international community must synchronize
actions with courage and determination. In that
context, I wish to recognize the presence of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon today, as well as his sustained
leadership and engagement in seeking solutions to the
challenges faced by SIDS. It is critical to highlight
the importance of moving beyond political discourse
and joint statements. We need to translate our shared
visions into concrete actions in addressing the security
challenges facing SIDS and the world. Peace, security,
global progress and the very future of the peoples of
small island States depend on us all. In that regard,
let us all stand united as one voice and one action to
promote and work together for SIDS, sustainable peace
and prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): Twenty-five years ago,
14 island States gathered in the Maldives. Together
they decided to work in unity to seek international
cooperation to protect the small States of the world
from the dangers posed by climate change, global
warming and sea-level rise. Today the Republic of
Maldives is proud to represent the Alliance of Small
Island States, which was born at that meeting. We
thank the Government of New Zealand, President of the
Security Council for the month of July, for convening
this important debate, a debate that signals a true
mark of international cooperation towards small island
developing States (SIDS).
We hope that this debate will be a beginning
that marks a turning point in how the international
community, and the Security Council in particular,
view peace and security as they relate to the world’s
small island nations. To be sure, even as a host of crises
with profound implications for the work of this body
increasingly impact our communities, insufficient
attention is paid and resources made available to ensure
an effective response. In fact, in our recent SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway
document we reaffirmed that peace and security, the
rule of law, respect for human rights, and other issues
relevant to this body play a crucial role in achieving our
sustainable development goals. Peace and security is a

S/PV.7499

prerequisite to health and prosperity. At the same time,
the lesson of history is that peace will prevail only
when we promote sustainable development practices.
SIDS understand that reality well. For centuries
communities in our small islands have promoted
practices and values that not only help to protect the
fragile ecosystems of the islands, but also promote
peace and harmony within and among communities.
More recently, SIDS have also taken on important
responsibilities in promoting peace and security on the
international stage.
We, the SIDS, provide a disproportionate
number of peacekeepers to missions throughout the
world and host many operations in our own backyards.
Yet our voice at the Security Council is vastly
underrepresented. For the past 25 years, only six
SIDS have served on the Council out of the 125 elected
members during that period. That must change.
The smallest in the world, said Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon in Samoa in the past year, are like a
magnifying glass — when we look through the lens, we
see the vulnerabilities we all face. And the most profound
vulnerability we have is climate change. Climate
change is humankind’s defining challenge. The science
is clear that climate change has exacerbated existing
problems and causes new ones, including threats to
our food and water security, displaced communities,
loss of adaptive capacities, ecosystem services and, for
some of us, territorial integrity. We have stressed that
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change policy should remain the primary forum for
climate negotiations. Yet, we have to recognize that
climate change is a threat to the survival of humankind,
and our response to the threat requires us to redefine
the concept of security.
Indeed, the utter devastation seen in the wake
of Cyclone Pam, in particular to Vanuatu and other
neighbouring countries like the Solomon Islands,
Tuvalu and Kiribati, as well as from two recent
typhoons, Maysak and Dolphin, which hammered
the Federated States of Micronesia, underscores the
unique circumstances of life in SIDS. Our small size,
geographic isolation and high exposure to impacts like
powerful tropical storms and other extremes make it
challenging to prepare for disaster before it strikes.
More effective programmes for disaster risk reduction
must be part of the efforts to build resilient and
sustainable island communities.

15-2378245/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

We are all too aware that we cannot do this on our
own. Criminals often exploit the vast oceans off our
shores to evade the rule of law on land. While our waters
are home to some of the most productive marine habitats
in the world, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
also deprives us of the resources on which we depend
for our food and income. At the same time, drug dealers
and human traffickers increasingly escape detection in
these isolated places. Maritime piracy has also been a
challenge for some of our countries. Because we have
a limited surveillance capacity, we are unable to detect
and deter illicit activities that have security implications
for the entire international community.
The SIDS are ready to lead. We are an important
part of the solution. Vulnerability is a fact in SIDS,
yet we refuse to be defined by it. Although we are
vulnerable, we also are valuable contributors in
proposing global solutions to common problems. Since
the acceptance of the first small State in the United
Nations nearly five decades ago, SIDS have shown the
world that small States are not only viable, but in fact
have an extraordinary ability to survive and even thrive
in the turbulent global political arena. We have engaged
the United Nations on the serious security threats that
small States face and proposed a mechanism to address
such threats. We have highlighted the links between
the dangers of climate change and the full enjoyment
of human rights. We continue to show that through
genuine and durable partnerships, we can address our
challenges and face adversity.
We live in a time of dramatic change and
uncertainty. Our pursuit of international peace and
security faces new obstacles that will test our resolve at
every turn, but we also have the expertise and resources
to make the world more secure — in all countries, large
and small, on the mainland and in the oceans. We have
a significant task before us, one that will require our
attention over decades. Let us consider this discussion
as the beginning of that effort and commit to doing
what is necessary to achieve our common goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the Prime
Minister of Aruba, who will speak on behalf of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Mr. Eman (Netherlands): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands in
my capacity as Prime Minister of Aruba. We welcome
the initiative of New Zealand to hold this meeting of
the Security Council to address the peace and security
challenges that small island developing States (SIDS)
46/87

30/07/2015

are facing. We are also very grateful for the briefings
given today by the Prime Minister of Samoa, the Prime
Minister of Jamaica and our friend the Minister of
Finance of Seychelles.
Today’s topic is of particular interest to the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, since three of the four
autonomous countries within the Kingdom — Aruba,
Curaçao and Sint Maarten — are in fact SIDS. I am
very pleased and take a great interest in representing
the voice of small island States both within and outside
of the borders of our Kingdom.
Let me ask the Council to take a moment to imagine
life in many of the small island developing States.
The first image that comes to mind might be that of a
tropical paradise, pictures of a small island with palm
trees, surrounded by a placid turquoise sea. And yes,
that image is entirely correct for Aruba, Curaçao, Sint
Maarten and many other SIDS. At the same time, even
the inhabitants of paradise have to deal with their share
of serious challenges. Some of these are local, some are
regional and some are global challenges.
When we were at the Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States in
Samoa, small island States, together with large
countries and large corporations, had the opportunity
to share the challenges and the permanent handicaps
that small island States face. It was very encouraging
in Samoa to see how, maybe for the first time, large
countries, major institutions and large corporations in
a very concrete way committed themselves to working
towards the future and the improvement of the quality
of life within the SIDS. Let me briefly share with the
Council today three of the challenges and some insights
on what we can do to respond to challenges facing so
many of our small island States.
First, on the effects of climate change, the sheer
horror of having to survive an extreme tropical storm is
a familiar phenomenon in my region, the Caribbean. We
know the storm is coming, and on some islands we know
that there is no high ground for escape. Meanwhile, ever
higher seas and more powerful cyclones are destroying
the little plots of land, one’s family home and the local
school. In March, the South Pacific witnessed just such
a devastating extreme weather event when Cyclone
Pam swept through the region.
Climate change affects us all. In the Council
today, we have heard from Prime Ministers, Ministers
and representatives of countries that not only face

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

devastation from a possible natural disaster, but already
know for a fact that within 20 years, 50 years or 60
years, they may not exist any more as an island. That is
a dramatic given that we, the Security Council and the
United Nations and the world, must deal with. Today,
as we look at how climate change affects us already,
we know that extreme risks are developing in ways that
are very threatening to fragile States, which have fewer
resources and the least capacity to cope with them. We
need to leave the Chamber with a stronger commitment
than when we left the Conference in Samoa to work
with these islands. As the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
we recognize the need to strengthen resilience to
climate fragility risks. That is one of the reasons we are
working hard towards the adoption of a new, ambitious,
legally binding and global agreement in Paris later this
year.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands will convene
the first international conference under the them
“Planetary security: Peace and cooperation in times of
climate change and global environmental challenges”,
on 2 and 3 November at the Peace Palace in The Hague.
The conference will be an annual event aimed at
maintaining an ongoing focus on this important topic.
Some may believe that only large nations can
effectively fight climate change. but each country, no
matter how small, can contribute to the fight against
climate change. In Aruba, we are a small country, but
we are seeking to transition from fossil fuels by 2020
and to share the lessons we learn with other countries,
especially SIDS. We, like many others engaged in
this fight, believe that small island nations can be
laboratories to demonstrate how this transition can
occur in all countries. In Aruba, we view the move to
renewable energy as part of a broader vision of shared
and sustainable prosperity in which we take strong steps
not only to preserve our physical environment for the
future and future generations, but also to ensure that
our socioeconomic culture and environment prospers
as well. Let us not forget that inequality also breeds
insecurity.
A second problem for many SIDS is the challenge
of transnational crime. Many lack the capacity to patrol
the immense waters surrounding our islands. This has
a negative impact on our ability to fight transnational
crime. The threat posed by criminal networks dealing
in drugs and arms can have truly destabilizing effects
on our islands. We have combated these threats on
Aruba and the other parts of our Kingdom together

S/PV.7499

with the Dutch Caribbean Coast Guard, which patrols
a large part of the Caribbean waters to the northwest of Aruba, Curaçao and Bonaire. Howeverm
regional and international cooperation needs to be
further strengthened in order to be more effective.
Such collaboration helps increase the possibilities for
countering transnational crime.
Thirdly, a lack of maritime patrolling capacity can
also sustain the illicit exploitation of natural resources,
including illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU)
fishing. This can negatively impact the sustainable
yield of fish stocks. The damage to unique coral reefs
can affect the livelihood of SIDS. That is why a standalone sustainable development goal on oceans and seas
is important, as it will seek to regulate harvesting and
end overfishing, IUU fishing and destructive fishing
practices by 2020.
This morning, the Secretary-General called for
partnership with SIDS to address current security
challenges. That is what the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
as a partner for peace, justice and development,
hopes to do. Allow me to cite some examples. With
Seychelles, we are fighting piracy. With Grenada,
we have started cooperation on blue growth and food
security. After Cyclone Pam, the Kingdom was among
the first countries to provide assistance to Vanuatu and
Kiribati. Aruba and the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
together with Carbon War Room and the Netherlands
Organisation for Applied Scientific Research, are
reaching out to 10 other Caribbean islands to share
with them our experience on the path to total energy
sustainability.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
welcomes the interest of the Security Council in SIDS
and in the challenges we face. Stronger regional and
international collaboration is needed in order to meet
the security challenges we encounter in the Caribbean
and other regions where SIDS are situated. That is
also one of the motivations for the Kingdom of the
Netherlands to seek a seat on the Security Council
for the 2017-2018 term. We best know our challenges
and keep the interests of small and medium-sized
countries close to heart. We welcome and encourage
further discussions on the international challenges
affecting SIDS, now and in the future, with a view to
strengthening the solidarity between larger and smaller
Members of the United Nations family. We in Aruba
have grown in modest nest of six SIDS. When we think
of our smaller brothers and sisters — Bonaire, Saba

15-2378247/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

and Saint Eustatius — we feel compassion and a sense
of solidarity a responsibility towards them. So too,
the larger countries, world institutions and even large
corporations should think of small island developing
States with the virtuous thought, “I am my brother’s
keeper”.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representive of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonedia): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate on a very important subject.
My delegation also thanks the Secretary-General for
his statement and recognizes the presence of highlevel representatives of small island developing States
(SIDS), including the Prime Minister of Samoa, the
Prime Minister of Jamaica and the Minister of Finance
of Seychelles.
As a country whose territory includes small islands,
Indonesia knows only too well the vulnerabilities of
SIDS and many aspects of the security challenges they
are facing. As the concept paper (S/2015/543, annex)
before us highlights, the vulnerabilities of SIDS are
heightened by their remoteness, narrow resource,
economic and export bases, limited capacities and
finances. Furthermore, the impact of climate change,
along with sea-level rise and other challenges such as
piracy, organized crime, illicit exploitation of natural
resources and illegal fishing, with inadequate capacity
to monitor exclusive economic zones, present major
problems affecting the security and stability of SIDS.
Without a doubt, SIDS face serious challenges in
the field of peace and security. In this interconnected
world, the security challenges faced by SIDS may
have an impact on regional and even global security
and stability. My delegation therefore believes that it
is only logical that the security issues relating to the
specific situation faced by SIDS should be an integral
part of our collective efforts to promote global peace
and security. Indeed, SIDS should be equal partners in
our collective efforts in the field of peace and security.
The security perspective of SIDS requires our
Organization, including the Security Council, to
broaden its approach to dealing with international
peace and security. Our Organization must continue
to develop strategies that are integrated and better
coordinated among its various organs in dealing with
security and sustainable development in a mutually
reinforcing way.

48/87

30/07/2015

Indonesia attaches great importance to many
areas relevant to tackling security challenges faced
by SIDS, including maritime conservation, illegal,
unreported and unregulated fisheries, and disasterrisk reduction management through a reinvigorated
maritime policy and mainstreaming it into the national
planning programmes. My delegation is of the view
that security issues related to SIDS are closely related
to development challenges. Therefore, if issues like
poverty, unemployment, climate-change adaptation
measures and institution building in SIDS are not
addressed effectively, opportunities for resentment,
instability and conflict will arise. We must not let that
happen.
In that context, we should continue to enhance
our cooperation with SIDS in the Pacific through
bilateral and regional platforms. The United Nations
and the international community should support
SIDS in a strengthened, more comprehensive and
sustained manner. The post-2015 development agenda
must therefore provide robust and tangible means
of implementation for SIDS to clearly reflect this
intention. It is also vital for SIDS to get their resource
requirements adequately met by the relevant regional
and international financial institutions since their
small economies may face a greater number of issues
in obtaining financing through purely market-based
mechanisms.
Taking urgent action to mitigate climate change is
a global necessity vital to responding to the security
challenges for SIDS. Many SIDS have already
confronted dangerous floods and natural disasters as a
result of climate change and lost hard-won development
gains. There must not be any illusion in this regard:
the deterioration of quality of life on the planet will
lead to chaos. Therefore, a central pressing task in the
climate response would be to better integrate disaster
risk reduction in the development framework.
In this regard, my delegation reaffirms the
significance of the United Nations as the universal
forum for providing a common platform to strengthen
international cooperation in promoting sustainable
development that increasingly takes into account the
specific needs and challenges of SIDS. My delegation
also reiterates the importance of the ongoing collective
endeavours within the United Nations to strengthen
international cooperation, coordination and coherence
in the implementation of the internationally agreed
development goals, including the unmet Millennium

15-23782

Maintenance of international peace and security

30/07/2015

Development Goals
development agenda.

and

the

future

post-2015

In conclusion, my delegation hopes that today’s
debate will assist the Security Council in further
integrating the SIDS perspective on peace and security
into its work and provide a platform for the international
community to identify further practical and coherent
steps to take in supporting SIDS as they tackle the
specific challenges within their national efforts to
promote sustainable development, peace and stability.
My delegation would like to underscore the necessity
for all of the entities within and outside the United
Nations, including all countries, to work together with
greater common purpose and cooperation to engender
peace, security and prosperity for everyone.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tonga.
Mr. Tupouniua (Tonga): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the 12 members of
the group of Pacific small island developing States with
a presence at the United Nations, namely, the Federated
States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, the Republic
of the Marshall Islands, Palau, Papua New Guinea,
Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, and my own
country, Tonga.
At the outset, allow me on behalf of our group
to thank you, Mr. President, and New Zealand, for
convening this very timely and important debate on
issues related to peace and security in the Pacific
SIDS and SIDS generally. We associate ourselves with
the statement delivered by Mr. Ali Naseer Mohamed,
Foreign Secretary of the Republic of Maldives and
Chair of the Alliance of Small Island States.
In this day and age, with all its complicated,
interrelated
and
enmeshed
political,
social,
environmental and economic realities, how can we
define international peace and security? Certainly
today’s realities are far from those that the founders of
this body faced in 1945. Security issues were defined
traditionally in terms of the scourge of war between
States. The issue of what causes war was and still is the
major question that defines the purpose of the Security
Council.
Seventy years later, however, we must ask whether
the traditional definition of security, upon which the
Council was founded, is still appropriate for application
today? Should this traditional concept of security
alone continue to define the present day actions of the

S/PV.7499

Council? Many have argued that it should not, and that
is why other organs of the United Nations are looking
to renew themselves so as to ensure that the whole body
is fit for purpose for today’s realities. In that regard,
we may ponder whether the Security Council today is
likewise fit for purpose, by way of maintaining its usage
of traditional security approaches to prevent, or dare
I say, cure the problems of global peace and security
today. Can the traditional definition of security still
suffice to answer the question of what causes war?
The root causes of the difficulties in maintaining
international peace and security are no longer drawn
from traditional definitions of security, as those root
causes have evolved over the years into what might be
considered non-traditional causes. The lines are blurred
between the traditional realpolitik of the past and today’s
more complex notions of non-traditional definitions
of security, all of which contributes, in a multitude of
complicated ways, to making the Council’s duty to the
world a more difficult one. Questions of sustainable
development or the lack thereof are root causes of the
failure to maintain peace and security. Furthermore, the
failure to maintain peace and security is a root cause for
the absence of sustainable development. The Council
must look at issues of international peace and security
through the lens of the present tense by redefining its
understanding of security to be in line with today’s
realities, as non-traditional causes of the difficulties in
maintaining peace and security are plentiful.
That having been said, the Pacific SIDS have
observed that, over time, the Council has shown that
non-traditional security dimensions beyond traditional
military-type threats to peace and security do have a
place in the Council. Indeed, through resolution 1308
(2000) on HIV/AIDS, the Council for the first time
unanimously agreed to allow a non-traditional threat
to peace and security to be part and parcel of its work.
The coincidence of this unprecedented decision with
the fifty-fifth anniversary of the Council, as well
as with the advent of the new millennium, may have
facilitated the realization that the scourge of that
health issue at the time, which had been devastating
populations beyond national borders years before the
adoption of the historic resolution, was in fact a threat
to international peace and security even if it went
beyond the traditional definitions that the Council had
previously used. At that time, the spread of HIV/AIDS
was having a heavy impact on society and was leading
to an aggravated lack of security that could give way to
instability and emergency situations if left unchecked.

15-2378249/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

A very good precedent was set, and the Council
followed that precedent when, last year, the Ebola crisis
was addressed within these walls.
In 2007, these same walls heard another conversation
on a non-traditional threat to international peace and
security, namely, climate change. Unfortunately, the
Council found itself unwilling or unable to take on this
issue through a unanimously agreed approach. That
also occurred in 2013, despite the fact that Article 2
of the Charter of the United Nations established the
prime importance of respecting the territorial integrity
of States by setting forth the obligation of all States
to refrain from threatening another State’s territorial
integrity. Human-induced climate change is doing
exactly that, however — undermining our territorial
integrity.
Pacific island leaders have been continually calling
for the political will and ambitious actions necessary
to address the adverse impacts of climate change. The
evidence is clear and present today in our region, and
it has very real implications for the rest of the world.
I would reiterate that the Pacific SIDS call for the
immediate appointment of a special representative on
climate and security with responsibility for analysing
projected security impacts of climate change so that
the Council and all Member States can prepare for the
unavoidable threats to their security that lie ahead.
Moreover, we are of the view that the Council should
request an assessment of the capacity of the United
Nations system to respond to those impacts, in order to
be able to assure us that it is up to the task.
Like the severity of the health crisis caused by HIV/
AIDS, especially in Africa, but with clear and direct
implications on a global scale, we are able to see direct
correlations between both of these non-traditional
threats to the maintenance of international peace
and security. Since both are threat multipliers, they
are equally important as root causes of threats to
international peace and security that should be on the
Council’s agenda. Thankfully and rightly, the health
issue has been recognized. The Pacific SIDS submit
that the issue of climate change should be considered in
the same way. Both have global implications, both have
a heavy negative impact on society and both can lead to
instability and emergency situations if left unchecked.
Finally, last year the Secretary-General mentioned
that the Pacific SIDS are like a microcosm of the world
as a whole, in which we can see the vulnerabilities
and threats that we all face from the effects of climate
50/87

30/07/2015

change. Climate change is cross-cutting, and therefore
all the major organs of the United Nations have a role
to play in dealing with it through their own mandates,
as they have done with regard to the non-traditional
security threat of HIV/AIDS in the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and in the Security
Council Chamber.
I would therefore like to conclude by saying that
we, the Pacific SIDS, submit our experiences and
realities to the Council in asking it to consider this
non-traditional security threat of climate change as one
that merits the Council’s attention not just today, but in
an ongoing, dedicated space in our Organization that
can ensure that the threats posed by climate change to
our islands, our peoples and indeed our shared world
are adequately addressed so that the Council is able to
carry out the task of maintaining international peace
and security that we have entrusted to it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Palau.
Mr. Otto (Palau): Palau would like to congratulate
New Zealand on its presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July and to thank it for convening
this important open debate on the peace and security
challenges facing small island developing States (SIDS).
We would like to acknowledge the presence
of the leaders who have come from all the capitals
of the SIDS countries for this important event. We
associate ourselves with the statements delivered by the
representative of Tonga, on behalf of the Pacific SIDS,
and by the Foreign Secretary of the Maldives, on behalf
of the Alliance of Small Island States, to which I would
like to add this statement in my national capacity.
Palau shares all the issues discussed by the
leaders who have spoken today, ranging from issues
of governance such as money-laundering and illicit
financial flows to syndicate criminal activities.
We have our share of trafficking and drug use, of
non-communicable diseases and HIV/AIDS. Illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing continues unabated,
bringing the risk of food insecurity.
All of those problems have the potential to
destabilize and bring unrest to our communities, but
the one we wish to see on the Security Council’s agenda
is the impact of climate change, because it deserves to
be addressed here and now. When whole nations are
swallowed by the sea, there is potential for unrest.
When an entire population is forced to migrate or
15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

become refugees, either as one group in one place or
several groups in several places, peace becomes elusive
and the potential for unrest and conflict becomes real.
Palau has low-lying atoll islands that are at risk of being
swallowed by rising sea levels and are in that category,
with the potential for the absence of peace and the
presence of conflict.
We therefore join our leaders in urging the Security
Council to consider the impact of climate change as a
real threat to peace and security that it should address
by adding it to its agenda now, as we heard the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine and the Minister of
International Development Cooperation of Sweden
advocate earlier. Additionally, the Council can continue
to encourage all Member States to arrive at a strong,
legally binding agreement on climate change in Paris,
as we have heard many members say today, including
the representative of the Netherlands just a few minutes
ago.
To summarize, as the concept note (S/2015/543,
annex) says, understanding the role that the Council
and the United Nations system can play in working
with small island developing States to address these
challenges will be important to preventing future
conflicts and maintaining international peace and
security. Palau urges the Security Council to put the
threat that climate change poses to small island States’
peace and security on its agenda.
Before I leave, I would like to emphasize that peace
and security are important to Palau and, small as we
are, we do participate in international peacekeeping
activities in the Sudan and Darfur. As Members of
the United Nations community, we will continue to do
our part to ensure that peace and good mental health
and well-being will continue for all people all over the
world. Finally, we would like to thank the Security
Council, as well as all of our partners, for their work
and assistance, as well as for the further assistance
commitments that were made today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to join those who have preceded me
in congratulating the New Zealand presidency on
convening today’s open debate, which is clear evidence,
based on what we have heard, of its timeliness and of the
severity of the problems facing small island developing
States (SIDS).

S/PV.7499

For my country, this group of 52 States and
territories — 23 of which are in the Caribbean Sea
region, to which Colombia, with a coastline more
than 1,600 kilometres long, also belongs — are very
important and in urgent need of solutions to their
problems. Of the challenges that were discussed so
eloquently by the Minister of Finance of Seychelles and
the Prime Ministers of Jamaica and Samoa, I will focus
on two that are particularly significant for Colombia:
transnational organized crime and climate change.
Colombia, perhaps unlike any other nation in our
region, has been dealing for decades with transnational
organized crime, at an enormous cost in lives and
resources. In that struggle, however, we have learned
lessons that have enabled us to design a comprehensive
international strategy for security cooperation that
we have shared in particular with our Caribbean
neighbours through advice, technical assistance,
education and training on anti-narcotics intelligence in
order to fight transnational organized crime, as well as
in helping to combat the global drug problem, which,
as we have heard today, has had tragic effects on SIDS,
particularly our neighbours in the region. It is in that
spirit of cooperation that we are now able to announce
that, in September in Cartagena de Indias, we will be
hosting a third Caribbean seminar on combating drugs,
with representatives from 16 countries.
We have also signed cooperation agreements with
14 countries in the region aimed at strengthening
national capacities at the operational level that will
enable us to work together, with better tools, in order to
tackle potential threats to our security and that of our
citizens. Perhaps one of the most effective mechanisms
has been the creation and strengthening of strategic
alliances, in partnership with countries such as Canada
and the United States, that have enabled us to develop
triangular and South-South cooperative relationships,
as others have also mentioned, in order to create safer
societies in the countries of the Caribbean.
Secondly, I would like to refer to the threat posed
by climate change. Disasters caused by extreme
natural phenomena linked to climate change have the
potential to devastate Caribbean States and therefore
the economic stability and security of our entire region.
A single tropical storm can destroy the infrastructure
of an entire country and retard gross domestic product
growth for several years, thus significantly disrupting
its development growth and the region’s development
path.

15-2378251/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

Colombia has fallen victim to this phenomenon
and therefore understands the extreme circumstances
facing neighbouring SIDS, as so rightly stated in your
concept note (S/2015/543, annex), Mr. President, in
which you say that:
“Tackling climate change is not, on its own,
sufficient to eliminate all the challenges that small
island developing States are facing, but failure to act
on climate change will undoubtedly make their future
less secure.”
This, of course, will threaten the stability of our
region and of the entire planet. That is why the Security
Council must play a role in the cases of conflict that are
already on its agenda, which can only be exacerbated
by the effects of climate change, specifically through
humanitarian protection measures.
I am sure with the definition of a new post2015 sustainable development agenda, and with the
opportunity to adopt a legally binding agreement at
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change Paris Conference to be held in December, as
well as the special session of the General Assembly on
the world drug problem, to be held here in New York
in April 2016, as mentioned by the Prime Minister of
Jamaica and the Ambassador of the United Kingdom,
we shall forge ahead in building more prosperous
societies while tackling the drivers of insecurity for all
States of the world, but especially for the small island
developing States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Ms. Lind (Estonia): First of all, I would like
sincerely to thank New Zealand for having convened
this important meeting, for the first time. I would also
like to express my gratitude for all of the presentations
made this morning.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
We are all well aware that natural disasters and
development issues such as the scarce resources,
remoteness, limited administrative capacity and
disadvantaged economies that small island developing
States (SIDS) are facing can pose serious threats to
peace and security not only in those countries but even
in a wider context, both regional and global. These
threats include tensions caused by political, social and

52/87

30/07/2015

economic instability, humanitarian crises, risks related
to migration and transnational organized crime.
One of the greatest challenges for SIDS, of course,
is climate change, which generates sea-level rise and
increasingly intense natural disasters, as was recently
demonstrated by Cyclone Pam, which recently struck
Vanuatu and Tuvalu. Estonia was one of the first to
contribute to UNICEF in response to the most critical
needs of the children and families affected by the
disaster in both countries. In this context, we also
welcome the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015-2030, which includes reference to the
vulnerabilities of SIDS.
As was also discussed in the recent Arria Formula
meeting, climate change can be a driver for various
types of insecurity and crises, both internally and
globally. It is a matter of utmost importance that a
global, ambitious, single, legally binding agreement on
climate change,
applicable to all, be concluded this year in
Paris. Estonia has always been a strong proponent
of safeguarding international law, and we also think
that the obligations undertaken by the international
community to fulfil the objectives of tackling climate
change must be taken extremely seriously. Estonia
has also decided to contribute €1 million to the Green
Climate Fund in the years 2015-2016.
Last year, Estonia was glad to be present at
the third International Conference on Small Island
Developing States, held in Apia, and to be part of the
adoption of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(Samoa Pathway) and the Programme of Action for the
sustainable development of SIDS. It recognized, as a
core theme, that genuine and durable partnerships and
international cooperation are essential for the mitigation
of the risks of climate change and other challenges of
those island countries. In Apia, nearly 300 partnerships
were announced, and now it is crucial to implement
them.
Estonia has made a long-term commitment to
partnering with SIDS countries. We have contributed
to the project aiming to provide and improve satellite
Internet connectivity in remote and vulnerable areas in
the Pacific small island States. While information and
communication technologies solutions have proved to
be one of the most powerful promoters of development,
especially in remote areas, the other side of the coin
is security. Among other threats, SIDS are also

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

susceptible to cybercrime and cyberattacks. Therefore,
we have extended our cooperation with SIDS to the
field of cybersecurity, inter alia in cooperation with the
Organization of American States, in several Caribbean
countries such as Dominica, Jamaica and Trinidad and
Tobago.
Finally, we hope that today’s debate will not remain
the only one on the subject. The Security Council’s
involvement is essential in the maintenance of peace
and sustainable development in the small island
developing States. And vice versa, in order to better
accomplish that aim, a stronger voice of the small
nations in the Council is vital. We therefore hope that
the SIDS countries will be adequately represented in
the Security Council in the near future.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
I would first like to thank you, Mr. President, and
New Zealand for having organized this very important
debate. We thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
We would also like to acknowledge the important
contributions by the Prime Ministers of Samoa and
Jamaica and the Minister of Finance of Seychelles in
sharing their perspectives on the peace and security
challenges faced by small island developing States
(SIDS). We welcome the participation of so many highranking dignitaries from Member States: the President
of Kiribati, Ministers, the Prime Minister of Aruba, the
Premier of Niue and their respective statements.
We welcome, as I said earlier, the initiative by New
Zealand to convene this meeting. The security challenges
facing SIDS demonstrate the complex interlinkages
between stability, security and global challenges. Our
discussion should consider both independent States
and those overseas territories administered by other
States, including some EU member States, which face a
common set of problems.

S/PV.7499

The unique and particular vulnerabilities of
SIDS have been consistently acknowledged by the
international community, most recently at the third
International Conference on Small Island Developing
States, held in Samoa last September, to which the
previous speaker just referred. It is clear that the
vulnerabilities arising from small size and remoteness,
weak capacity and exposure to natural disasters can
have an impact on stability and in some cases pose
security challenges.
The SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (Samoa
Pathway), agreed in Samoa last year, acknowledges
SIDS’ unique and particular vulnerabilities while
offering many tools to address them. In helping
implement the Pathway, the international community,
including through the strong partnership between the
European Union and SIDS, will continue to deliver
on the promise of sustainable development through an
integrated, balanced and rights-based approach.
Many SIDS continue to be dramatically affected
by natural and other disasters, leading to loss of life
and livelihoods and significant economic, social
and environmental costs. Most recently, Cyclone
Pam showed us the dramatic impact of a natural
disaster on development and human security, in
particular when combined with remoteness and
geographical specificities. The Sendai Framework
firmly anchors risk management as a key element of
sustainable development and takes into account SIDS’
vulnerabilities. The European Union is thus reorienting
its support to make resilience a priority in cooperation
with those countries most vulnerable to natural
disasters, and will work with SIDS to better integrate
risk management and resilience into their policies and
strategies.
We must continue our efforts to avoid the negative
impact of climate change, which is not only threatening
the survival of some SIDS, but is also challenging their
access to key resources, such as water or fisheries. The
recent the Arria Formula meeting of the Security Council,
initiated by Spain, on the role of climate change as a
threat multiplier for global security acknowledged that
climate change triggers humanitarian crises, as well as
political and economic instability and climate-induced
migration. Shrinking natural resources may exacerbate
tensions and potentially lead to conflict and, in turn, to
displacement.

15-2378253/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is in this context that the European Union and
SIDS will continue to work towards the shared objective
of addressing climate change at the global level. The
moment to act ambitiously is now. We need to get a
universal, fair, ambitious and balanced legally binding
international climate agreement in Paris later this year.
An agreement that ensures that the world remains on
track to keep global warming below 2°C is fundamental
in order to limit the risks predicted by science, of which
SIDS would be — or I should say already are — the
first victims. We would also welcome an update of the
Secretary-General’s 2009 report on climate change and
its possible security implications (A/64/350).
The New Zealand presidency has rightly pointed
out in its concept note (S/2015/543, annex) that SIDS
are also affected by piracy and the trafficking of drugs,
small arms and persons. Law enforcement agencies
within SIDS often lack the capabilities and resources
needed to address those challenges and the corruption
that drives, enables and perpetuates criminality. Crime
and security are a joint priority area of cooperation
between the European Union and the Caribbean region
that constitutes a successful area of partnership in the
Indian Ocean. We closely cooperate with the Caribbean
nations in the fight against drug trafficking and
international criminal networks. In order to support the
region’s efforts to increase security, governance and
the rule of law, the European Union adopted in July
2014 a comprehensive citizen security strategy for the
Caribbean and Central America. The action plan for
the strategy, adopted on 8 June, focuses on building
international cooperation and a shared political agenda
for citizen security, strengthening the ability of
Governments to deliver quality public services in the
area of security through capacity-building.
Security and the economic development of SIDS
are also impacted by the illicit exploitation of natural
resources, in particular fisheries. It remains crucial
to implement existing international commitments
that strengthen oceans governance rules, notably
in the context of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea. Moreover, the European Union
is cooperating with a number of SIDS in the fight
against illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing by
promoting measures to prevent, deter and eliminate
those phenomena, strengthening legal frameworks and
fisheries management plans, and promoting improved
fisheries management and the sustainable management
of fishing resources. The European Union has concluded
sustainable fisheries partnership agreements with seven
54/87

30/07/2015

SIDS and has renewed or reinforced cooperation in this
area in the Pacific Ocean. We plan to extend existing
programmes to West Africa, benefiting SIDS there.
In conclusion, all of the aforementioned security
risks and vulnerabilities are interrelated, which
constitutes in itself an additional threat to stability and
must be addressed in a comprehensive and collaborative
way. These risks and vulnerabilities equally require the
involvement of all actors and concerned stakeholders.
The European Union remains a strong advocate of
effective multilateralism and is committed to helping
SIDS overcome their vulnerabilities and challenges.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Singapore.
Ms. Tan (Singapore): We join others in expressing
our appreciation to New Zealand for giving attention
to issues important to small island developing States
(SIDS) by hosting this open debate on peace and
security challenges.
Singapore was privileged to have worked closely
with New Zealand to shepherd the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway (Samoa
Pathway) at the third International Conference on Small
Island Developing States, in Apia in September 2014.
The vulnerabilities faced by SIDS can often accentuate
many of the challenges that are common to all nations.
A major preoccupation of SIDS is dealing with the
adverse impacts of climate change, which besides being
an existential threat in itself, has a multiplier effect on
non-traditional security threats.
High degrees of climate change pose enormous
risks to national and international security. Climate
change impacts could also indirectly lead to
transboundary issues like pollution and an increased
risk of terrorism if States fail, and higher temperatures
can accelerate the spread of some diseases to epidemic
proportions. In terms of disaster-risk reduction and
relief, the capacity of the international community for
humanitarian assistance is already at full stretch and
could be overwhelmed. The role played by climate
change in exacerbating such non-traditional security
threats should therefore not be ignored.
The risks related to climate change are clear and
present to many. A recent Pew Research Center survey,
measuring perceptions of international challenges,
showed global climate change as the top threat
perceived by countries in Latin America, sub-Saharan
Africa and Asia. A sizeable portion of the 45,000
15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7499

persons surveyed in 40 nations cited climate change as
their biggest worry — of greater concern than the threat
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham — making
it the most widespread concern of any issue included
in the survey. The sense of urgency reflected in those
recent reports is something that SIDS have long been
preoccupied with, because SIDS have to cope with these
matters in every aspect of planning and development at
the national level.

at the national level. Examples include improving
the baseline monitoring of island systems and the
downscaling of climate model projections, which would
help to enable better projections of future impacts on
small islands. To increase human and environmental
resilience to the longer-term impacts of climate change,
continued support is needed to raise awareness of and
communication about climate change risks, including
through public dialogue with local communities.

As we anticipate a new global agreement on climate
change at the twenty-first session of the Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change in December, the urgent need to help
SIDS adapt to the impacts of climate change should be
seen through the lens of those non-traditional security
implications. Climate change can be a threat multiplier,
and the quest to reduce the vulnerability and increase
the resilience of SIDS takes on additional dimensions
of urgency.

Also, SIDS seek to achieve, first, sustainable energy
goals through better energy efficiencies and sustainable
energy systems, including an integrated approach to
establishing and strengthening innovative energy road
maps; secondly, disaster risk-reduction goals through
early warning systems, better risk assessment and
data collection, as well as contingency planning for
better disaster preparedness and response; and thirdly,
greater food security and nutrition by promoting open
and efficient international and domestic markets and
enhancing international cooperation to maintain access
to global food markets, particularly during periods of
high volatility in commodity prices. Such actions can
contribute directly to the reduction of vulnerability,
the enhancement of resilience and the reduction of
non-traditional security threats.

The Samoa Pathway recognizes that sea-level rise
and other adverse impacts of climate change continue to
pose a significant risk to the efforts of SIDS to achieve
sustainable development. For instance, climate change
implications tied in with other threats could lead to
the displacement of populations and conflict over
resources due to food and water scarcity. The Samoa
Pathway reaffirmed that SIDS remain a special case
for sustainable development, in view of such unique
and particular vulnerabilities. The document identifies
direct responses to a host of challenges to which
SIDS would be particularly vulnerable, with concrete
modalities of action to tackle disaster-risk reduction,
food and energy security, as well as water and sanitation,
among others. Addressing such challenges effectively
will help each of the SIDS manage its overall resilience
to climate change and reduce non-traditional threats to
peace and security.
International support for adaptation efforts lags
behind support for mitigation actions, yet many SIDS
undertake adaptation actions with domestic resources,
at significant opportunity costs to other development
priorities. The truth of the matter is that tackling these
challenges is an existential issue for SIDS. We have no
choice but to undertake adaptation efforts to increase
resilience, reduce vulnerability, and avoid loss and
damage. We need to do so whether there is a global
climate agreement or not.
In that respect, some of the actions identified in
the Samoa Pathway can make a qualitative difference

Singapore is committed to helping our fellow SIDS
in building capacity to take such action. At the Third
International Conference on Small Island Developing
States, held in Apia, Singapore launched a three-year
technical cooperation package dedicated to SIDS that
includes customized programmes in areas such as
climate change, sustainable development and disaster
management. In collaboration with the United Nations
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, we will also conduct
a specialized training course for SIDS, in October,
on the implementation of the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 (General Assembly
resolution 69/283), including climate change adaptation
and mitigation measures.
The adaptation objectives that SIDS have been
championing are not empty demands being made during
negotiations. They are real needs. The design and
implementation of climate change adaptation measures
must be appropriate to the respective vulnerabilities
and national circumstances if they are to be truly able
to safeguard our security. This debate at the level of the
Security Council is therefore very welcome in drawing
attention to the need for greater support for the ongoing
efforts of SIDS.

15-2378255/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

The global nature of climate change calls for the
widest possible cooperation on the part of all countries
and their participation in an effective and appropriate
international response. We need genuine and durable
partnerships that harness the full potential of engagement
among Governments at all levels. Businesses, civil
society and a wide range of other national and regional
stakeholders can also play important roles in helping
SIDS better mainstream adaptation needs as we
advance sustainable development.
In closing, we once again thank New Zealand for its
leadership in providing the opportunity to bring these
pertinent issues to the fore at this open debate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Let me, too, acknowledge the
many high-level participants that have come here today,
in particular those from small island developing States
(SIDS), including from our Pacific family, to take
part in this meeting of the Security Council. We, too,
commend New Zealand for convening today’s debate.
The participation of a large number of small island
developing States at the ministerial level demonstrates
the importance of this issue and underscores the value
of this Security Council meeting.
To Australia, as an Indo-Pacific country surrounded
by SIDS, the vulnerabilities and challenges facing our
SIDS partners are all too clear. The adoption of the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action Pathway at the Third
International Conference on Small Island Developing
States in September 2014 was a landmark outcome that
recognized that crime and violence, conflict, piracy
and trafficking adversely impact the peace of SIDS. It
underlined the importance of supporting SIDS through
genuine and durable partnerships.
Experience shows us that the international
community can make practical contributions towards
ensuring the peace and prosperity of SIDS. But it
requires an integrated approach to building resilience in
support of peace and security, sustainable development
and human rights. We see several important elements,
including, first, securing global commitments and
cooperation to address challenges faced by SIDS, for
example by acceding to and implementing the global
agreements that are fundamental to improving security
for SIDS, such as the Arms Trade Treaty — as called
for today by many of the Ministers from the Caribbean.

56/87

30/07/2015

Bold commitments are needed and action to reduce
emissions, including a strong new climate agreement
under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, greater and more effective investment
in adaptation and resilience, and an update to the
Secretary-General’s 2009 report on climate change
and its possible security implications (A/64/350),
and the implementation of the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 (General Assembly
resolution 69/283) and the sustainable development
goals, especially goal 16, on peaceful societies, and
goal 14, on oceans.
Secondly, regional partnerships must be supported
to help SIDS pool resources and build capacity. For
example, the Pacific Transnational Crime Network
has disrupted drugs, firearms and wildlife trafficking
throughout the region. The Pacific Patrol Boat
Programme, involving a network of patrol boats
and Australian naval advisers, has strengthened
surveillance to protect fisheries and tackle crime. This
month, Pacific Foreign Ministers agreed to strengthen
regional disaster response capacities by committing
to a number of concrete actions, including improving
pre-positioning of emergency supplies and investing in
multihazard early warning systems.
Thirdly, capacity-building efforts in support of
peace and security are important. Member States should
continue to build institutional capacity in governance,
law and justice and natural resources management
and resilience, including through scholarships and
technical and vocational training. In addition and
throughout all of that, gender equality is essential to
peace and security. Support for SIDS should actively
engage women.
The Security Council and Member States can also
take practical steps to help SIDS implement Security
Council obligations, including by engaging regional
organizations. For example, Australian support for
the Caribbean Community Regional Coordinator
over the past year has strengthened non-proliferation
and counter-terrorism capacities in the Caribbean.
Australia will continue to work with our neighbours,
the international community and the United Nations
system as a whole, to support the peace and security
of SIDS.
Let me conclude by again thanking New Zealand
for convening this important debate and for the
contributions made today by so many ministers from so

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

many SIDS capitals. Their experience and contributions
have enriched today’s debate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this debate. I am also grateful
to the Secretary-General and to the Prime Ministers of
Samoa and Jamaica, as well as Minister Adam, for their
presentations.
Small island developing States (SIDS) play a
valuable and increasingly distinct and active role
in fostering international peace and security. They
provide troops to peacekeeping operations across
the world, support vital initiatives to counter the
trafficking of small arms and light weapons, and seek
to advance the multilateral agendas of peacebuilding,
conflict prevention and nuclear disarmament, among
others. Those countries also face particular social,
economic and security vulnerabilities that are linked to
their unique geography, as the concept note authored by
New Zealand (S/2015/543, annex) correctly points out.
Understanding and facing those specific concerns is a
collective responsibility. Brazil is proud to cooperate
with many SIDS on an array of issues that assist in their
sustainable development.
Transnational organized crime and, in particular,
the illicit transfer of small arms and light weapons are
a source of insecurity for many small island developing
States, which are often unable to effectively patrol
their territories, airspace and exclusive economic
zones. International cooperation and coordination
of initiatives on the ground should be the preferred
answer in that regard. While we recognize the human
suffering caused by the illicit flow of small arms and
light weapons into many SIDS, it is important to also
acknowledge that not all illicit cross-border trafficking
represents a threat to international peace and security.
The Security Council can play a role in countering
the dissemination of armaments and ammunition in
conflict or post-conflict situations, including through
sanctions. It is important, nevertheless, not to lose sight
of the distinction between situations that may threaten
international peace and security from those that pertain
to public security. Discussions on small arms and light
weapons in domestic contexts should be addressed
by the General Assembly, in particular within the
framework of the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in

S/PV.7499

Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
Brazil expects that the entry into force of the Arms
Trade Treaty, by favouring stricter arms-export control
systems, will have a healthy impact on the levels of
violence experienced by some small island developing
States. We urge all States to sign and ratify it.
The challenge faced by small island developing
States regarding the illicit exploitation of their natural
resources should be addressed by strengthening
national ownership and the State institutions needed to
bolster national oversight and develop adequate policies
regarding natural resources. National ownership and
sovereignty are strong antidotes against the use of
natural resources as fuel for conflicts.
Brazil acknowledges the serious hazards posed
by climate change to many small island developing
States, whose long-term survival may be endangered
by rising sea levels, desertification, extreme weather
events and cataclysmic natural disasters. We express
our full solidarity with these nations and continue to
stand ready to cooperate with them in seeking answers
to their specific needs.
Yet, as several delegations stressed during a recent
Arria Formula informal debate of the Council, the
issue of climate change cannot be properly understood,
let alone resolved, from a security-based perspective.
The Security Council lacks the tools, the expertise,
the representation and the legitimacy to deal with
the economic, social, environmental, humanitarian,
scientific and technological aspects of this global debate.
Instead of debating climate change in a forum where
the SIDS themselves are seldom represented, we should
seek solutions to this real problem in the Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (COP 21), where the voice of SIDS
has acquired increased resonance.
Climate change cannot be considered a threat to
international peace and security per se or a “threat
multiplier”. Instead, it is the foremost sustainable
development challenge of our times. Of special
relevance for developing countries, and particularly for
small island developing States, is the need for adequate
resources for adaptation measures. Brazil is convinced
that the most effective way to address the legitimate
concerns of small island developing States on climate
change is to renew our efforts towards an ambitious
agreement, under the Convention, that is based on the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities
and respective capacities. Brazil expects such an

15-2378257/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

30/07/2015

outcome to be reached at COP 21 in Paris, and will
continue to play a constructive role in this regard.

The international community cannot remain idle in the
face of this reality.

Let me reiterate, in conclusion, Brazil’s confidence
that with capacity-building, enhanced international
cooperation and the strengthening of national
institutions, small island developing States will be able
to confront environmental and natural hazards and
other challenges they face. Brazil will remain engaged
with small island developing States at the bilateral,
regional and international levels in order to cooperate
and promote their development and security.

The best long-term response we can make to
the threats posed to small island developing States
by climate change will be to conclude in Paris in
December a legally binding and dynamic agreement,
enjoying global participation, to maintain global
warming below 2 degrees Celsius. Luxembourg, as
President of the Council of the European Union, will
spare no effort to contribute to the conclusion of such
an agreement at the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change. Our Minister of the Environment reaffirmed
that commitment at the Arria Formula meeting
organized on 30 June by Spain and Malaysia on the
theme of climate change as a multiplier of threats to
global security.

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg fully endorses the statement made by the
observer of the European Union. Let me make a few
additional comments in my national capacity.
We thank New Zealand for organizing this open
debate, which allows the Security Council to address
an important topic — the threats to peace and security
faced by the small island developing States. The
briefing of the Secretary-General and the statements
made by the Prime Ministers of Samoa and Jamaica
and the Minister of Finance of Seychelles highlighted
the fact that small island developing States face
special challenges in terms of peace and security. The
international community must help these countries to
overcome these challenges.
There is no doubt that, because of their size and
their geographical location, small island developing
States are particularly vulnerable to the activities
of transnational organized crime networks, be it
trafficking in drugs, human beings or small arms and
light weapons, or piracy. It is also obvious that small
island developing States are among the first affected by
the effects of climate change. Sea-level rise threatens
the very existence of these States and the security and
well-being of their populations; it may result in the
loss of territory, thereby undermining the territorial
integrity of small island developing States.
Who could have imagined 70 years ago, when the
Charter of the United Nations was adopted, that the
principle of territorial integrity — an essential principle
of international relations — could be endangered by
the effects of climate change? The challenge is real.
It can lead to the displacement of populations and
migration flows that may be the source of tensions if
they are not well anticipated, prepared and managed.
58/87

In the Security Council, we continue to advocate, as
we did during our recent term as an elected member, for
the Council to take the implications of climate change
into account in order to better address the root causes of
conflict in the framework of conflict prevention. In our
view, it would be useful in this context for the SecretaryGeneral to report to the Council on the multiplication of
threats to small island developing States in particular.
Security and development are intrinsically linked.
In contributing to the security and progress of small
island developing States, Luxembourg is strongly
committed to their cause. In that regard, we support
Cabo Verde, one of Luxembourg’s main cooperation
partners in the social sectors and in the field of renewable
energy. Luxembourg has supported the fight against
piracy off the coast of Somalia by deploying maritime
patrol aircraft based in Seychelles. We have made
our expertise in the field of satellite communications
available to States in the Caribbean region in order to
strengthen their capacity to respond to natural disasters.
We also support a multilateral regional programme that
helps Pacific small island developing States to develop
renewable energy and adapt to climate change.
Luxembourg, as a small State itself, will remain in
solidarity with small island developing States.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Solomon Islands.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): At the outset, let
me join others in congratulating New Zealand on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of July. I also join others in thanking New
15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Zealand for convening this open debate on the peace
and security challenges facing small island developing
States (SIDS).
Given the time limit, I will restrict myself to
speaking on climate change, which for SIDS remains a
multiplier of threats to international peace and security.
This open debate is being held at a time when global
warming is altering the face and balance of our fragile
planetary system. Water and land are becoming scarce,
triggering climate-induced migratory patterns. Floods,
disease and famine have intensified competition for
basic needs. In other words, climate change is dividing
populations and creating poverty that is not only causing
instability but also aggravating existing threats.
All these outcomes have been recognized at
previous Council debates, going as far back as 2007,
when the United Kingdom first brought the issue of the
security implications of climate change to the Council
(see S/PV.5663). Since then, nothing has changed
for SIDS. SIDS continue to face the brunt of climate
change, and the situation has worsened.
Against that backdrop, Solomon Islands does
not think that this debate is about increasing the
Council’s understanding of the security implications
of climate change; we have already established that.
SIDS vulnerability and special situation are also well
documented in the 21-year-old Barbados Programme
of Action, the 10-year-old Mauritius Strategy for its
implementation and, more recently, the 2014 SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway.
Solomon Islands believes that the Council has
built up sufficient knowledge over time, and is nowwell placed to take a more proactive in giving more
prominence to climate change, as it has done with
regard to other non-traditional security issues, such
HIV, back in 1983, and Ebola, just last year. Such
challenges are breaking down social structures and, in
the case of SIDS, exposing populations to face greater
security threats and risks. My delegation would like to
take this opportunity to make five specific proposals to
the Council.
First, the Council should institutionalize the threat
of climate change on its agenda.
Secondly, the Council should play a much more
proactive role in mobilizing multilateral action to
deliver as one on this issue. That also means the Council
exploring new avenues to enhance the country presence

S/PV.7499

of the United Nations, especially in least developed
SIDS. Too many opportunities have been missed over
the decades. The one-size-fits-all approach of overregionalizing United Nations SIDS programmes has
made SIDS orphans multilaterally.
Thirdly, SIDS need a new international partnership
that is able to transform our lives and build resilient
societies. At the moment, our hydro, geothermal and
wind potential are not the subject of sufficient global
partnerships, in spite of the huge amount of multilateral
funds spent within SIDS. Hopefully, the post-2015
agenda will change that dynamic.
Fourthly, the Council’s work needs to be guided
by science. The structured expert dialogue under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change this year established and confirmed the fact
that stabilizing global temperature at or below 2°
Celsius is too much of a risk for SIDS and LDCs. The
agreement to be reached at Paris must deliver in order
to establish that level at well below 1.5° Celsius. SIDS
cannot pay the price of the excessive consumption and
care-free lives of some at the expense of their survival
and viability.
Fifthly, with regard to the reform of the Council, we
seek an expanded Council that includes a seat for SIDS
so that our challenges are meaningfully addressed in
the Council.
In conclusion, Solomon Islands believes that
preventive diplomacy is the central work of the Council.
SIDS issues cannot be addressed by the Council alone,
but with the Council and the entire United Nations
system working in a systematic and coherent manner. If
we fail the 37 SIDS Members of the United Nations, we
will also fail in upholding our Charter responsibilities,
as well as the multilateral system.
The President: I now give the floor to the Observer
of the Holy See.
Monsignor Kassas: My delegation commends
you, Sir, for convening this first-ever Security Council
open debate on the peace and security challenges
facing small island developing States (SIDS). For
SIDS, climate-related threats are more than just an
environmental issue, or even a development issue, they
are an existential threat.
My delegation sees concern for climate change
as inseparable from concern for human development.
Caring for the environment and alleviating poverty are

15-2378259/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

not separate challenges, but parts of one and the same
challenge: providing integral and authentic human
development. Pope Francis proposes this “integral
ecology” as a paradigm able to articulate harmoniously
our fundamental multidimensional relationships. He
has affirmed that we are not faced with two separate
crises, but rather one complex crisis that is both social
and environmental. Therefore, strategies for a solution
demand an integral approach to combating poverty,
restoring dignity to the underprivileged and, at the
same time, protecting nature. If we lose sight of our
oneness with the environment, our attitude to it will
be that of masters, consumers and ruthless exploiters,
unable to set limits on immediate needs. By contrast,
if we feel intimately united with all that exists, then
sobriety and care will well up spontaneously.
Our care for the Earth should therefore be much
more than a “green” attitude; it must also be a social one,
because we human beings are a part of nature, included
in it and in constant interaction with it. As Pope Francis
told the mayors of the world’s major cities gathered at
the Vatican on 21 July, care for the environment is a
social attitude. My delegation wishes to mention briefly
three areas where we can make a difference in the next
few months.
First, we can do so by achieving a deal in Paris to
combat climate change. Pope Francis challenges global
political leaders to be courageous and move beyond the
mind-set of short-term gain that dominates present-day
economics and politics. In Paris, we need a deal that
will leave behind a testimony of selfless responsibility.
Secondly, we can do so by allocating sufficient
financial resources to tackle climate change and to
respond to current needs. Climate finance is a key part
of paying the ecological debt, and is vital for building
trust towards a successful climate deal in Paris.
And, thirdly, we can do so by increasing access
to renewable energy as an enabler of sustainable
development. Billions of people need access to energy
to lift them out of poverty. Richer countries must help
poorer countries develop less-polluting forms of energy
production by giving them greater access to technology
and financial resources.
While climate change and underdevelopment are
primarily socioeconomic issues, they can severely
impact the peace and security of local communities,
of regions and of entire nations — and, indeed, of the
international community. My delegation will continue

60/87

30/07/2015

to engage in these discussions in the context of the
General Assembly and other relevant forums.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Alday González (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the delegation of New Zealand for its initiative
in convening this meeting, which makes it possible
to learn at first hand the challenges and specific
vulnerabilities faced by small island developing
States (SIDS) in maintaining international peace and
security. On behalf of Mexico, I should like to take
this opportunity to commend you, Mr. President, on
your presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July, which, as we have seen, has not been an easy
month. We also wish to acknowledge the presence of
the various ministers and Heads of State or Government
participating here today.
Mexico is convinced that development is
intrinsically linked to peace and security. Without peace
there can be no sustainable development, and vice versa.
We recognize the vulnerability and special situation
of SIDS in terms of making progress on sustainable
development and therefore consider it indispensable to
strengthen international cooperation to benefit these
States in the economic, social and environmental areas.
That is why we encourage every effort to bring
about the effective implementation of the SIDS Action
Platform as a space with a dual function: to integrate the
progress made and to provide guidance for the planning
of future actions. We believe that the United Nations
system is the sole authority with the ability to mobilize
and take concrete action to consolidate and guide
efforts in this direction; accordingly, it is incumbent
upon all Member States to nurture the system with
political will and concrete commitments in order to
effectively address the unique challenges facing small
island developing States.
From those who are dealing with these challenges
every day, we have at this meeting heard about the
consequences that climate change, food insecurity,
transnational organized crime and piracy have had
for their territories and populations. The droughts
and hurricanes that often affect SIDS, together with
so-called slow-onset events, conspire in some cases
to generate a real threat to their territorial survival
and become unequivocal examples of how climate
change can be a threat multiplier for global security.
We take this opportunity to call for strengthening the

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

global climate regime by adopting a new and ambitious
agreement at the upcoming Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, to be held in France in December.
Among other underlying challenges for many SIDS
is the prevalence of undernourishment at alarming rates
for their populations, aggravated by the challenges in
agriculture and fisheries. Hunger and malnutrition are
not only the result of conflict, but can also provoke them,
alter the fabric of societies and nations, and undermine
peace. In contrast, their eradication helps to prevent
conflict and promote peace. My delegation believes
that governance issues such as the responsiveness
of the institutions of small island States can prevent
temporary food insecurity crises caused by short-term
factors from becoming chronic food insecurity that
threatens peace and security.
Everyone in this Chamber is well aware of the link
between the over-exploitation of natural resources and
conflicts around the world. The sanctions imposed by
the Security Council on countries where the illegal
exploitation of natural resources takes place should be
the international community’s imperative for preventing
conflicts, especially in developing countries like SIDS.
The challenge that transnational organized
crime represents for the international community is
exacerbated when we analyse it from the viewpoint of
SIDS. Their size and limited capabilities for effectively
patrolling exclusive economic zones make them more
susceptible to lurking criminal networks, often turning
them into stopover points in the illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons, persons and drugs.
Mexico has a strong interest in promoting a substantive
multilateral discussion that highlights the similarities
among regions within the framework of the preparatory
process for the special session of the General Assembly
on the world drug problem to be held next year.
The threats and challenges that we have heard
about throughout this debate demand multifaceted
responses not only from the countries concerned
but from the international community as a whole. In
addition to the tools available to the United Nations
system to which we have already referred, there is the
role the Security Council could play, and should want
to play, to mitigate the risks and threats of conflicts.
Thought must be given to the actions that the Security
Council can take to support the efforts that the small
island developing States are carrying out to address the
existing challenges and, more importantly, to prevent

S/PV.7499

future conflicts and strengthen the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Compliance with decisions and resolutions of the
Security Council requires new legal, economic and
financial obligations from many States and, in the
particular case of SIDS, a disproportionate additional
administrative burden and a further reduction in their
limited resources as the result of competing policy
priorities. We invite the Security Council to discuss
and adopt formulas that equip Member States with
institutional mechanisms to respond clearly to the issues
raised by the implementation of some of its resolutions
and in particular sanctions regimes. It will be essential
to provide access to resources of the Organization to
address these issues in the instances that warrant it.
For no one is this challenge more burdensome
than for SIDS. In a rules-based international system,
practical support should be provided to all parts of the
system. Larger countries and the multilateral system
and organizations cannot continue to impose on small
island developing States the same obligations as on the
rest without providing structural support so that they
can meet those obligations appropriately.
In this context, we believe it is important to
emphasize the need for the voice of the SIDS have a
more regular presence in this Chamber. Mexico is
aware that in the past quarter century only six SIDS
have been members of this Council. Therefore, as part
of the compromise proposal to reform and democratize
the Security Council, we urge the expansion of the
number of seats — all non-permanent — to have a more
diverse representation of the international community,
ensuring greater and more frequent representation
of SIDS, and the creation of long-term seats with the
possibility of immediate re-election. Mexico invites the
small island developing States to broaden the dialogue
on this issue and on other ideas or proposals that help
them and us to strengthen their ability to completely
fulfil their role as active members of the international
community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): I would like to join
previous speakers in congratulating New Zealand for
its successful presidency of the Security Council this
month. I would also like to express my delegation’s
appreciation of the initiative of bringing up the issue
of peace and security challenges facing small island

15-2378261/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

developing States (SIDS), which is a good follow-up
to the Third International Conference on SIDS, held in
2014 in Samoa, and which will hopefully allow us to
add new dimensions to the response the United Nations
system may have in this regard. We also appreciate the
informative briefings by the Secretary-General, the
Prime Ministers of Samoa and Jamaica and the Minister
of Finance of Seychelles.
As a developing country and a maritime nation,
the Kingdom of Thailand shares many interests and
concerns with SIDS and in recent years has been
steadily intensifying partnership and cooperation with
island countries. In Asia and the Pacific, for which the
Kingdom has been the United Nations regional hub
since 1947, we have been working closely with our
SIDS friends to address those common concerns.
Last August, in recognition of 2014 as the
International Year of Small Island Developing States,
the Royal Thai Government hosted the first ThailandPacific Island Countries Forum in Bangkok. The
conference opened a new chapter for closer development
partnership based on five priority areas of cooperation,
namely, ecotourism, information and communication
technology, alternative energy, rural area development
and infrastructure, and environmental conservation
and management. A new Thailand-Pacific Action
Plan has also been adopted to reflect the ideas and
comments brought out at the conference and set the
future direction for our comprehensive partnership,
not only with the Pacific island countries but beyond.
With the emergence of the Economic Community of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the
year 2015 also provides a new window of opportunities
for closer partnership between ASEAN and SIDS.
I would like to focus on some of the pressing issues
of concern we share with SIDS that should continue to
rank high on the United Nations agenda, starting with
climate change. We may recall in that regard that the
Security Council’s first-ever debate on the impact of
climate change on security (see S/PV.5663) took place
in this very Chamber eight years ago.
Today, climate change remains a major threat to the
very survival of SIDS, as it can lead to drought and
extreme weather phenomena, rises in sea levels, coastal
erosion and ocean acidification. The United Nations
system should urgently mobilize efforts to come up
with a long-term global response, starting perhaps with
the anticipated agreement at this year’s Paris meeting of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
62/87

30/07/2015

Change, which we hope will be an important milestone
in efforts to limit global greenhouse gas emissions
to levels required to hold off increases in the global
average temperature.
Climate change is also a threat to food security
for SIDS, which are already vulnerable in that regard
due to their high dependence on subsistence fishing
for domestic consumption and on food imports, as well
as to their narrow land-resource base. That in turn
undermines efforts to eradicate poverty and achieve
sustainable development. The entities of the United
Nations system should work together to assist SIDS
in developing sustainable agriculture, enhancing their
productive capacities and improving their regional
connectivity.
Closely linked to climate change are the issues
of water management and natural disasters. Both
are of course vital for all countries, but they can
disproportionately affect SIDS. The United Nations
system should work to help them respond to their
current critical needs, particularly to improve access to
fresh water and address the problem of water scarcity, to
build resilience, strengthen monitoring and preventive
mechanisms, raise awareness and increase their
preparedness to respond to and recover from disasters.
Given the uniqueness of SIDS and their particular
vulnerabilities, we support their access to technical
assistance and financing for sound investments in
water-management infrastructure, as well as for early
warning and disaster risk reduction and management
systems.
Another critical challenge for SIDS is the illicit
exploitation of natural resources, especially illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing. As a State with
a large part of its population relying on the oceans’
healthiness, but also as a fishing nation, the Kingdom of
Thailand fully recognizes the vast impact of this issue
on sustainable development, and we share a common
stance with SIDS.
We are therefore very pleased to see the
conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas
and marine resources listed as a stand-alone sustainable
development goal — goal 14, for which we voice our
unwavering support. To achieve that important goal, we
need strong political will and commitment on the part
of the international community. In the years to come,
the United Nations system can play an important role,
particularly in strengthening the regime for cooperation
between the coastal and flag States of fishing vessels in
15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

waters under national jurisdiction, and in developing
strong mechanisms for the conservation and sustainable
use of marine resources in waters beyond national
jurisdiction.
To that end, the Kingdom of Thailand supports
the initiatives of SIDS and other Member States to
follow up on and implement goal 14 through regular
global conferences until 2029, and looks forward
to participating constructively in the process of
developing a legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in
the context of the forthcoming preparatory committee
on marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction.
At the Third International Conference on Small
Island Developing States last year, we reaffirmed
our support for SIDS’ efforts to effectively combat
transnational organized crime. We are pleased that our
cooperation with SIDS in that area, in collaboration with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, has been
going well. We are ready for further partnership and
urge the international community to further cooperate
with SIDS in addressing their transnational organized
crime concerns, taking into account their vulnerability
as small economies with expansive exclusive economic
zones.
Through the United Nations system, Member States
and other stakeholders, let us build a partnership to
raise awareness and support for SIDS as they cope with
their challenges. The Kingdom of Thailand, as always,
is committed to standing shoulder to shoulder with our
SIDS friends as a reliable and responsible development
partner.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): I would like to begin by
thanking New Zealand for taking the initiative, which
we applaud, of convening this open debate. It offers
a rare but important opportunity for the Security
Council to highlight the challenges and vulnerabilities
that affect 52 countries and territories and more than
50 million people on this globe.
Germany is convinced that the dimensions of the
threats facing small island developing States (SIDS) and
their vulnerability to them require a global response.
All must play their part, including the United Nations
system. Germany is prepared to assume its fair share of

S/PV.7499

responsibility in that endeavour. I would like to provide
a few examples and proposals for action.
First, concerning climate change, the implications
of global warming threaten small island States
disproportionately. For some, it is a question of survival;
for virtually all of them it is a matter of national
security. That is why it is so important that we reach
an ambitious climate agreement in Paris later this year,
since it would represent a crucial investment in future
peace and security, especially — though certainly not
only — for small island developing States. We must
improve our mitigation and adaptation efforts. A recent
study presented under the current German presidency
of the Group of Seven (G-7) showed that we do not
yet use risk assessments and early warning systems
effectively. The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015-2030 (General Assembly resolution
69/283, annex II) should therefore be one of our prime
guidelines for further action.
My country is prepared to support vulnerable
countries, thereby making an ambitious climate
agreement more attainable. To that end, Germany
recently pledged to double its public climate financing
by 2020, to €4 billion annually.
Turning to the role of the United Nations and
the Security Council, I would like to reaffirm
Germany’s position that the Council should discuss the
interdependence of climate change and security on a
regular basis. We consider the presidential statement
on the subject (S/PRST/2011/15) — issued, incidentally,
under Germany’s presidency of the Council in
2011 — to be an important step in that regard. We
favour an update of the Secretary-General’s 2009 report
on climate change and its possible security implications
(A/64/350). We also welcome the recommendations
made by the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations in its report of 16 June (S/2015/446) and
hope they will be included in the Secretary-General’s
report.
On the subject of sustainable development, we
look forward to the adoption of an ambitious post2015 agenda that takes into account the particular
vulnerabilities and challenges of SIDS. The successful
implementation of such a far-reaching agenda requires
a new global partnership for poverty eradication and
sustainable development. Again, Germany is prepared
to play its part here.

15-2378263/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

My country is also making use of its current
presidency of the G-7 to support small island developing
States. The G-7 leaders agreed at their recent summit in
Germany to increase to 400 million by 2020 the number
of people in the most vulnerable developing countries
who have access to insurance coverage against hazards
related to climate change. They also agreed to support
the development of early warning systems in the regions
most affected. Furthermore, they committed to taking
action to combat marine litter, which poses a global
challenge and affects so many SIDS. Back in April, the
G-7 foreign ministers issued a statement on maritime
security, addressing issues of considerable concern to
SIDS, such as piracy and illegal fishing.
With the adoption of the Sendai Framework,
the Addis Ababa Action Agenda (General Assembly
resolution 69/313, annex), the post-2015 agenda and a
new climate agreement in Paris in December, 2015 will
be a critical year for all of us, and very prominently for
SIDS. Let us all make it a year of success and hope.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Cortorreal (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me at the outset to congratulate,
through you, New Zealand for bringing to this
important forum of the United Nations an issue of
particular sensitivity for island States, given that
environmental degradation and climate change directly
affect sustainable development in all of our countries.
It is important that the Security Council recognize
the humanitarian risks entailed by climate change, as
well as the political and security risks that result from
extreme tensions and conflict.
The impact and consequences of climate change
on human security are related to international security.
In our view, global policy action is required by this
important international forum. The Dominican
Republic finds itself in a special situation that makes
us vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.
Our overriding priority is human security, and, to that
end, we value the opportunity to share our concerns in
this important arena.
Our delegation is particularly troubled by the
phenomenon of annual rainfall distribution. Adequate
knowledge about this phenomenon makes it possible to
safeguard water as a resource that is not only vital but
crucial to establishing and maintaining stable societies.

64/87

30/07/2015

For small island developing States (SIDS) like ours,
this is particularly important.
The Dominican Republic, which shares the island
of Hispaniola with the Republic of Haiti, knows full
well its rainfall pattern. This has enabled the country
to make its water resources one of its main vectors
for development. The Dominican nation has therefore
built 14 major multipurpose hydro plants and 4,000
kilometres of irrigation channels. This infrastructure
has allowed us to double the amount of arable land in
just a few decades. We must also point out that up to
15 per cent of Dominican electric production comes
from hydro-electric plants. This system of clean and
renewable energy cost billions of dollars and requires
substantial resources for its expansion and maintenance.
We are proud to say that Dominican legislation
establishes the resource of water as a public good, but
despite this progress the impacts of climate change
have begun to affect the efficiency of our hydro
system. The clear changes in rainfall patterns, with
persistent periods of drought, has plunged us into an
unprecedented water-supply crisis.
As things stand, every five or seven years we
have a year of drought. The danger now is that, if
the temperatures keep rising, rainfall years will soon
become the exception. This would involve a constant
decrease of rainfall throughout the island, that is,
persistent drought. There is already a water crisis in
neighbouring Haiti, in addition to a well-known lack
of infrastructure for regulating and exploiting water
resources. This is an additional factor of concern to that
brother country that leads to its nationals continuing
to emigrate to our country, owing to the continuing
pressure on resources.
Increasing drought, water scarcity and land abuse
undoubtedly will further degrade the soil, leading to
social tensions and economic and land losses, which
will undoubtedly affect global human security, even in
those countries considered to be politically sound. In
our opinion, it is appropriate and very important that
the Security Council adopt a resolution recognizing
the threat posed by the foreseeable effects of climate
change. In so doing, it would be more fully taking on
a universal challenge and facilitate the emergence and
implementation of effective and timely solutions to
provide peaceful responses that are based on shared
values of respect for life, human dignity and the
environment.

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, I wish to categorically reject
the imputations made by the Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines Minister for Foreign Affairs against the
Dominican Republic in its national plan for foreigners.
The Dominican Republic stresses that our country has
not conducted any deportations since 2003 and that
there has been no violence against those who have
wished to voluntarily leave our country. In exercise
of its sovereignty, the Dominican Republic, in the
framework of a strict constitutional and legal order,
has always implemented its national plan for the
regularization of foreigners with due respect for human
dignity and in compliance with the principles and
standards established in human rights commissions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and your delegation
on your successful stewardship of this month’s
presidency of the Security Council and for convening
this open debate. This debate could not have been more
timely, as we are approaching the first anniversary of
the adoption of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of
Action (Samoa Pathway), a blueprint for sustainable
development for small island developing States (SIDS),
while in September a historic summit will take place
here at the United Nations for the adoption of a universal
post-2015 development agenda that would call for global
action towards inclusive, sustainable development and
universal prosperity in a peaceful, safe and just world.
The Republic of Cyprus aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union and would like to make the following
remarks in its national capacity.
The international community has recognized the
particular challenges facing SIDS, especially through
the outcome documents of international conferences,
such as the Barbados Programme of Action, the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States and, most recently,
the Samoa Pathway.
Their small size, the limited nature of their
economies, their lack of capacity and resources, and
their geographical isolation and exposure to natural
disasters render those States more vulnerable to
subsequent threats that adversely affect their economies
and societies. Such challenges are, inter alia, lack of

S/PV.7499

human capacity, land degradation, weak infrastructure,
food insecurity, brain drain due to migration, organized
crime, including the trafficking of drugs, small arms
and persons, as well as piracy, and, most importantly,
the adverse effects of climate change.
The 2012 World Bank report entitled “Turn Down
the Heat” warns that if current commitments and
pledges are not fully adhered to, a warming of 4ºC could
occur as early as the 2060s and that an associated sealevel rise of 0.51 metre or more by 2100 will threaten
the very existence of entire countries and many SIDS.
Needless to say, all of those grave challenges have
a serious, cumulative impact on the stability and peace
of many SIDS. Following the Security Council’s recent
Arria Formula meeting on the role of climate change
as a threat to global security, especially for SIDS, this
debate is an excellent opportunity for SIDS to further
contribute to the discussion on how we can collectively
address the peace and security challenges related to
climate change that small island States have to face.
Climate change, as the greatest threat multiplier
for global security, can be considered the root cause of
many of the various challenges that threaten SIDS and
make them socially, environmentally and economically
more susceptible.
Ecosystems and marine biodiversity are also
susceptible to aggressive changes in the environment,
something that directly affects coastal and marine
resources and, eventually, tourism and fisheries. Climate
change can lead to or intensify structural adversities
and increase communicable and noncommunicable
diseases. It deepens social and economic disparities, as
climate-induced migration illustrates.
Cyprus, as a small island State in the Mediterranean,
is familiar with those challenges. Our small size,
remoteness, limited natural resources — such as water
scarcity — render us exposed and vulnerable to many
challenges similar to those currently facing SIDS. That
is why we have always maintained the view that the
interest of small island States can best be served and
protected collectively, within the framework of the
United Nations. It must be emphasized, in this context,
that building alliances and partnerships between
SIDS and all relevant actors — including regional
organizations, global financial institutions, the private
sector and civil society — is crucial in addressing the
numerous and diverse challenges of the small island
States.

15-2378265/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

SIDS rely on the support and solidarity of the
international community. In our national capacity and
as a member of the European Union, we support and
contribute to the realization of many of the shared
objectives of SIDS, including that of addressing climate
change globally.
Development, peace and security go hand in hand.
The sustainable development goals, which our leaders
will adopt next September, have clearly established that
peace and security cannot exist without development
and development cannot be achieved without peace.
International cooperation and effective collective
measures to remove any threats to peace lie at the core
of our preventive actions, and with the involvement of
all actors, governmental and non-governmental, and all
other stakeholders, we can help SIDS build resilience
and a more prosperous and sustainable life. It is in our
collective interest to do so, and it is in the interest of
global peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): I will shorten my statement
in the interest of time and circulate the full text for
reference.
India shares traditional and strong bonds of
friendship and kinship with small island developing
States (SIDS). With a coastline extending more than
7,500 kilometres and with several groups of islands
located far away from our mainland, India is deeply
conscious of the special challenges faced by SIDS.
As part of the South-South cooperation, India
has been privileged to share its developmental
experience and expertise as well as technological
resources with SIDS. Our cooperation with SIDS has
emphasized human and institutional capacity- building,
infrastructure development, climate change adaptation,
agriculture and food security, among others. Prime
Minister Narendra Modi initiated the Forum for IndiaPacific Islands Cooperation (FIPIC), in 2014 in Fiji, to
enable regular dialogue and interaction between our
two sides. The next meeting of FIPIC will be hosted in
India next month.
The very useful concept note circulated by New
Zealand for this debate (S/2015/543) disaggregates
the topic into four broad headings. In all these areas,
it is clear that effective international cooperation has
been most viable outside the confines of the Security

66/87

30/07/2015

Council. We must look beyond the Security Council in
redressing the concerns outlined in the concept note.
For example, though piracy was taken up by the
15-member Security Council in resolutions 1851
(2008) and 1918 (2010), it has been through a much
wider grouping — the 60-member Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia — that the security and
economic concerns related to piracy have actually been
addressed. This democratic and transparent approach
commends consideration of broadening effective
international cooperation to tackle piracy, under the
framework of the General Assembly and taking into
account the concerns expressed by SIDS.
The General Assembly devoted decades of
discussion and negotiation to enable the adoption of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Seas
(UNCLOS) in 1982. That has been a major achievement
of the Assembly, and UNCLOS today is the platform
from which issues of concern to Member States,
including SIDS, with regard to the illicit exploitation
of natural resources, including illicit fishing, are most
effectively addressed. We need to provide more attention
in the General Assembly on how to enable SIDS to use
the provisions of UNCLOS more effectively.
As the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) is poised to conclude its
current negotiations in Paris in December this year, we
advocate that the concerns of SIDS on climate change
must be reflected in the outcome document that will be
adopted in Paris. SIDS are at the front line of the threat
from climate change and sea-level rise and suffer the
most from a global problem they did not contribute to.
Adaptation to climate change remains one of the
highest priorities for SIDS. Long-promised financial
support under UNFCCC from developed countries must
reach the SIDS expeditiously. The Green Climate Fund
must also prioritize disbursement of funds to SIDS for
their urgent adaptation priorities.
We are poised to adopt the post-2015 development
agenda at the forthcoming special session of the
General Assembly in September this year. It is worth
emphasizing the importance of sustainable development
goal 14 in the context of this debate. Goal 14 reflects the
active participation of many Member States, especially
SIDS, in both identifying and addressing the concerns
related to development in the area of oceans, seas and
marine resources.

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Before concluding, Mr. President, I must thank your
delegation for pointing out in the concept note that as
many as 37 Member States are small island developing
States. While SIDS have participated effectively in the
universal platform provided by the General Assembly
to address their specific concerns, it is a pity that the
restricted and undemocratic nature of the Security
Council has so far prevented SIDS from contributing
their unique perspective as developing countries to the
Council’s deliberations.
That situation cannot be sustained for much longer.
We therefore call on you, Mr. President, to include in
your proposed non-paper a strong endorsement of the
call of a majority of Member States for urgent and
early reforms of the structure of the Security Council,
expanding its membership in both categories in order
to allow the voices of developing countries, especially
those of SIDS, to be acted upon more regularly and be
heard more often in the Council Chamber.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would like to extend my
appreciation to New Zealand for putting the spotlight,
for the very first time in the Council, on the peace and
security challenges facing small island developing
States (SIDS).
Albert Einstein said, “In matters of truth and
justice, there is no difference between large and small
problems.” In matters of truth and justice, there is
also no difference between large and small countries.
More than a fifth of the Member States of the United
Nations are classified as small island developing
States. Whether in the Pacific, the Caribbean or
off the coast of Africa, members of this unique
community — SIDS — are disproportionately affected
by climate change, environmental degradation and
natural disasters. These challenges pose considerable
obstacles to their development and, ultimately, to their
peace and security and to ours.
One major challenge for SIDS is the health of
our oceans. Although we in Israel may not have vast
oceans lapping at our shores, we know that they are
the livelihood of our blue planet. Healthy oceans are
not only essential for the environment, but they are
at the core of the world’s economic prosperity, social
resilience and our peace and security. While the health
of our oceans is an issue that we must all confront
together, the small island developing States are at the

S/PV.7499

vanguard of this global effort and face the highest risks
should we all fail.
In this campaign, it is not the size of the country
but the bravery and determination of its people that will
make the difference. One example we can look to is
Palau, which has demonstrated courage and leadership,
announcing it will establish the world’s first nation-wide
marine sanctuary. Palau will designate its entire ocean
territory as a regenerative zone for sharks, whales, tuna
and countless other precious species.
When asked about his country’s tremendous
efforts in that regard, the President of Palau, Tommy
Remengesau, replied powerfully and succinctly, “We
have no choice — the ocean is our way of life”. The
international community has no choice but to stand
with the SIDS to protect our oceans and to combat
climate change.
Around the globe, SIDS are proactively coming
together and partnering with other countries to employ
innovative ways to combat climate change. For example,
the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre in
Belize coordinates the Caribbean region’s response
to climate change. Efforts to incorporate renewable
energy, particularly solar power, to combat climate
change are growing in this region. Recently, energy
professionals from Trinidad and Tobago, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and Belize came to Israel to undergo a
unique course of intensive training in renewable sources
of energy. Israel and its Caribbean SIDS partners are
working together to bring renewable energy solutions
to the region because we know that small countries can
produce big ideas.
The courage of SIDS, disproportionate to their size
and population, is also quite evident in the realm of
peacemaking. Some of the smallest SIDS — some of
the smallest Member States in this family of nations, in
fact — are proud contributors to peacekeeping. Countries
such as Vanuatu, Samoa and Grenada contribute police
officers to peacekeeping efforts around the world. For
decades we in Israel have appreciated the presence
of the Fijian peacekeepers serving in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the Golan Heights and in
Lebanon and in the multilateral force in the Sinai. Far
away from home, the Fijian peacekeepers have earned
a place of respect for their contribution to peace and
security in our region.
Israel is a small island of sorts, a State in the midst
of an often turbulent sea of hostility. We face important

15-2378267/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

challenges to peace and security, but in our early years
the primary strategic threat to Israel was the scarcity of
water and the challenges of developing our agricultural
infrastructure — issues that are still plaguing many
SIDS. That is not ancient history, nor is it theory. Our
successes and our failures are still fresh, and those
lessons are part of our contribution to our SIDS partners
on their path to development, peace and security.
In 2014 Israel participated in the historic Third
International Conference on Small Island Developing
States in Samoa. The SIDS Accelerated Modalities of
Action (Samoa Pathway) outcome document of 2014
is the road map for addressing the challenges of peace
and security facing SIDS. At its heart is the principle
of sustainable development of small island developing
States through genuine and durable partnerships. In
the spirit of the Samoa Pathway, Israel has pledged to
provide 25 public health scholarships for SIDS scholars
at the world-renowned Hebrew University in Jerusalem,
of which I am a graduate. Furthermore, Israel, in
cooperation with the Marshall Islands, deployed an
innovative, mobile water purification vehicle in the
island of Ebeye.
As we are about to agree on the most comprehensive
and ambitious sustainable development goals for the
next 15 years, we must make sure that SIDS remain at
the top of our priorities. In our interconnected global
reality, no man is an island and no island is detached
from the rest of the world. Island nations must be
embraced. From Port Vila in Vanuatu to Port au Prince
in Haiti, the global community must sow the seeds of
development so that SIDS will prosper in the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): At the Security Council’s
Arria formula meeting on climate change last month,
many countries, including Japan, pointed out that
climate change can act as a threat multiplier to natural
disasters and other phenomena, especially for small
island developing States (SIDS). For example, the
rise in sea level caused by climate change can pose a
threat to a nation’s existence. That should be regarded
as an issue of national and regional security. It is also
important to address other issues such as development,
disaster risk reduction and the illicit exploitation of
natural resources.
To help SIDS overcome these challenges, Japan has
made efforts in this field. Let me elaborate.

68/87

30/07/2015

First, we served as a member of the Bureau of the
Preparatory Committee for the Third International
Conference on SIDS, held in Samoa in September
of last year. Japan has committed itself to helping
implement recommendations made at the Conference,
which include addressing the priorities of SIDS, such as
climate change and disaster risk reduction. We pledged
to train 5,000 experts from SIDS on those issues over
the next three years.
Secondly, in May this year, Japan held the Seventh
Pacific Island Leaders Meeting in Iwaki, Fukushima. At
that summit the participating leaders discussed issues of
priority such as disaster risk reduction, climate change
and maritime issues and fisheries. Prime Minister
Abe announced that Japan would provide development
assistance amounting to ¥55 billion over the next three
years for the priorities of the Pacific SIDS. We also
announced our intention to provide assistance for the
development of the Pacific Climate Change Centre
and capacity-building, which support efforts to tackle
climate change by the Pacific region as a whole.
Thirdly, Japan’s efforts to support SIDS are not
limited to the Pacific region. Prime Minister Abe
visited Trinidad and Tobago and held the first JapanCARICOM Summit in July 2014. Prime Minister Abe
recognized the importance of assisting CARICOM
member States based on criteria other than per-capita
income, considering their particular vulnerabilities as
SIDS. On that occasion, Japan also announced grant
aid of ¥1.5 billion towards climate change efforts for
eight Caribbean States, in partnership with the United
Nations Development Programme. As expressed at the
Summit, Japan will continue to enhance its assistance
to CARICOM member States in disaster risk reduction,
environment and energy.
Finally, Japan hosted the Fifth Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD V)
in June 2013. Japan’s assistance in the framework of
TICAD V for African SIDS includes the installation
of a climate radar system and support for preventing
coastal erosion. We have been steadily implementing
our commitments.
As I have outlined, Japan has been actively working
on the issues of SIDS around the world and will continue
to support them with our partners in the United Nations
system to address their current and future challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nauru.

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7499

Ms. Moses (Nauru): Let me begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. Allow me to
also acknowledge the presence of Their Excellencies
the Heads of State and Government and ministers from
the small island developing States (SIDS).

systems. Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing in
our waters amounts to nothing less than piracy, a topic
that the Security Council has addressed before. The
very foundation of our small island economies is being
quickly dismantled.

My delegation aligns its statement with those
delivered by Maldives on behalf of the Alliance of
Small Island States and by Tonga on behalf of the
Pacific States.

The international community knows the steps
required to address such environmental crises, but
we fail to take them. Often they are opposed by very
powerful economic interests or our urgency is not shared
by the larger countries. That brings us to the failures
in global economic governance. Countries have failed
to rein in a predatory financial industry that privileges
rampant speculation over sound investments. The
most vivid example of the industry’s shortsightedness
would have to be its continued funding of new fossil
fuel exploration and development despite the fact that
over two-thirds of the known reserves must stay in
the ground if we are to preserve anything resembling
a safe climate. It is hard to believe that we have not
learned the lessons from the last financial crisis, which
saw similar levels of reckless speculation based on
fraudulent projections.

It is much appreciated that the Security Council
is considering the root causes of conflict and not just
situations in which conflict has already broken out. A
holistic approach can be very useful for understanding
the larger context of any given challenge. And SIDS
undoubtedly face a unique and particular set of
challenges — challenges to our development, to our
security and even to our territorial integrity. Some are
due to the immutable characteristics of SIDS. We are
small, we are isolated, and we are vulnerable. Those
things will never change.
However, we also exist in the context of a global
economic and security system that is very much
manmade and is every bit as responsible for the current
situations in which we find ourselves. And that system
can be changed, if we want it to be.
Therefore, before going through a laundry list
of issues, it is important that we consider all of
the challenges facing SIDS in the context of three
overarching issues: global environmental governance,
global economic governance and global security
governance. Deficiencies in those areas are at the root
of the security challenges faced not only by SIDS but
by many other vulnerable developing countries around
the world.

The richest and most powerful countries write
the rules that the rest of us must follow. The decisions
they make in the lofty political forums dealing with
international trade, finance and military cooperation
have far-reaching implications for our development
prospects. They hold the keys. They can open the doors
for us or they can close them.

Taking them in turn, the breakdown in global
environmental governance is most apparent in our
collective failure to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
despite more than two decades of trying. Climate
change represents the single biggest threat to many
SIDS. Adaptation measures demand an ever-growing
percentage of our domestic budgets. Climate change
threatens to put an end to our sustainable development
and, in some cases, to our physical existence.

What we have seen is that private profit is
privileged over public good; the wealthy are privileged
over the weakest among us. SIDS are constantly being
told that we must make our islands more attractive to
private investors, but there is scant evidence that the
investors are interested in improving our schools or our
hospitals or our basic infrastructure — all necessary for
sustainable development. We have attempted to meet
the stringent requirements set for good governance, but
then we see good governance getting undermined by
the same forces when precious resources are at stake.
Official development assistance is available sometimes,
but too often it comes with strings attached. We have
seen countless times how such leverage can be wielded
to dictate policy and undermine sovereignty.

We see a comparably grave crisis brewing in our
oceans. Destructive fishing practices and overfishing
are depleting stocks at an alarming rate, while pollution,
acidification and coral bleaching are devastating our reef

Environmental impacts continue to grow much
faster than our capacity to deal with them, while a
large percentage of the world’s population remains
excluded from the global economy. That inevitably

15-2378269/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

leads to greater human suffering, instability and,
in the worst cases, violent conflict. The number of
people displaced every year seems to move in only
one direction, up. Yet global security governance has
failed to respond adequately. In fact, the response
often seems to exacerbate the situation. Meanwhile,
vulnerable countries have been left to shoulder the
growing security burden with minimal assistance. On
every continent, the rich and the powerful contain the
problems in ever higher barbed-wire fences.
Global environmental governance, economic
governance and security governance: those three
inter-related systems and how they are reformed will
have an enormous influence on whether SIDS are able
to thrive or languish. Therefore, when we examine the
numerous threats facing SIDS, we should not ignore the
wider global context in which we are forced to operate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Koncke (Uruguay): My delegation would like to
congratulate the New Zealand delegation and especially
His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs for
the remarkable work done in the month of July while
serving as President of the Security Council. We would
like to highlight the firm commitment demonstrated by
you, Mr. President, and by your country to the values
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. We would also like to commend the opportune
choices made in regard to the small island developing
States (SIDS) as well as other challenges undertaken
that we will all remember.
(spoke in Spanish)
At the outset, I would again like to commend you
for convening this open debate on such an important
topic as that of the peace and security challenges facing
small island developing States (SIDS). I also wish to
thank the Secretary-General, the Prime Minister of
Samoa, the Prime Minister of Jamaica and the Minister
of Finance of the Seychelles for their briefings.
At the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development, held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992,
the international community recognized the unique
vulnerabilities of SIDS in terms of their small size,
limited resources, geographic dispersion, isolation
from markets and dependence on international trade,
among many other factors. Those vulnerabilities pose
significant challenges not only for the sustainable
development of SIDS but also because they often
70/87

30/07/2015

threaten the very existence of those countries through
the impact of climate change.
My country had the honour of participating in the
Third International Conference on SIDS, held in Samoa
in September 2014, where the issue of sustainable
development was discussed at length. As stated in the
concept note prepared for this open debate (S/2015/543,
annex), the Conference Outcome document also
reaffirmed the importance of the issue of peace and
security for SIDS.
Today, with complex challenges like the current
ones, no clear boundaries exist between the agendas
of health, human rights, environmental protection,
economic development and maintaining international
peace and security. Issues such as piracy, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, including illegal
fishing and drug trafficking, and other activities of
global organized crime, pose serious threats to the
peace and security of SIDS. Others take advantage of
their inherent vulnerabilities, with potential dangerous
effects on international peace and security, which
is why the Council has included this topic of grave
concern on its agenda.
The increasing impact of climate change and
natural disasters on small island developing States and
on the efforts of those countries to achieve sustainable
development is an undeniable reality. Given that reality,
it is essential that the entire international community
intensify its efforts and recognize the responsibilities
incumbent upon it in every forum, particularly within
the principal bodies of the United Nations, such as the
Council.
Our region, Latin America and the Caribbean,
has been actively involved in seeking a solution to the
problem, not only because it directly affects countries
in the region, that is the Caribbean States, which are
SIDS and advocate on the issue, but also through the
calling we have in the region for peace and solidarity.
We have seen how one small island developing State in
the region faces multiple challenges. I am referring to
the case of Haiti, where the international community
and the region in particular have made enormous
efforts towards its stabilization. Those efforts continue,
although we have not yet achieved the desired result,
but we do see progress.
That is why we believe that the special needs of
SIDS must be borne in mind in all forums and attended
to in some specific ones, and that substantive solutions

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

to the structural problems that are the causes of the
problem must be found.
Finally, my delegation would like to highlight
the contribution of the SIDS to the international
community’s efforts to maintain international peace
and security, particularly in conflict mediation, and
their contribution to peacekeeping operations with
nearly 700 Blue Helmets. Uruguay, as a country that
is also truly committed to the peacekeeping system,
salutes the efforts and commitment to peace that those
countries have demonstrated.
Similarly, Uruguay, as a candidate to the Security
Council for the 2016-2017 biennium, feels a profound
commitment to the SIDS. In that sense, if elected,
Uruguay is committed to providing the necessary
support to those issues that require the complete
involvement of the international community. In that
regard, we hope to help.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama.
Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I want to welcome New Zealand’s presidency
of the Security Council. I also welcome Mr. Murray
McCully, Minister for Foreign Affairs of New Zealand.
I cannot think of a better setting or physical space
than the territories of the SIDS where we can so clearly
see the inextricable link between peace and security,
sustainable development and climate change. The
reality faced by the SIDS compels us to realize that
we cannot continue to work on those issues, which
are so fundamental for the United Nations agenda, in
an isolated fashion. I therefore thank New Zealand
for this open debate, which enables us — apart from
exchanging ideas on how to tackle the peace and
security challenges of small island developing States
from a global standpoint — to think outside the box. It
compels us to seek innovative ways of building bridges
and to link themes and realities that, through force of
habit, we have so far been dealing with separately.
In any territory, peace and security becomes
consolidated when we have inclusive development,
namely, a development with healthy ecosystems, a
development that promotes equality and respect for
human rights. That is how democracy is strengthened,
which leads to greater peace and security. Every nation
in the world aspires to that kind of a chain of progress.

S/PV.7499

But the SIDS face additional challenges in their
efforts to strengthen their peace and security. Although
they are among the countries with the greatest
biological, cultural and linguistic diversity and their
inhabitants have a wealth of resources and are extremely
resilient, the small island developing States continue to
face many vulnerabilities. All those who have taken the
floor before me have already mentioned that we must
bear in mind that those more than 50 nations, which
are scattered between Africa, the Atlantic, the Pacific
and the Indian Ocean, and the Caribbean and the
Mediterranean Seas and China, are disproportionately
limited in their development because of dangers, threats
and other security issues that are multidimensional and
transnational and which involve political, economic,
social, environmental and geographical factors as well.
My country Panama is a Caribbean State. The
Antillean presence during the construction of the
Interoceanic Canal in Panama helped in forming the
Panamanian nationality, and that ethnic group became
part of the very expression of our nation. Therefore,
Panama is truly interested in working with and for
the small island developing States: in the framework
embodied by the results achieved at the Samoa
Conference on SIDS in 2014, bilaterally and on a
subregional basis, in order to overcome the obstacles
on the path to the full development of those countries.
Last April, my country hosted the Seventh Summit
of the Americas, which succeeded in relaunching
hemispheric relations, with the attendance of all the
heads of State and Government of our island neighbours.
During the Summit Panama expressed its intention to
become an observer in the regional group known as the
Caribbean Community.
It also seems appropriate to mention that as a
contribution to the intergovernmental negotiations on
Security Council reform, Panama has made a proposal
that could be gradually completed in two successive
stages and would lead, by the United Nations centenary,
to a Security Council with 24 members, two of which
we propose should be SIDS. In that Council all members
would be equal and elected for three years, with the
possibility of consecutive re-election.
In conclusion, I am proud to point out that, as
destiny would have it, in this case because of the
alphabetical order, Panama is seated in the General
Assembly between two small island developing States:
Palau and Papua New Guinea. That has helped us

15-2378271/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

30/07/2015

acquire special knowledge and experiences from their
representatives and to become more familiar with the
realities of those small island developing States beyond
our own geographic region.

of the new climate regime will have a profound effect
on our ability to prevent or mitigate already existing
threats. In a globalized and interconnected world, that
will impact all our countries.

We are able, therefore, to connect the regional with
the global. Like all systems, what happens in one part of
the world has repercussions throughout the whole world.
So if we look at that from the standpoint of solidarity
and of survival, we are committed to ensuring peace
and security in the small island developing States.

Furthermore, Poland supports the idea of discussing
climate and security issues in the forum of the Security
Council, while pursuing agreement on the shape of the
new, global climate-protection regime at the level of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change. Those two forums can work concurrently,
using their respective resources and raising awareness
of the problem.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I would like to add a few comments in my
national capacity.
At the outset, I congratulate New Zealand on its
excellent initiative to devote this open debate to the
specific peace and security challenges faced by the
small island developing States (SIDS) and to consider
how the United Nations system can best respond to
them. Today’s important debate allows us to deepen
the discussion on many issues raised during the
Arria Formula meeting on climate change as a threat
multiplier, which was organized last month by Malaysia
and Spain.
The SIDS face a range of peace and security
challenges. Their unique and particular vulnerabilities
have been widely acknowledged, for instance at
the Third International Conference on Small Island
Developing States, which took place in Samoa last
September. Once again, we thank Samoa for hosting
that important conference.
The excellent concept note (S/2015/543, annex)
prepared by New Zealand for today’s debate very
rightly focuses on four main security challenges faced
by SIDS: transnational crime and piracy, the illicit
exploitation of natural resources, climate change and
development. While all of them deserve our attention, I
will focus on climate change, and comment briefly on
the illicit exploitation of natural resources. Our debate
shows how important climate-related challenges are.
Owing simply to the rising sea levels the mere existence
of small island developing States is threatened.
Poland acknowledges the need for all States to be
engaged in the deepened discussion on the influence
of climate change on global security. The effectiveness

72/87

Poland sees the twenty-first session of the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, known as
the Paris Climate Change Conference, as an excellent
occasion to draw the attention of both leaders and civil
society to climate change as a threat multiplier for the
global community. Apart from developing a broad
research and international response system, we also
need to work on concrete solutions to benefit the SIDS.
Such solutions should include the loss and damage
mechanism agreed at the 2013 United Nations Climate
Change Conference held in Warsaw and other practical
methods for supporting the present and future wellbeing of the most vulnerable nations. e.g. by securing
a separate channel for the financing of SIDS-related
actions through the Green Climate Fund.
There is little time to be lost in pondering the
modalities for action, and we count on the cooperation
of all parties in seeking durable solutions to the
problem. The challenges to SIDS need to be approached
in a more integrated manner. Complementarity of
action across different sectors is essential for ensuring
comprehensive risk management. It is very important
that the legal frameworks be strengthened so as to be
able to respond to and promote resilient development
at the local level. The SIDS can deal effectively with
climate change challenges and natural disasters only if
they have a detailed overview of all of the risks and how
those risks relate to their vulnerabilities.
Finally, I would like to draw the Council’s attention
to the challenge of diminishing natural resources. In
that context, unreported and unregulated fishing is one
of the most serious problems. Although we come from
different parts of the world, we should understand that
it is in our common interest to do more when it comes
to fighting that threat. Almost a month ago, on 1 July,
Poland joined with, inter alia, the Commonwealth of
15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Bahamas and the Republic of Palau to organize here
at the United Nations a high-level symposium entitled
“One ocean — Regenerating Fish Stocks: Achieving
Sustainable Development Goal 14”. The conclusion
was clear: healthy, resilient and productive oceans
contribute to poverty eradication, sustained economic
growth, food security and the creation of sustainable
livelihoods and decent work. Our debate today fully
confirms the importance of that message.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
thanks New Zealand for its initiative in holding today’s
meeting, thereby giving the small island developing
States and their international partners the opportunity
to comment on the major challenges to security faced
by those States.
We also welcome the holding, last month, of an Arria
Formula meeting of the Security Council, which again
showed the role of climate change as a threat multiplier
for global security. The meeting emphatically reminded
us of the existential threat posed by the adverse effects
of climate change on low-lying island nations: their land
and coastal resources diminish as do their livelihoods,
and their fresh water and agricultural resources are
reaching their limits, resulting in increased tensions
within the affected communities. For some of them,
forced emigration becomes the only long-term prospect.
The case for review by the Security Council of
the implications of climate change, especially for
small island developing States, is therefore becoming
increasingly compelling. Accordingly, we would like to
see the 2009 report of the Secretary-General entitled
“Climate change and its possible security implications”
(A/64/350) brought up to date. In that context, Belgium
fully supports the commitment of the European Union
to reach a legally binding instrument applicable to all
parties within the framework of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change at the
Conference of the Parties in Paris at the end of this
year, taking into account the fact that the European
Union will exceed the target for reducing greenhouse
gases that it has set for 2020 and that it has embarked
on the implementation of its commitment to reduce its
emissions by 40 per cent by 2030.
The Outcome document adopted by consensus
at the International Conference on Small Island
Developing States in September 2014, better known as

S/PV.7499

Samoa Pathway, puts particular emphasis on the need
for a strong partnership to meet the challenges. In the
document, Member States acknowledge
“the leadership role of small island developing
States in advocating for ambitious global efforts to
address climate change, raising awareness of the
need for urgent and ambitious action to address
climate change at the global level and making efforts
to adapt to the intensifying impacts of climate
change and to further develop and implement plans,
policies, strategies and legislative frameworks with
support where necessary”. (General Assembly
resolution 69/15, annex, para.33)
We therefore encourage small island developing
States to further strengthen their profile and their
position as a group in negotiating the Climate
Convention.
For small island States, the link between
sustainable development and security appears evident.
In that regard, Belgium welcomes the progress made
in the negotiation of a new post-2015 development
programme. The inclusion in that programme of Goal
14 and its targets, which highlight the importance of
oceans, the protection of marine resources and their
sustainable use, is the result of an ongoing and sustained
commitment on the part of the small island developing
States, for which we are grateful. Indeed, we believe
that Goal 14 is an essential component of our future
programme. Humankind depends on the oceans for its
survival and sustainable development. That requires
a holistic approach to the oceans and their resources.
Small island developing States have played a pioneering
and mobilizing role on those issues.
We also welcome the fact that the 2015 Addis
Ababa Action Agenda on Financing for Development
contains many references to small island developing
States, their specificities and the particular challenges
they face. I quote:
“SIDS remain a special case for sustainable
development in view of their small size, remoteness,
narrow resource and export base, and exposure to
global environmental challenges.”
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda also contains
numerous operational references to small island
developing States and to climate change, such as
investments in enhancing resilience, research on clean
energy, services in sustainable energy, adaptation needs
through the Green Climate Fund, and marine research.

15-2378273/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

Finally, we should not lose sight of the fact that
other security issues also directly affect small island
developing States and need a prompt solution. Belgium
is an active partner in the fight against trafficking in
drugs, weapons and human beings. Concrete actions
against drug trafficking, such as the patrolling by
frigates and helicopters of the Belgian Armed Forces
in the Caribbean, have contributed for many years to
improving the security of countries in the region.
Belgium looks forward to continuing its active
engagement with small island developing States on
issues of vital importance to all, but whose specific
dimension for those countries we need to understand
better. Global solidarity unites us, and Belgium is a
willing defender thereof.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Marshall Islands.
Ms. Barker-Manase (Marshall Islands): At the
outset, I would like to recognize the leaders of the small
island developing States (SIDS) who were with us here
today, the Prime Ministers of Samoa and Jamaica and
the Finance Minister of Seychelles, and thank them for
their briefings this morning. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral and you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative
to organize today’s debate. Further, we align ourselves
with the statements delivered by the representative
of Tonga, who spoke on behalf of the Pacific Small
Island Developing States, and by the representative of
Maldives, who spoke on behalf of the Alliance of Small
Island States.
In 1969, responding to the impacts of the nuclear
testing that took place during the period where we were
a United Nations trust territory, the top diplomat of a
major global Power said, “there are only 90,000 people
out there. Who gives a damn?” Forty-five years later,
with the Second World War and the Cold War now
firmly in the past, we approach the Council today as a
sovereign member of the United Nations, and the world
has dramatically changed. However, our concern is that
some of the shades of deep history may still remain. It
is not only our own security that is at stake; the problem
also serves as a barometer of wider global pressure.
As many speakers before me have said, there is
an intrinsic relationship that characterizes countries
with small populations, limited resources and an
overwhelmingly difficult geography. In the case of
the Marshall Islands, 60,000 people populate nearly
2 million square kilometres, an area larger than Mexico.

74/87

30/07/2015

While international partnerships, including shiprider
agreements and bilateral security arrangements, have
had a strong impact, we nonetheless have only two
national boats with which to patrol our entire nation.
Some of our neighbours in the Pacific have even greater
challenges.
Our baseline condition is State fragility. Many in
the Pacific and elsewhere are uniquely vulnerable to
external shocks, as well as to outside groups and forces
that may seek to offer easy solutions in desperate
moments. While many small island Governments,
including that of the Marshall Islands, are strongly
committed to good governance, democratic principles
and the safeguarding of human rights, there is high
potential for exceptions. With skyrocketing youth
populations and overwhelming unemployment, the
long-term risks are only growing. The cumulative
impact of domestic instability within fragile nations is
a long-term threat to international security.
Our security, as small island and large ocean
nations, cannot be considered apart from the security
of much larger geostrategic interactions. Some may
see our small island nations as strings of pearls, as
though our political alliances, borders and in some
cases significant marine mineral resources were mere
possessions, readily available to the highest bidder or
strongest military force in the context of the growing
rivalries between major Powers.
Many of these issues, which others have also
addressed today and which are outlined in the concept
note (S/2015/543, annex), intensify our fragility and
increase security threats. As a major fishing port,
we have a limited capacity to monitor and address
transnational organized crime, in particular when it
is associated with illegal fishing, an activity that can
net well into the billions of dollars in foreign markets.
As a major flag State, we remain very concerned about
piracy’s impact on global trade, and we also have a
clear understanding of the capacity challenges that
small island nations face in addressing and controlling
such activity.
Finally, while it is possible for us to be warned in
a timely manner of imminent hazards, as a low-lying
nation we have simply nowhere else to go. We are a
nation with no higher ground, so narrow that one can
stand in the lagoon and see the ocean on the other
side. The impacts of climate change not only pose
severe challenges to development, they threaten our
land’s habitability and raise increasingly problematic
15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

questions about political boundaries. As recent weather
events have shown, nuclear-waste storage structures
from the era of atomic testing are at risk from the rising
waters, an issue that we have raised previously with the
United Nations.
In the 2011 presidential statement S/PRST/2011/15,
the Council expressed its concern that possible security
implications could arise from the loss of territory in
some States caused by sea-level rise, in particular
small, low-lying States, as well as the worry that
climate impacts could, in the long run, aggravate
certain existing threats to international peace and
security. Those should not be seen as empty words. I
am asking the Council to act directly to address the
situation of small, low-lying atoll States through its
formal agenda — we are not helped by its continued
silence, general sympathy or references to multilateral
negotiations that are ill equipped to directly address
this issue as it pertains to low-lying island States.
The Security Council ultimately acts for the whole
Organization, not solely on behalf of narrow interests,
and it has full power to investigate any situation that
could lead to international friction so as to better
understand the possible danger to international peace
and security. The collective math of all the factors that
have been outlined today makes an overwhelming case
for the Council’s direct and formal treatment of them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Federated States of Micronesia.
Mrs. Chigiyal (Federated States of Micronesia):
Much has been written and said about the specific
challenges facing small island developing States (SIDS),
and for good reason. SIDS, such as the Federated States
of Micronesia, are inherently exposed to factors outside
our control and are the single most vulnerable group of
countries in the world.
I would like to thank the Prime Ministers of Samoa
and Jamaica and the Minister of Finance of Seychelles
for their briefings this morning.
The Security Council cannot close its eyes to
the challenges facing small island developing States,
especially the existential threat posed by climate
change. I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
your country, New Zealand, for bringing this debate to
the Council. As SIDS, we have an inherent interest in
the subject.

S/PV.7499

Speaking as one of the many representatives of
island communities appearing before the Council
today, we, as islanders, can all welcome the Council’s
debate on the issue of the peace and security challenges
facing our communities. It is appropriate and expected
that the Council should address the security issue of
our time, namely, climate change. But the Council must
go beyond merely debating the issue. It must ensure the
security of all peoples and especially those of small
island developing States. Its work must be relevant to
even the smallest of the members of the United Nations.
It must give greater emphasis and attention to the
myriad issues that pose peace and security challenges
to SIDS, and it should put the issue of climate change
and security on its formal agenda. Our vulnerability to
security threats, man-made or natural, can be reduced
only through collective international efforts, including
those of the Security Council. The Council has a moral
imperative to act, and really tough decisions must be
taken if it is to address the security challenges facing
SIDS.
But while the members of the Council and many
in the international community may disagree about the
various types of security challenges, in our countries
it is actually possible to see with awful clarity what
those challenges actually mean. Among many other
challenges, small island communities are grappling
with the simultaneous threats of sea-level rise,
extreme weather events and a decline in the viability
of fisheries. For our small island developing States,
the interconnectedness of security threats needs no
explanation. To put it in context, when two of the states
in our Federation were struck by Super-typhoon Maysak
in March, the storm damaged 90 per cent of their food
crops, contaminated their water supplies and left behind
widespread destruction of the homes and everything
else in its path. Typhoon Maysak’s consequences have
set back our sustainable development efforts for many
years.
Micronesia is a large oceanic State. One of the
greatest threats to our sustainable development and
economic security is that of the unabated criminal acts
represented by illegal, unregulated, and unreported
fishing. And in a country with such a large exclusive
economic zone, the task of patrolling it is daunting.
Our area could become a prime location for criminal
activities and a transit point for human trafficking and
drug smuggling. Not to be overlooked is the issue of
sovereignty that would affect my island nation. Our

15-2378275/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

exclusive economic zone, a major source of economic
livelihood, would substantially diminish in size, as
present measurement baselines, located mostly on the
atoll islands, may forever be submerged underwater.
For the islands of Micronesia, the effect, whether
through natural disaster or undeterred global warming,
and whether abruptly or gradually, will be the same,
and that is nothing less than our disappearance from
the face of the planet. As the Pacific water and ocean
temperature rise, the long-term fate of our islands is
dire, as we will be completely engulfed by the sea
and remain only as submerged reefs. No amount of
development can save us from disappearing if climate
change is not adequately addressed. I therefore urge the
international community and members of the Council
to commit to and adopt an ambitious, legally binding
agreement at the Paris Conference.
We have tried to do our part to ensure that we
maintain a peaceful and secure society and region. But
we know all too well that in an interconnected world, no
man is an island. Gone are the days when security was
about warfare. New security threats have emerged that
can destabilize a society and a region, and we believe
that the Security Council should help us pre-empt them.
To maintain a peaceful and secure region has no price,
and we cannot do it alone.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation would like at the outset to
thank you, Mr. President, for this important initiative
to discuss for the first time the peace and security
challenges that small island developing States (SIDS)
face.
Costa Rica may not be a member of that group,
but it fully empathizes with the peace and security
challenges confronting those States. We are in full
solidarity with them in the face of the need to work
together in the quest for solutions to these challenges.
After having listened to the statements made by the
representatives of Marshall Islands and the Federated
States of Micronesia, who spoke so eloquently about
their immediate needs as countries, we realize that
these are issues to which we must accord maximum
priority.
From our perspective, peace and security are
essential elements for the achievement of sustainable

76/87

30/07/2015

development. It is not possible for developing countries
to achieve higher levels of progress if we do not
decrease our vulnerability indices and increase our
national resilience, building peaceful societies in
which the absence of conflict, the rule of law, good
governance and sustainable development are part of our
daily realities.
My country believes in the strengthening of
a cooperation strategy established by the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action, and we support
more specific cooperation among island States and
other countries that are not island States but that share
challenges, vulnerabilities and aspirations. Working
together on the eve of the outcome of negotiations on
the new sustainable development agenda and on the
basis of the already negotiated Addis Ababa Action
Agenda should fuel our desire to deepen our dialogue.
Our aim must always be to promote a comprehensive
approach in that respect, acknowledge the various
challenges facing this group of countries, place the
United Nations system at the heart of the activities, and
closely involve the relevant regional and subregional
organizations, the international financial system, the
private sector, civil society and the populations of
the countries concerned, as well any individuals who
wish to cooperate with them. These efforts must be
accompanied by the establishment of an action plan for
cooperation on the part of the international community
with middle-income countries, many of which are
SIDS.
These efforts also must go hand in hand with the
implementation of the Green Climate Fund. It is key
to ensure its funding, so that developing countries,
including SIDS, will have the financial resources
necessary to deal with the impacts of climate change
and will be able to provide better, more effective and
lasting solutions focused on adaptation and mitigation.
We call on the developed countries to fulfil the objective
of mobilizing $100 billion annually by 2020, as they
have committed to doing.
The emerging global trends caused by natural
disasters and the adverse impacts of climate change
compel us to look at the big picture, including the
effects involuntary human displacements. We believe
that initiatives such as the Nansen Initiative on crossborder displacement due to natural disasters can lay the
foundation for a protection and prevention agenda so
as to guarantee the fundamental rights of the people
involved.
15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

To conclude, I wish to call upon all Member States
not to forget these and other challenges mentioned in
this debate during negotiations at the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change Paris
Conference, in Paris. The agreement we reach there
must take into account the main concerns we have
expressed here, and we hope that the final Paris outcome
will reflect those concerns.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow me at
the outset, on behalf of the Government of the Republic
of Haiti, to congratulate the New Zealand presidency
of the Security Council for its initiative to convene this
important debate on the specific challenges linked to
peace and security facing the small island developing
States (SIDS).
The Government of the Republic of Haiti welcomes
the fact that this meeting, which is taking place in
the wake of the International Year of Small Island
Developing States (2014) and of the Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States, is being
held at a turning point, on the eve of the adoption of a
new United Nations post-2015 agenda for development
and just a few months before the International Climate
Change Conference in Paris.
Small island developing States are often presented as
a special case when it comes to sustainable development.
In many ways, their vulnerability is extreme. There
is justified concern that their economic situation has
progressed less than the majority of other groups, and
that is when it has not actually regressed, particularly
in terms of poverty reduction. Regardless of the
parameters used to measure sustainable development,
small island developing States are one of the areas of
the world in difficulty, according to the United Nations.
They suffer many structural handicaps, which are often
exacerbated by security-related problems.
The Republic of Haiti, like all small island
developing States, is grappling with multiple challenges
linked to inadequate resources, exposure to natural
disasters and to environmental crises, and vulnerability
to external economic shocks. This is coupled with
the rise in sea levels and the consequences of climate
change, which not only hamper the march of SIDS
towards sustainable development, but also pose an
acute risk to their survival and viability. The situation

S/PV.7499

of SIDS is therefore unquestionably an important issue
in the context of peace and international security.
Security has indeed a multidimensional character,
which now extends beyond traditional military issues to
encompass new threats to peace that are more diffuse,
more fragmented and often more social than military in
nature. These include the challenges linked to economic
and social development, stability and environmental
sustainability, but also, of course, natural disasters and
environmental crises.
To a great degree, the situation in Haiti
demonstrates the close relationship among security,
peace and development. In 2004, in the wake of a
serious political crisis that had severely tested the
stability of the country and its development prospects,
the Security Council decided to create the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Today, 10 years later, the country has fortunately taken
its destiny back into its own hands. The establishment
of democracy, protection of human rights and the
full enjoyment of fundamental freedoms are today
indisputable achievements. Strengthened by its restored
stability and security, in recent years Haiti has seen a
significant recovery in its economy, characterized by
the creation of new businesses, dynamic investment,
a rebirth of its tourist industry and a general revival
of its development process. After several decades of
stagnation, the economy is enjoying growth again.
At the same time, on the political front, the country
is moving determinedly towards upcoming legislative,
municipal and presidential elections, credible
elections that must guarantee the proper functioning
of institutions, facilitate the changing of politicians at
all levels and allow for a peaceful, orderly transition of
power in 2016. The Haitian Government welcoms the
contribution of MINUSTAH in obtaining those results,
which have played a significant role in stability and
the maintenance of peace, and whose contribution to
development has been broadly recognized.
However, that progress, as tangible as it is, cannot
conceal the extent of the difficulties or the severity of
the challenges that the country still faces. For, as long
as the necessary public infrastructure remains lacking
and poverty is not eradicated or at least substantially
reduced, democracy will seem like a pipe dream to
the vast majority of the population that face harsh
everyday economic realities. That is why we must
welcome recent initiatives by the Security Council to

15-2378277/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

30/07/2015

enhance the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
We can only welcome its growing concern to examine
the myriad sources of conflict, instability and threats,
which in particularly vulnerable situations such as that
of Haiti combine to fuel insecurity, prevent peace and
consequently impede growth and development.

energy; the fight against desertification, soil degradation
and droughts; and the mitigation of disaster risks – not
to mention the often exorbitant budgetary impact of
natural disasters on small island developing States,
which is recognized by the international cooperation
programmes.

Peace and development go hand in hand. There can
be no peace or genuine security without development.
Human security is one of the preconditions for peace
and development. The management of security, in
all of its facets, must therefore play a part in a global
approach that rejects unilateralism and is based on
the strength of interdependence. It requires increased
cooperation among States and coherent actions at all
levels — national, bilateral, regional and global levels.

The Haitian Government hopes that this
meeting marks a new milestone in the quest for and
implementation of bold, effective and innovative
partnerships that we earnestly desire and that will
meet the particular challenges facing SIDS. We trust
that this enriching debate will lead to conclusions and
recommendations that will be used to advance the
dialogue on certain issues essential to our common
future, to international peace and security and to the
sustainable development of SIDS — whose viability
and very survival are at stake today.

To assist small island developing States in meeting
the challenges of peace and security is, first, to help them
deal with both internal and external threats, which have
a considerable impact on their development — political,
economic, social, environmental, cultural and
human — as well as on their stability and on the
sustainability of that development. Assisting them
amounts to helping them deal with environmental crises,
which threaten to entirely undermine their development
efforts and to compromise the hard-fought progress and
results achieved in the fields of health, agriculture and
environmental sustainability. Additionally, assisting
them especially helps them to better deal with their
specific vulnerabilities. Clearly, that is predicated on
strengthening existing partnerships in order to support
their work for sustainable development. Accordingly,
a new spirit of solidarity with small island developing
States, particularly with the least developed and most
vulnerable among them, is vital.
The commitments undertaken by the international
community within the framework of the 1994 Barbados
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States, the 2005 Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action, and the 2014 SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action should not remain dead letters.
They must be followed by concrete actions, coordinated,
balanced and integrated, which in many cases are
urgently needed.
Regarding Haiti, allow me to stress the particular
importance that we attach to reinforcing partnerships
in various areas where intervention is urgently needed
– especially in education; adaptation to climate change;
food and energy security; investments in renewable
78/87

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I would like
to thank New Zealand for convening this debate,
highlighting the extreme vulnerability of small island
developing States (SIDS) to the impact of climate change,
which threatens their very survival. The devastating
effects of climate change, which occurred once in a
century, are now occurring with increasing frequency
and greater intensity, warning and compelling us to act
accordingly and promptly.
We need to assist SIDS in combating the negative
effects of conflict, violence, organized crime and
cybercrime, human trafficking, terrorism and disease
epidemics because those countries face the highest
disaster risks and have less resilience to external shocks
and crises than any other group of countries. Those
threats know no boundaries; they are transnational.
They present a threat not only to SIDS but also to
other groups, such as least developed countries and
landlocked least developed countries, as well as to
global security in general.
We have to think collectively how to reduce the
strain on water resources around the world, which
will bring fundamental transformations in the global
landscape, agriculture, trade and human existence,
resulting in an unspeakable humanitarian toll. Our
immediate task is to reduce the impact on development
caused by the destruction of all types of infrastructure
that is disrupting not only the SIDS but causing
worldwide disruption in our interconnected world.

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

With their very fragile economies, SIDS need our
support for capacity-building; they need technology
transfer to overcome crises that can destabilize them
completely. Climate change adaptation therefore
demands a global response, while we formulate the
post-2015 development goals, and calls for maximum
commitments to the climate agreement to be forged in
Paris in December.
Kazakhstan gives serious attention to climate
change mitigation at the national, regional and
international levels. Just a few days ago, ice melting
on the glaciers near my former capital, Almaty, as
a result of unusually high temperatures caused a
flood and mudslide. That clearly demonstrated our
own vulnerability with regard to climate change and
disaster risk reduction. My country has officially
declared its intention to take on voluntary quantitative
commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
It has launched its own reduced domestic emissions
trading scheme, thereby moving towards a low-carbon
economy. The Government and business community
of Kazakhstan welcome enhanced cross-national
cooperation in reducing greenhouse gas emissions
and linkage to national markets as important tools for
climate change mitigation.
Kazakhstan will honour its obligations most
strictly and will lead the way, through the United
Nations hub in Almaty, for sustainable development,
humanitarian assistance, disaster risk reduction
and building resilience in Central Asia, and will
share those efforts with SIDS. Also the Centre for
Disaster Risk Reduction — under the Ministry of
Emergencies, with support from the Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP),
the United Nations Environment Programme and other
international organizations, together with domestic
non-governmental organizations — will spearhead
capacity-building for climate mitigation, early warning
and preventive and emergency relief and rehabilitation
work on behalf of the Central Asian region.
Realizing that advanced energy technologies will
have an increasing impact on climate change, Kazakhstan
has chosen the theme “Future Energy” for Expo 2017,
which Astana will host in 2017. The Expo focus will
be on developing and using alternative energy sources
and the best global energy-efficiency technologies, in
partnership with other countries. We have organized
seminars in Astana for over 60 developing countries
on Future Energy to take advantage of the Expo. We

S/PV.7499

also hosted a side event during the Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States in Apia,
where we addressed future energy issues for SIDS
and introduced an ESCAP project on training for and
installation and maintenance of biogas systems for SIDS,
in which Kazakhstan is closely involved. Kazakhstan
will therefore provide support to representatives of
approximately 60 developing countries to participate in
the Expo.
In conclusion, I reiterate Kazakhstan’s readiness
to be an active part in the international community
through decisive, bold action to deal with the challenges
faced by SIDS.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): Egypt recognizes the
initiative taken by New Zealand in organizing this
open debate as the first open debate addressing the
specific challenges faced by a group of 37 countries and
territories with a combined population of 15 million.
Egypt believes that small island developing States
(SIDS) remain a special case for sustainable development
in view of their unique and particular vulnerabilities
and their peace and security challenges. Therefore, the
United Nations system and the international community
must undertake their responsibilities in supporting
SIDS to overcome their vulnerabilities and transform
them from challenges into opportunities. In that regard,
allow me to highlight the following remarks.
There is an urgent need to support the efforts of
small island developing States to combat trafficking
in persons, cybercrime, drug trafficking, transnational
organized crime and international piracy by promoting
the accession, ratification and implementation
of applicable conventions, by enacting and using
legislation that prohibits trafficking, by promoting
strong institutions and capacity-building, by providing
sufficient financial resources and by achieving
coordination and synergies among national, regional
and international efforts.
The challenges related to the illicit exploitation
of natural resources are global in nature, but their
impact on SIDS is especially devastating. Efforts to
sustainably manage natural resources and increase
the resilience of livelihoods to threats and crises rely
heavily on the management capacity of institutions and
on coordination and governance mechanisms. There
is a need to build capacities and develop an agenda

15-2378279/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

of institutional strengthening and capacity-building
at regional, national and local levels. That must be
achieved through partnerships among SIDS in and
across regions and between SIDS and the international
community.
Natural disasters, desertification, land degradation
and drought are major threats for small island
developing States and impede their progress towards
sustainable development. There is a critical need to
build resilience, strengthen monitoring and prevention,
reduce vulnerability, raise awareness and increase
preparedness and resilience policies to respond to and
recover from disasters and other challenges. The role
of the international community is of vital importance.
The outcome document of the Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States,
namely, the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(Samoa Pathway) outlines a series of threats affecting
peace and security, as well as the challenges faced by
SIDS. It further identifies an action plan to respond to
them effectively. Our mission now is to guarantee the
implementation of the Samoa Pathway and to transform
our political commitment into concrete policies and
actions.
Egypt is committed to supporting all of the efforts
of SIDS to overcome their major existential challenges.
It reiterates its commitment to respect the mandate of
General Assembly resolution 63/281, which recognizes
the respective responsibilities of the principal organs of
the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset I wish to thank the Secretary-General,
the Prime Minister of Samoa, the Prime Minister of
Jamaica, the Minister of Finance of Seychelles and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of New Zealand — your
country, Mr. President — for their statements at the start
of today’s open debate. We also especially welcome
the high-level participation on the part of the small
island developing States (SIDS), which highlights
the importance of the debate. We are grateful for the
opportunity provided to address the challenges facing
SIDS in an open debate in the Security Council.
SIDS face major challenges linked to multiple
variables that affect their security. While the entire
international community faces challenges related to
drug trafficking, terrorism, criminal gangs and arms
80/87

30/07/2015

trafficking, among others, SIDS seem to be more
exposed to their harmful consequences, due to their
limited capacities and size.
Argentina expresses its support for and solidarity
with SIDS in the face of the growing challenges
confronting them. Therefore, as in the past, we appeal
to the Security Council to assist SIDS in matters of
international peace and security, pursuant to its primary
responsibility. Likewise, we also request the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council to
strengthen their cooperation with and support for SIDS
in the areas within their competencies.
Arms trafficking and organized crime are the most
dangerous challenge for many SIDS, where criminals
often find facilities to conduct their murky activities,
including trafficking in arms and illegal drugs. We
therefore call upon those SIDS that have not yet done
so to sign and ratify the Arms Trade Treaty as soon
as possible and to implement its relevant measures
to regulate and control arms trafficking in their own
States.
With respect to piracy and armed robbery at sea, we
know that in many cases SIDS lack the infrastructure
and capacity to control and eradicate that complex
challenge, which affects many island and peninsular
States. We call on the international community and the
Security Council to remain vigilant in confronting the
situation and to cooperate with States that need help in
ending to the problem.
We acknowledge that in certain circumstances, the
lack of growth, poverty and persistent inequalities can
cause problems for societies in conflict or post-conflict.
Argentina has often expressed its vision that there can
be no genuine, lasting peace without development. In
that regard, we call on the international community
to cooperate with the States involved through the
competent forums — the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the specialized
agencies of the United Nations system — so that they
can truly enjoy their right to development, which faces
many complex challenges arising from structural
poverty, unemployment, the lack of opportunities for
young people, the lack of education and health problems,
among others, which underline the importance of the
post-2015 agenda being negotiated.
We would like to conclude, Mr. President, by
once again thanking you for having brought to our
consideration the challenges confronting small island

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

development States. The international community
cannot remain indifferent or forget that the challenges
SIDS face can have especially negative consequences
because of their limited response capability, which in
turn can affect not only the peace and security of the
SIDS themselves, but international peace and security
as well.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Lassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank the New Zealand
presidency for convening this debate on the security
challenges facing small island developing States
(SIDS). My delegation is convinced that this debate will
help to deepen our consideration of how to strengthen
peace and security in those countries.
The topic we are discussing today enjoys high
priority on the agenda of the United Nations. The
convening of this meeting is timely, comes as it does
after the adoption of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
on financing for development and as we are pursuing
negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda, as
well as during preparations for the Paris Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. We therefore trust that
our debate shall formulate recommendations reflecting
the international community’s commitment to taking
tangible steps to remedy the vulnerability of small
island developing States, notably in terms of security
and the challenges of transnational crime.
International action aimed at strengthening the
resilience of those States to security challenges should
be taken in parallel with the implementation of the
Action Agenda and the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States. The strengthening of the relevant
constructive partnerships must take into consideration
the establishment of specific projects for the benefit of
the sustainable development of small island developing
States.
The adoption of the Barbados Programme of
Action in 1994 and the Mauritius Strategy in 2005
kindled great hope and launched an impetus that must
be maintained. However, these two instruments have
not enjoyed the anticipated success, despite the good
results achieved thanks to the consistent commitments
of the Government of the small island developing

S/PV.7499

States. Today, small island developing States continue
to face security challenges coupled with other
socioeconomic problems, limiting their capacity for
growth and development. That is reflected, inter alia,
in an infrastructure deficit, weak productive capacities
and poor integration of those countries into the world
economy, as shown in their still very low volume of
trade and increasing vulnerability to the effects of
climate change.
Indeed, for years the devastating impact of climate
change that threatens the various ecosystems of the
planet has had detrimental repercussions on those
countries, which already face such problems as rising
sea levels, natural and environmental disasters, waste
management, and the need to preserve coastal and
maritime resources and biodiversity. Those countries’
economies remain dependent on a few sectors, such
as tourism, which has been affected by the impact of
climate change and natural disasters, or the export of
basic commodities, the prices of which have suffered
significant fluctuations on international markets,
making their economic growth even more vulnerable
to external shocks.
Diversifying the economies of those countries in
order to enhance the share of the manufacturing sector
and improving their productive capacities remains
the most appropriate way to achieve lasting growth in
those countries and to bolster their resilience. In order
to achieve the change necessary to supporting their
growth, SIDS need a significant mobilization of official
development assistance, foreign direct investment,
technology transfer and access to markets. With respect
to climate change and natural disasters, it is necessary to
bolster both the prevention and the adaption capacities
of those countries, whose environmental vulnerability
has grown in recent years. National policy support
programmes must be conceived and implemented with
the support of international institutions. To that end,
we need to build on the results of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development of June 2012,
particularly in terms of global governance, sustainable
development, the biodiversity of the oceans and seas,
and financing for sustainable development.
For the Kingdom of Morocco, South-South
partnership is a strategic choice, and it has always been
mindful of the problems of the small island developing
States, with which it shares aspirations as formulated in
the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius
Strategy. Morocco remains convinced that increased

15-2378281/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

cooperation in regard to clean technology transfer, the
utilization of renewable energies and the financing of
sustainable development projects will substantially
contribute to the economic recovery and stability of
those countries. My country has always been aware of
the challenges facing SIDS and contributed actively at
the first meeting with the Pacific SIDS, held in Rabat
on 13 December 2012. The work undertaken at that
meeting was endorsed by a joint press release concering
the strengthening of bilateral relations, cooperation and
coordination with all those States.
The resurgence of terrorism and transnational
crime requires the international community to take the
necessary precautions and appropriate measures to spare
these vulnerable countries from such activities and to
help them integrate into the world economy. Morocco,
which shares the security concerns of small island
developing States, has therefore always advocated for
for efficient cooperation and joint efforts at the regional
and international levels to bolster safety and security
systems around the world. For that reason, my country
will continue to support international efforts to improve
cooperation with those States in the field of security
and remains willing to share its own experience and
to place at their disposal its own expertise in various
sectors related to socioeconomic development. That
cooperation is also reflected through a multitude of
human development projects linked to the demands of
globalization and democracy and in terms of access,
duty-free and quota-free access to its markets.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): Let me join the delegations that
have spoken before us in thanking the New Zealand
presidency of the Council for convening this timely
meeting to address the security challenges facing
small island developing States (SIDS). Our thanks also
go to the Secretary-General for his briefing. It was a
pleasure to listen to the Prime Ministers of Samoa and
Jamaica and the Minister of Finance of Seychelles, who
presented briefings on their regional perspectives on
peace and security challenges faced by the SIDS.
Turkey has become increasingly active in sharing
its own development experiences and in contributing
to international development cooperation efforts in
countries in special situations, including the SIDS. The
declaration of 2014 as the International Year of SIDS
was of particular importance for the acknowledgement
of the challenges faced by SIDS. We were pleased
82/87

30/07/2015

to create opportunities throughout the International
Year of SIDS to give fresh momentum to our political
engagement with SIDS from different regions.
Within this framework, I would like to mention
two important meetings we hosted in 2014. The first
meeting, held from 7 to 8 June 2014, was on Turkey
and the Pacific SIDS. The second, on the TurkeyCaribbean Community consultation and cooperation
mechanism, took place on 18 July 2014. The
respective outcome documents of those ministerial
meetings — namely the Bosphorus Declaration and
the Istanbul Declaration — will shape our efforts,
partnership and engagement towards the SIDS.
We would like once again to congratulate Samoa
for hosting the Third International Conference on
Small Island Developing States in a very successful and
able manner in September 2014. The Conference and
its Outcome document and the Small Island Developing
States Accelerated Modalities of Action contained
therein will be guiding our efforts in the years to come
and its effective implementation will be crucial.
As the current President of the Group of Twenty (G20), Turkey’s priorities are summarized as the three “i”s,
namely inclusiveness, implementation and investment
for growth. We also placed development at the centre of
the G-20 agenda this year. The Turkish Presidency has
introduced a strong low-income developing countries
(LIDCs) perspective into the G-20 agenda. We are
focused on reaching out to LIDCs, almost all of which
belong to categories of countries in special situations.
The SIDS face a wide range of challenges in pursuing
sustainable development, and we believe that the G-20
has an important contribution to make in addressing
their vulnerabilities and building resilience.
To give members of the Council a concrete example
and as part of our outreach activities, we organized,
together with Trinidad and Tobago, the Caribbean
Region Dialogue with the G-20 Development Working
Group in Washington, D.C., last April. During that
meeting, an enthusiastic exchange of development
policy experiences and insights, knowledge-sharing
and the exploration of opportunities took place, which
was aimed at deepening existing relationships.
Climate change is one of the toughest global
challenges facing our century. Tackling climate change
requires global solidarity and effective action. The
SIDS and LIDCs are the countries most vulnerable to
and negatively affected by global warming. Increasing

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

their resilience to climate change requires enhanced
financial and technological support. In that context, the
international community, the developed countries in
particular, should mobilize adequate levels of finance
from public and private resources for those countries.
Climate change poses an immediate and real threat to
the survival of those peoples and communities. If urgent
action is not taken, living conditions in those countries
will get worse, eventually leading to disastrous
consequences. In that framework, the significance of
resilience and preparedness must be emphasized.
The G-20 agenda has a special focus on climate
finance. The G-20 Climate Finance Study Group
has been considering ways to effectively mobilize
resources, bearing in mind the objectives, principles and
provisions of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. We aim to facilitate the access of
LIDCs to climate funds. In that regard, a toolkit for
access to adaptation finance by developing countries
and an inventory of methods for climate change study
are being prepared as the main deliverables of the
Climate Finance Study Group this year.
In the period ahead, our commitment will remain
strong to work together with SIDS in order to develop
our cooperation based on a shared agenda for sustainable
development, which is directly linked with peace and
security challenges. The first-ever World Humanitarian
Summit, to be held May 2016 in Istanbul, will provide
a very valuable platform to discuss all those issues in
length and depth.
2015 is a landmark year for sustainable development.
We have successfully completed the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development, which
was recently held in Addis Ababa. We are confident
that Addis Ababa will set a good precedent for the
upcoming United Nations Summit for the Adoption of
the Post-2015 Development Agenda in September and
the twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Climate Change Conference
in Paris in December. From the outset, Turkey has
supported the well-founded request of the SIDS for a
stand-alone oceans goal in the post-2015 development
agenda, which is now Sustainable Development Goal
14. We support that goal within Turkey’s well-known
position regarding the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea.
We believe that, as a member of the United Nations,
we should continue our pragmatic, constructive and

S/PV.7499

forward-looking approach as we address the concerns
of countries in special situations, including the SIDS,
in a way that leaves no one behind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Mr. President, I thank
you for ably presiding over the Security Council in July
and for convening this important debate. South Africa
also thanks the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
and the representatives of the small island developing
States (SIDS) for their briefings.
South Africa recognizes the fact that sustainable
development and the peace and security of SIDS can
be negatively affected by crime and violence, as well as
by conflict, piracy, trafficking in persons, cybercrime,
drug trafficking and transnational crime. In particular,
the lack of sustainable livelihoods and opportunities for
further education and the break down in community
support structures can lead to increasing numbers of
people becoming involved in crime.
With specific regard to piracy, as early as 2010 South
Africa involved itself in counter-piracy engagements,
which have been formalized in partnerships with other
African Member States, such as Mozambique and
Tanzania, under the auspices of the Southern African
Development Community. That collaboration has
led to various successes, as reflected by the fendingoff of pirate attacks in Tanzanian waters in 2012, in
cooperation with the European Union deployment,
entitled Operation Copper.
Furthermore, Operation Copper has set up training
programmes as a capacity-building mechanism working
with neighbouring countries. More recently, South
Africa has also begun to focus its naval operations on
counter-piracy operations in the Gulf of Guinea. South
Africa therefore supports the efforts of SIDS to:
First, combat trafficking in persons, cybercrime,
drug trafficking, transnational organized crime and
international piracy;
Secondly, promote the accession, ratification and
implementation of applicable conventions;
Thirdly, enact and apply legislation that prohibits
trafficking; and,
Fourthly, promote strong institutions and improve
protection mechanisms to ensure adequate care
for victims of sex trafficking and forced labour, in

15-2378283/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

accordance with the relevant national and international
agreements and treaties.
Furthermore, my delegation supports the
development of action plans in SIDS aimed at eliminating
violence against women and girls, who are often targets
of gender-based violence and are disproportionately
affected by crime, violence and conflict.
Peace, security, stability and respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms, including the right to
development, as well as respect for cultural diversity,
are essential for achieving sustainable development
and ensuring that sustainable development benefits all.
All countries will face the adverse impacts of climate
change, but the world’s most vulnerable peoples will
suffer the most. And yet, those societies are the least
responsible for the global challenges that we are now
facing. In addition to that shared challenge, rising
sea levels owing to climate change ultimately pose an
existential threat to SIDS.
Even climate change scenarios reflecting moderate
warming during this century could have devastating
consequences, as increases in extreme weather and
slow onset events could further worsen food and
water security challenges, undermine community
development, compromise critical infrastructure,
weaken State governance and strain social cohesion.
Such threats, if not addressed in a timely fashion, could
well reshape the future global security environment
by affecting vulnerable countries’ political and social
stability and economic security. Strong domestic
action and robust global cooperation is the only way to
tackle those global challenges, particularly through the
adoption of a fair and ambitious multilateral agreement
in Paris at the end of the year at the twenty-first session
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Climate Change Conference.
We believe that the Paris agreement should give
equal priority to mitigation and adaptation, while
establishing clear linkages between the action that is
required of countries and the means of implementation.
That should include enhanced support for country-driven
climate action, including for climate change-related
disaster risk management and for building resilience in
all vulnerable regions, such as SIDS, least developed
countries and Africa.
Furthermore, SIDS represent a multidimensional
concept. Specific challenges for small island developing
countries include, among other things, environmental

84/87

30/07/2015

degradation, natural disasters, food insecurity, water
scarcity, HIV/AIDS, narco-trafficking, small-arms
trafficking and the impact of terrorism on the economic
sectors, particularly tourism. The implementation
of the sustainable development agenda for small
island developing States must proceed despite the
current emphasis on security. In that regard, we must
acknowledge the increased financial and administrative
obligation at the national level that this places on all
small island developing States, as part of the global
fight against terrorism.
In conclusion, South Africa urges the international
community to fulfil its commitments to SIDS and to
help them build their capacity in strategic areas such
as trade, information and communications technology,
investment, capacity-building, disaster management,
the environment, food and agriculture, the oceans,
water, energy, health and education. That will help
them to push back against the plethora of challenges
that have been identified in today’s debate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, I would like
to thank the presidency of New Zealand and its Minister
for Foreign Affairs for his leadership in bringing this
issue to the Security Council. I would also like to
thank the high-level briefers — the Prime Ministers
of Samoa and Jamaica and the Minister of Finance of
the Seychelles — for their informative and insightful
interventions.
I would also like to align myself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union.
In today’s world, the meaning of security can
no longer be linked merely to an absence of military
threats. Security risks manifest themselves in a range
of areas that know no boundaries and cannot be tackled
by a single country; they require a collective effort.
Transnational crime and piracy, the illicit exploitation
of natural resources, climate change and natural
disasters are among such threats. By putting them on its
agenda, the Council encourages us to take stock of the
United Nations programmes aimed at addressing such
challenges and to seek ways to reinvigorate our efforts
to mitigate them.
Climate change is a global security challenge.
In the near term it poses a direct, immediate threat
to small island developing States (SIDS), which are
in fact those least responsible for the problem. In
15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

the long run, no country — whether it is an island,
mountainous, landlocked, developing or highly
developed — can be immune when nature strikes back.
Reducing vulnerability in today’s changing global
landscape is therefore a cross-cutting and complex
development issue that requires an unprecedented effort
that encompasses scientific knowledge, innovation,
public understanding, careful development planning,
responsible enforcement of policies and legislation,
political and legal commitment, enhanced human and
institutional capacity and, of course, efficient disaster
management.
The outcome document of the third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States explicitly
states that there is an urgent need to strengthen
international cooperation and ensure genuine and
durable partnerships at the national, regional and
international levels in order to address issues related
to SIDS’ sustainable development priorities and
needs. I would once again like to reiterate Georgia’s
commitment to that outcome and to the need to establish
a platform under United Nations auspices that can
adequately address the issues of SIDS, which include 37
countries, one fifth of the United Nations membership.
Over the past decade, Georgia has developed steady
partnerships with important SIDS organizations, such
as the Caribbean Community and the Pacific Islands
Forum, as well as with individual SIDS countries, in
areas that include cooperation in education, the sharing
of experience and public-sector reform.
Georgia is not an island, but as a small developing
nation it faces many challenges similar to those
experienced by SIDS, whether earthquakes, floods,
soil erosion and degradation and severe climate
fluctuations. That is of course in addition to the illegal
exploitation and unsustainable use of our natural
resources, the militarization of our agricultural
and urban infrastructure and other security threats
stemming from the fact that 20 per cent of our territory
is under foreign military occupation. The adverse
impact of all such issues on our ecosystem and economy
has helped to motivate my country’s commitment to
sustainable development. The Georgian Government is
currently undertaking efforts to limit greenhouse-gas
emission levels by boosting investments in low-carbon,
energy-efficient and renewable energy technologies. In
2013, we began to prepare a low-emission development
strategy and established a high-level inter-ministerial
committee under the leadership of our Ministry of
Environment and Natural Resources Protection. My

S/PV.7499

country has set itself the ambitious goal of becoming
entirely carbon neutral by 2050.
In conclusion, I would like to stress once again
Georgia’s standing commitments and readiness to
continue our engagement with SIDS, both within
the framework of international organizations and
bilaterally and, by achieving sustainable development
and mitigating the adverse effects of climate change,
its willingness to make more tangible and resolute steps
towards preserving international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tuvalu.
Mrs. Simati (Tuvalu): It is indeed an honour for
Tuvalu to participate in this Security Council open
debate on small island developing States (SIDS).
I thank our leaders from the Pacific, the Council
members and the United Nations membership for their
insights and leadership on an issue that is dear to our
hearts — climate change and the security of our island
nations.
At the outset, Tuvalu would like to associate itself
with the statements delivered by the representatives of
Tonga, Chair of the Pacific Small Island Developing
States, and the Maldives, Chair of the Alliance of Small
Island States.
Tuvalu is grateful to the Government of New
Zealand, as President of the Security Council for the
month of July, for its initiative in holding this meeting
and instituting a dialogue on issues related to peace
and security in the Pacific and SIDS in general. As we
exchange views here on those issues, we are always
grateful for recognition of SIDS’ special situation and
context.
Climate change is the greatest challenge facing
Tuvalu, threatening as it does the livelihoods, security
and well-being of all Tuvaluans. It is a security,
development and environmental issue. During the
discussions of the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals, many Security Council members
noted that climate change is a cross-cutting issue. It is
very much so, and therefore we cannot consider it as
something that can be treated as a silo. We recall the
urgency with which the Ebola epidemic was considered,
and how so many United Nations institutions, including
the Security Council, collaborated to address the
issue as a security threat. We need to focus that same
attention and urgency, on the part of all United Nations
institutions, including the Council, on the impacts of

15-2378285/87

S/PV.7499

Maintenance of international peace and security

climate change. Climate change causes sea-level rise,
which inundates many island coastlines; it floods
plains and deltas in larger, heavily populated countries;
it damages food crops and displaces many people. It is a
security issue that is urgent and inter-generational. And
it is an existential issue for Tuvalu and other Pacific
countries.
Tropical Cyclone Pam, which hit Vanuatu and other
Pacific countries, devastated Tuvalu early in March.
Given Tuvalu’s low elevation and small size — 24 square
kilometres of land surrounded by a vast ocean — and
despite the fact that Tuvalu was hit only by the periphery
of Cyclone Pam, the devastation was significant, further
confirming our high vulnerability to the increasing
occurrences we are seeing of natural disasters, rising
sea level and other climate-change-related events. It
is estimated that approximately $92 million is needed
for recovery efforts and to better protect the people of
Tuvalu from future disasters. Yesterday, on Wednesday,
29 July, on its capital island, Funafuti, Tuvalu held
its first high-level dialogue on Cyclone Pam with its
development partners, aimed at responding actively with
the goal not only of recovery but also of strengthening
the resilience of the people, communities and islands of
our tiny nation.
The seriousness, reality and urgency of the
climate-change problem demands more than our
heartfelt conversation; it simply needs us to act now. We
need the Security Council to recognize climate change
as a global security threat, put the issues of climate
change and environmental security on its agenda and
take immediate steps to address them. Tuvalu and other
atoll-island countries in the Pacific may be the first to
feel the brunt of the impacts of climate change, but the
whole world is bound to feel them if nothing is done
urgently.
While we debate and talk, lives are being affected
and our coastal areas are disappearing. In fact, four
small islets in Tuvalu have disappeared since 2000, two
of them as a result of Cyclone Pam in March. They were
here one day and gone the next. That is how fast our
islands could disappear, in the blink of an eye, if nothing
is done to address climate change. Tuvaluans rely on
the country’s meagre land mass for the basic needs for
their survival, food and shelter. If their land begins to
disappear, the people of Tuvalu will find themselves
restricted in their access to their basic survival needs
and their right to live comfortably in their God-given
homeland. Unfortunately, although human lives were

86/87

30/07/2015

not lost, other living organisms that made their home
on those islets lost their lives. The higher tides and
the effects we are seeing do not lie; they tell us that
somehow, somewhere, the chain of events that causes
sea levels to rise demands our urgent attention and
action. We cannot continue along this path.
SIDS issues are now legislated in the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway,
and we must cooperate in order to genuinely address
SIDS’ resilience and vulnerabilities. The support of
partners in financing for adaptation to climate change
cannot be the total answer to this universal problem. We
need moral reform; we need science and new technology
to help keep the average rise in temperatures well below
1.5° Celsius; and we must reach a credible agreement
at the 2015 Paris Climate Conference of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
The Security Council should review its mandate so
that it can fully embrace the concept of environmental
security. The post-2015 agenda seeks to respect, protect
and fulfil all human rights, for all peoples; please, let
us cooperate to achieve that with dignity and honour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I would like to
begin by congratulating the delegation of New Zealand
on its successful presidency of the Security Council. As
Member States prepare to adopt an ambitious new set
of sustainable development goals, it is high time that
the Council consider the peace and security challenges
faced by the people residing in the areas that we identify
as small island developing States (SIDS).
From the Pacific across the Mozambique Channel
and the Gulf of Guinea to the Caribbean, SIDS, owing
to their unique geographical characteristics, are indeed
more vulnerable to a series of security challenges. The
Republic of Korea fully recognizes those challenges,
and has engaged with partners around the world that
can be identified as SIDS in order to help them address
their needs in various ways.
As a member of the Combined Task Force 151 in
the Gulf of Aden and Chair, until last year, of Working
Group 3 of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia (CGPCS), the Republic of Korea remains
committed to fighting the problem of piracy and
transnational organized crime that exploits the vastness
of the open sea. Recognizing that there is a great need
for capacity-building, the Republic of Korea has been

15-23782

30/07/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

making contributions to the CGPCS trust fund and the
Djibouti Code trust fund of the International Maritime
Organization in order to adequately strengthen the
capacities of the directly affected States. In addition,
we are working with the Friends of the Gulf of Guinea
to encourage implementation of the code of conduct
adopted at the first Gulf of Guinea Maritime Security
Summit Meeting.
Recognizing the importance of the effective
conservation and management of natural resources, the
Republic of Korea is working closely with Pacific island
countries on the sustainable development of marine
and fisheries resources in the Pacific Ocean. The
scope of our cooperation extends to marine scientific
research, exploration for deep-sea mineral resources
and renewable energy, including ocean thermal energy
conversion.
Climate change constitutes a critical economic,
social and security threat to the international
community, including SIDS. To help to address that
threat, we recently hosted the World Water Forum,
aimed at exploring policy options for preventing
water security crises, following the 2013 International
Conference on Climate Security in the Asia-Pacific
Region. Korea is committed to international efforts
to establish a new climate regime that can enable us
to pursue a path towards low-carbon and sustainable
development.
Finally, as a nation that is often cited as a rare
example of a least-developed-country-turned-donor,
the Republic of Korea has a unique take on what it
takes to overcome poverty and promote sustainable
development. Through initiatives such as the KoreaPacific Island Cooperation Fund and an annual highlevel forum on the Korea-Caribbean partnership, we
renew our commitment to expanding our overseas
development assistance in order to meet the specific
needs of our SIDS partners.

S/PV.7499

Those are just a few examples of our efforts to
respond to the problems faced by our SIDS partners.
However, given the vast scope and complexities of
those problems, only by harnessing the collective will
of the entire international community can we hope
to find genuine solutions to them. In that regard, my
delegation appreciates New Zealand’s initiative in
bringing this important issue before the Council, and
we will take due note of all the statements made today
in this Chamber.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I would like to thank everyone
who participated today, both from the delegations of
small island developing States and those of the many
other Member States who spoke.
Before adjourning the meeting, since this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month
of July 2015, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of New Zealand to
the members of the Security Council, especially
the Permanent Representatives and their staffs, and
to the secretariat of the Council for all the support
they have given us.
It has been a very busy month, and one in which
we addressed many pressing issues. On some very
important questions we were able to achieve consensus,
and we could not have done that alone and without the
hard work, support and positive contributions of every
delegation and the representatives of the Secretariat,
as well as all the relevant conference service officers.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf of
my colleagues on the Council in offering the delegation
of Nigeria our very best wishes and good luck for the
month of August.
The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

15-2378287/87
