S/PV.7774

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7774th meeting

Wednesday, 21 September 2016, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Key. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Domingos Augusto
Mr. Wang Yi
President Al Sisi
Mr. Ayrault
Mr. Abe
Mr. Hamidi
Mr. Lavrov
President Sall
Mr. García Margallo
President Poroshenko
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Kerry
Mr. Nin Novoa
Ms. Rodríguez Gómez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-29433 (E)
*1629433*

S/PV.7774

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 9.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Heads of State and Government, the SecretaryGeneral, Ministers and other representatives present in
the Security Council Chamber. Their presence today
underscores the importance of the subject matter under
discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to the His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank Prime Minister Key
for organizing this very important meeting.
The Syrian tragedy shames us all. The collective
failure of the international community should
haunt every member of the Security Council. Well
over 300,000 Syrians have been killed, half of the
country’s population has been uprooted and much of
its infrastructure lies in ruins. Many Syrians fear the
fragmentation of their State could follow, with Da’esh
and Al-Qaida affiliates poised to exploit further
chaos. Neighbouring countries are hosting millions
of Syrian refugees, while many lose their lives trying
to reach Europe. Forces unleashed by the conflict are
destabilizing the region. Terrorist attacks linked to
the crisis have struck around the world. Global norms
of humanitarian law have been flagrantly violated.
We have seen indiscriminate attacks on civilians and
civilian facilities, the medieval tactic of sieges and the
weaponization of hunger, the use of chemical weapons,
including attacks recently attributed to Da’esh and the
Syrian Government. Tens of thousands of men, women
and children remain in arbitrary detention, in appalling
2/29

21/09/2016

conditions and systematically subjected to unspeakale
torture. Meanwhile, foreign fighters and arms flow
to all sides. All of that defies the resolutions of the
Council.
Tragically, the divisons inside Syria are too often
amplified by regional divisions, and then mirrored
in the Council. Those divisions condemn Syria to its
terrible fate. Yet we know that international unity can
make a difference. Council unity and resolve led to
the elimination of Syria’s previously denied chemical
weapons and attribution of responsibility for their use.
Food and medicine have been delivered to millions of
Syrians, including across front lines and via air drops to
besieged and hard-to-reach areas. And the formation of
the International Syria Support Group (ISSG) provided
fresh momentum to the search for a settlement and
paved the way for resolution 2254 (2015).
A cessation of hostilities, albeit fragile, began in
late February, with positive results for a few months.
In that window, the United Nations intensified
humanitarian operations and brought the parties to
Geneva for talks. But that process was once again
overwhelmed by violence. The long-sought agreement
between the Russian Federation and the United
States concluded on 9 September represents a new
opportunity. The attack on a United Nations-Syrian
Arab Red Crescent humanitarian convoy two days ago
was an outrage that resulted in several casualties and
forced the United Nations to suspend aid operations.
I am looking at options for vigorously investigating
that and similar atrocities against civilians. I am also
concerned about the earlier attack in Deir ez-Zor, in
which dozens of lives were lost. I take note of the rapid
acknowledgement by the United States of that strike
and look forward to more information.
We must remain determined that the ceasefire
will be revived. I urge everyone to use their influence
now — today — to ensure that it does. This is a
chance to reinstate the cessation of hostilities, faciliate
humanitarian aid to Aleppo and throughout the country,
ground the Syrian air force and see joint military
action against terrorist groups, such as Da’esh and the
Al-Nusra Front. If we can do that, it would open the
road to political talks.
As soon as a new round of intra-Syrian negotiations
begins, they must focus on the fundamental issues for
a viable transition, in particular —
­ and I use the exact
16-29433

21/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7774

words of the mediators’ summary of the last round of
talks —

exercised differently and responsibly from the way it
has been until now.

“how power is to be exercised in practice by the
transitional governance, including in relation to
the presidency, executive powers and the control of
Government and security institutions”.

There is also a profound need for accountability.
The Government has mercilessly trampled on human
rights. Opposition groups have done some of the same.
Terrorist groups parade images of their cruelty before
the global public with perverse glee. For the world
not to pursue the perpetrators of such brutality would
be a grave abdication of duty. It would deny Syrian
justice and healing. It would shred the credibility of an
international community that claims to be concerned
about upholding our common humanity.

The ISSG has already signalled its support for that
approach. It urged the parties,
“to reach agreement on a framework for a genuine
political transition, which would include a broad,
inclusive transitional body with full executive
power”.
And the ISSG co-Chairs formally requested that the
United Nations develop proposals as a starting point for
future tasks. With my strong backing, Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura will be ready to present to the parties
a draft framework of proposals as a starting point
for negotiations for a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led
political transition. We are fully guided by resolution
2254 (2015), the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) and the ISSG statement, as well as the clear
agenda for intra-Syrian talks laid out in resolution 2254
(2015).
I have asked the Special Envoy to work intensively
towards convening formal negotiations as soon as
possible. I call on the Security Council to fully support
the Special Envoy as he proceeds in that manner, with
no ifs, ands or buts. We have to unequivocally move
ahead towards a credible political process. I expect all
to use their influence with the Syrian parties to make
sure they come to talks ready to genuinely negotiate the
core issues of political transition. No country’s destiny
should rest on what happens with a single individual.
If one side continues to insist that the powers of the
Office of the President are not subject to negotiation,
by definition there cannot be a negotiated settlement.
If another side insists that the President simply depart
at the very outset of a transition, it is difficult to see a
genuine negotiation take place.
Transition is not an end in itself; it is a process by
which the Syrian people can achieve a new, peaceful and
democratic reality while protecting their sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence and uniting
against terrorism. The transition must ensure the
continuity and reform of State institutions and public
services in the country. That requires an inclusive set
of governance arrangements that ensure that power is

I note that the Security Council itself has said that
those who use chemical weapons in Syria must be held
accountable. I repeat my call on the Security Council to
refer the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court. Members of the Government who gave orders or
were part of the chain of command must be brought to
account. Others on the battlefield must also be brought
into the halls of justice. And there can be no doubt that
any durable settlement will have to ensure a proper
framework for transitional justice and reconciliation if
Syria is to overcome the horrors of this war.
We are at a make-or-break moment. I challenge
everyone to use their influence now to restore
our cessation of hostilies, enable the delivery of
humanitarian assistance everywhere it is needed, and
support the United Nations in charting a political path
for the Syrians to negotiate a way out of the hell in
which they are trapped. In their service as members
of the Security Council, those present have no higher
responsibility now.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: The Secretary-General has
spoken powerfully about this terrible conflict and the
need to open the road to political talks that focus on
the fundamental issues for a viable transition. He has
requested that I be ready to present to the parties a draft
framework of proposals as a starting point — nothing
more than a starting point, but an important starting
point — for negotiations for a Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led political transition. And we are ready. Let
me offer now a few observations in this regard. We owe
them to the Security Council.

16-294333/29

S/PV.7774

The situation in the Middle East

First, we believe that the United Nations has done
its due dilligence in order to understand the needs and
fears of all sides, even if their own starting positions
continue to be distant. Over the past two years, the
United Nations has engaged extensively with Syrian
stakeholders, whether in Geneva consultations or
in three rounds of formal proximity talks, technical
discussions, shuttle diplomacy in the region and
through the International Syria Support Group (ISSG)
and the 18 Special Envoys from all over the world,
civil society — and, frankly also to a large extent,
with the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board — with
representatives of Syria. I have taken into account all
the input from these engagements.
Secondly, despite the horrors on the ground, we have
been pleasantly surprised by the fact that some points
of convergence have emerged from the intra-Syrian
talks about what essential governing princples should
frame the transition and any end-state consititutional
arrangement for Syria in the future. These commalities
demonstrate how potentially close the visions of each
side are, at least on the following point: an open, civil,
all-inclusive, non-sectarian, pluralistic, democratic,
unified State based upon the rule of law, in which all
components of Syrian society are recognized, respected
and whose fundamental freedoms are enshrined and
protected in a new constitution. These are, at least
verbally, what they seem to be agreeing upon.
Thirdly, in the third round of our intra-Syrian talks,
both sides have accepted that the agenda was indeed a
political transition. The Secretary-General referred to
the mediator’s summary a few minutes ago, which in
fact has captured further commonalities on a transition
and set out the issues that need to be addressed to ensure
a viable transition. That summary was subsequently
endorsed by the ISSG — and I am glad that we have
the ISSG; we had been waiting for it for more than a
year, and it does provide a lot of support to the Special
Envoy, as we were alone before it — as the basis for
the next round of intra-Syrian negotiations. The ISSG
urged the parties “to reach agreement on a framework
for a genuine political transition”. It was within this
context that on 26 July the ISSG requested that we
develop some proposals. As soon as the talks resume, it
is my intention to put proposals to all sides as a starting
point for negotiations and as a means by which to move
to direct talks, and no longer just proximity talks. The
Secretary-General has indeed been encouraging me
4/29

21/09/2016

and requesting that I present a draft framework to move
the sides towards a transition through negotiation.
Fourthly, any proposal that I may present would
proceed upon the basis that the conflict in Syria cannot
be resolved militarly — we say that all the time, but
sometimes fail to practice it — but rather only through
a a Syrian-owned and -led political negotiating process
between the Government and the opposition, in which
a framework is agreed based upon mutual consent,
capable of effecting a genuine and irreversible political
transition leading to a new constitution, and free and
fair elections under international supervision, while
preserving continuity — we are not looking for what
happened in Libya, for instance — and reformed State
institutions, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
Fifthly, in our view, any viable transition must
inevitably do the follwing. First, it must address how
power is to be exercised in practice by the transitional
Government, including in relation to the presidency’s
executive powers and control over Government and
security institutions. This is something that the Syrians
have to decide, but they need to address it among them.
Secondly, the transition must involve power-sharing
and a phased and genuinine power-devolution exercise
during transition in an agreed manner in accordance
with good governance, principles and subject to
domestic and international guarantees. Thirdly, it
must require the creation of collective transitional
bodies to oversee a national ceasefire, humanitarian
relief, the creation of a calm, neutral environment
to enable free, peaceful political activity to occur in
relation to the adoption of a new constitution, and the
holding of free and fair elections under international
supervision. I know it seems like a dream, but that is
the plan, and if we do not do that it will not be possible
to actually get there. Fourthly, it must be accompanied
by sustained, international efforts to help reconstruct
Syria, discussions are already taking place about how
to prepare for reconstructing Syria as soon as genuinine
and verifiable transition gets under way.
Therefore, ideally, the Government would need
to understand that the transition involves a genuinine
devolution of power and not just the absorption of the
opposition into the current Government. While the
opposition should also understand that the transition is
not solely about one person or one presidency, but it is
actually related to a transfer not only of power from one
political group to another, but actually it is about how
16-29433

21/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

power should be exercised differently as Syria moves
forward through Syrian negotiations.
Above all, the sides need to recognize that any
transition needs to be all-inclusive and agreed among
them — as the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523,
annex) clearly states — through mutual consent. I take
note of the inputs that we have received from both sides,
the Government and the opposition, in this process.
I also take note of the High Negotiation Committee’s
description of its own recent vision statement as a
living document, and therefore a document that can
evolve. This is the kind of approach that negotiations
need to have in order to be developed.
I appeal, therefore, to the Security Council to
reflect carefully on what the Secretary-General has just
said. It was an important statement. It was a statement
that he made by choosing his words carefully, because
he feels strongly about this terrible conflict, which has
been ongoing for five years of his tenure. I have added a
few points and I hope that all Syrian parties understand
that if peace is to be made and they are to save their own
country, there is a need for a transition that will require
a genuine readiness to negotiate and compromise. They
should also be present at the next talks. This is an
opportunity we would like to offer them.
Let me finish by saying, because obviously we
cannot ignore the elephant in the room, that all of this
will and can be heavily affected if we build on the
agreement reached on 9 September between the two
co-Chairs of the ISSG, which gave us a lot of hope,
and on the basis of which we have been working even
harder to renew talks.
The President: I thank Mr. De Mistura for
his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Prime Minister of New Zealand.
New Zealand has convened today’s high-level
meeting on the situation in the Middle East for one
simple reason — no other issue more urgently demands
the attention of world leaders. The Syrian civil war is the
most devastating conflict of the twenty-first century.
We see a country shattered, terrorism and extremism
rampant, and the daily horrors of the deliberate
displacement, starving and killing of civilians. We join
the Secretary-General in condemning Monday’s attack
on a humanitarian convoy. There is no justification
for attacking those who are trying to save lives.

S/PV.7774

Longer term, we will need to hold to account those
most responsible for the appalling atrocities we have
witnessed. This includes those responsible for chemical
weapons attacks.
The scale of the Syrian refugee crisis has shocked
the world. It has impacted millions of people in the
region and beyond. The conflict has created security
threats that reach well beyond Syria’s borders. After
more than five years of violence, Syria has become a
byword for failure — failure of the parties and their
supporters to put peace and the lives of innocent people
ahead of self-interest and zero-sum politics; failure to
respond to the crisis early to prevent this tragedy; and
a collective political failure, including on the part of
the Security Council, to do what must be done to end
the conflict.
Today’s meeting is a chance for an open and honest
discussion on how peace can be achieved. It is critical
that we rewrite this narrative of failure and help set
Syria on a path to peace. Let me be clear. No one will
benefit from a continuation of this conflict. The Syrian
Government, which bears responsibility for starting
this war, cannot win, nor can the many others whose
support is allowing the conflict to continue. Ultimately,
Syrians must reach an agreement on their future
Government, but at this point it is clear that Syrians by
themselves cannot end this war.
The problem is not a lack of direction. The pathway
for ending this conflict was set out by the Security
Council in resolution 2254 (2015) in December
2015. The resolution identified the steps required:
a nationwide ceasefire, negotiations on a political
transition and a united front for fighting the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and other terrorist groups.
It also established a timetable for implementing them,
but that timetable itself was never implemented. Today,
we all need to commit to restoring the cessation of
hostilities, delivering aid to those who need it, and
restarting political talks. Last week’s arrangement
between United States Secretary of State Kerry and
Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov represents the best
hope we have seen in some time. We encourage Russia
and the United States to show sustained leadership and
not let this opportunity slip away.
The next few days will be critical in restoring the
cessation of hostilities and getting humanitarian aid
flowing. We urge the Syrian parties to abide by the
arrangement. The Council should unite to back those

16-294335/29

S/PV.7774

The situation in the Middle East

efforts. A political solution needs to address the causes
of the conflict and establish a new form of inclusive
Government. It must provide more than just cosmetic
change with regard to the central question of President
Bashar Al-Assad’s future. A political solution will
involve unpalatable choices for both sides. It will take
courage and, most of all, pragmatism. Anyone who
insists on political red lines that block the necessary
compromises will have to measure the delay they cause
in terms of more lives lost, more refugees and more
suffering. Those with influence must reinforce the
message to the parties and to the Syrian Government
that a political solution is the only way out of this
conflict, and they must back these words with their
actions. This means encouraging the parties to seek
outcomes around the negotiating table, rather than on
the battlefield. It also means not using the fight against
terrorism as an excuse to shift our focus from achieving
a political solution. Terrorism is a major consequence
of the Syrian war, but it did not cause it.
Those countries with greatest ability to influence
events have a particular responsibility in this regard.
I speak in particular of those the Secretary-General
identified in his General Assembly address last year (see
A/70/PV.13) as being key to resolving this conflict: the
United States, Russia, Iran, Saudi Arabia and Turkey.
We call on those countries to work together to restore
the cessation of hostilities over the next few days.
Advancing a political solution must be the priority in
the weeks ahead. The people of Syria deserve this much.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Sergey Lavrov,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): It is clear that the region of the Middle East
and North Africa is undergoing a period of serious
upheaval as a result of the conjunction of inter-ethnic and
inter-religious clashes with the unprecedented eruptions
of terrorism and extremism that have enveloped Iraq,
Yemen, Libya, Syria and have disturbed a number of
other countries, including some in Africa. The potential
deterioration of the situation presents the likelihood of
increasingly serious threats to international stability
and security.
This is hardly the first time that such a state of
affairs is the direct consequence of the heinous practice
of geopolitical engineering, interference in the internal
6/29

21/09/2016

affairs of sovereign States, and attempts to replace
objectionable regimes, including by violent means. It
is fair to say that the situation in Syria is particularly
worrying. Since the very beginning of the crisis, Russia
has consistently advocated an exclusively peaceful
solution arrived at while respecting the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of that ancient nation. We
continue to believe firmly that there is no alternative
to a political process based on a mutually respectful,
inclusive intra-Syrian dialogue without preconditions,
while ensuring an end to hostilities, the expansion
of humanitarian access and a more effective fight
against terrorism.
That complex position has been clearly affirmed in
the decisions of the International Syria Support Group
and the Security Council’s resolutions, particularly
resolution 2254 (2015). In order to fulfil the provisions
of that resolution, Russia and the United States, as
co-Chairs of the International Syria Support Group,
arrived at a specific arrangement, which took more
than six months to produce and was completed on
9 September, after the Presidents of Russia and the
United States, meeting three days earlier in China, had
reached final agreement on the last remaining issues to
be resolved.
I apologize for referring to documents that almost
no one in the Chamber has seen. As ever, Russia is
prepared to make them public and distribute them
within the United Nations. It is important to note that
the Russian-American agreement emphasizes that one
of its key priorities is distinguishing the opposition
forces from those of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and Jabhat Al-Nusra, in order to put the
ceasefire into effect, resolve humanitarian issues and,
most importantly, end terrorists’ attempts to evade
punishment by using the pretext of their cooperation
with the so-called moderates participating in the
ceasefire regime.
The arrangements came into force on 12 September,
and I should say once again that the fact that they are
not yet publicly available prevents us from comparing
them with what has been done and by whom, but I can
give one example. The arrangements required ensuring
safe passage for humanitarian access along the Castello
Road and that therefore both the Government and the
opposition, which were controlling various sectors of
that road, should withdraw their forces to an equal
distance from the road. That distance was specifically
fixed in the agreements. The Government forces began
16-29433

21/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

to withdraw, as required in the Russian-United States
agreement, only to see that the opposition was not
only not reciprocating but in fact began shelling the
Government forces. That happened more than once,
and the opposition has still not withdrawn from the
Castello Road, as the 9 September agreements required.
In general, through its Ministry of Defence, Russia
has been continually monitoring the activity on the
Castello Road and around Aleppo, and the Ministry’s
website shows very clearly who is complying with the
agreements and who is not.
Last week, through the operational monitoring
centre we established in Geneva with our United States
partners, we informed our American colleagues about
300 cases of violations of the ceasefire regime by Ahrar
Al-Sham and a number of other opposition groups,
including some whose names were provided to us as
supposedly participating in the ceasefire. There were
violations in Aleppo and the provinces of Hama, Homs,
Latakia and Dar’a, as well as in the suburbs of Damascus.
I would like to stress that the information we passed on
is reliable. It comes not from Internet or media reports
but was obtained on the ground by Russian military
monitoring groups and it corresponds to specific facts.
The violations include shelling using light weapons,
mortars, multiple rocket launchers and homemade
shells. The strikes on 16 September by the opposition
coalition against Government forces’ positions in Deir
ez-Zor were a clear violation of the ceasefire, and as
soon as they occurred, ISIL launched an attack on the
Government forces. Another unacceptable provocation
took place on 19 September, when a United Nations
humanitarian convoy was attacked near Aleppo in an
opposition-controlled area. It should be noted, by the
way, that on that same day, in the same area, known as
the Ramusa road, Jabhat Al-Nusra and its allies carried
out an aggressive attack on Government forces. As a
result, the jihadists were able to make progress in the
10-70 sector.
I do not have any proof, but I am certain that
such coincidences should be thoroughly analysed and
investigated, particularly the attack on the humanitarian
convoy. Many people said that it could have been a
rocket or artillery shelling — that was what we were
informed originally — and then they started talking
about helicopters and then airplanes. I think we should
restrain the emotional instinct that makes us instantly
reach for the microphone to comment and should rather
conduct a thorough, professional investigation. I should

S/PV.7774

mention that the distance between where the incident
occurred and the epicentre, to the west of Aleppo,
where Al-Nusra is, is no more than five or seven
kilometres. Russia has provided all the information it
has obtained about the attack on the convoy, including
real-time video. In general, in spite of our appeals,
which are to be found in Security Council decisions on
the importance of exerting influence over the various
armed opposition groups, the results have so far been
extraordinarily limited.
I mentioned the list provided to us by our American
partners of the 150 or so organizations named as
participants in the ceasefire regime, but for a long time
now, and officially since 12 September, more than 20
of them have declared that they will not comply with
the agreement. That list also includes Ahrar Al-Sham,
which, by the way, when drafting resolution 2254
(2015), we proposed including on the list of terrorist
organizations, together with another group, Jaysh
Al-Islam. At the time, however, our partners said that
would make it impossible for us to work effectively, and
as a gesture of goodwill we decided not to insist on
that, limiting the terrorist list to Jabhat Al-Nusra and
the so-called Islamic State. Well, after the ceasefire’s
entry into force, on 12 September, the leadership of
Ahrar Al-Sham stated officially that it would not abide
by the agreements because they describe Al-Nusra
as a terrorist organization. Ahrar Al-Sham does not
consider it to be a terrorist organization, and in fact
works closely with it.
I believe, therefore, that the time has come to think
about revisiting the list of terrorist organizations,
especially since a specific incident occurred in the
past few days in the north of Hama province, where
Syrian forces were defending against attacks by the
Jund Al-Aqsa group in the El Khabare and Maan areas.
Regarding the fighting there, some have accused the
Syrian Government forces of violating the ceasefire,
but yesterday the United States stated that it had added
Jund Al-Aqsa to the list of terrorist organizations, so I
hope that no one will demand that we cease hostilities
against that group. I just wanted to mention that
example, on top of what I just pointed out about Ahrar
Al-Sham, since they will probably require that we
revisit the list. There has to be an end to covering up for
those who are opposed to peace and refuse to comply
with the agreements and with the Security Council’s
resolutions, and they should be considered equivalent
to terrorists. In the past few days, in the Damascus

16-294337/29

S/PV.7774

The situation in the Middle East

area, Jaysh Al-Islam has been trying to gain territory
in eastern Ghouta, while at the same time there have
been intensive attacks on Government forces by Jabhat
Al-Nusra and Failak Al-Rahman, which is also working
in coordination with Al-Nusra in the suburb of Jobar,
from where they often use mortars for shelling civilian
neighbourhoods in Damascus.
Another lesson that we should like to draw from
the latest events is that, in ensuring security during
humanitarian operations, the effective participation of
all parties to the conflict is necessary, not only that of
Syrian and Russian armed forces, to which everyone
usually addresses all appeals and requests. The armed
groups and their sponsors need to provide relevant
guarantees as well. Representatives of the United
Nations also need to escort the convoys after receiving
such guarantees.
The International Syria Support Group met
yesterday, and many colleagues were present. Everyone
spoke in favour of resuscitating the cessation of
hostilities. Initially the proposal was to ensure three
days of calm. We are convinced that that can be
achieved only by all the parties to the Syrian conflict
without exception, taking simultaneous, parallel
steps. Otherwise, nothing will happen. There will not
be any unilateral pauses. We have done that already.
There were unilateral pauses around Aleppo for 48
and 72 hours, and each time the result was that the
insurgents, including Jabhat Al-Nusra, were provided
with re-enforcements and military equipment and
ammunition during these periods of calm. We therefore
can no longer even discuss unilateral measures.

21/09/2016

of all ethnic and religious groups, in order to implement
the road map set out in the resolution, which should lead
to a solution to the Syrian crisis within 18 months — as
we had hoped at the time. Otherwise, we will not be
able to achieve a lasting solution and preserve Syria as
a single, territorially integral State, restore its economy
and ensure the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons.
We support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura, and we call
on him to continue working with the Syrian parties
to the conflict to ensure the continuity and inclusive
character of the negotiating process. Attempts by
certain participants to put forward preconditions or
ultimatums to sabotage resolution 2254 (2015) are
unacceptable. Unfortunately, such attempts have
continued, and the United Nations and the Special Envoy
should not yield to such blackmail. Negotiations should
resume urgently. Those who insist on preconditions
should be told that such decisions run counter to the
demands of the Security Council. We are ready to
contribute in every way to the efforts carried out by
Mr. De Mistura, including by further working with all
parties — the Syrian Government and all members of
the opposition — without excluding anyone.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. John Kerry, Secretary of State of the
United States of America.

What is needed is that every single member of the
International Syria Support Group, especially those
mentioned by the President of the Council, the Prime
Minister of New Zealand, need to formulate serious
guarantees in order to ensure that those units on the
ground on whom they have influence will comply
with all the provisions of the cessation of hostilities
agreement. If we can agree on that type of comprehensive
approach, then I believe that the viability of a cessation
of hostilities will have a chance. Of course, it will not
be enough to reach an agreement, we will have to make
sure that the agreement is actually implemented.

Mr. Kerry (United States of America): I want to
thank my colleague from New Zealand in particular for
convening this very important meeting on the crisis in
Syria. I believe that it is appropriate that we are gathering
here a couple of rooms over from where yesterday so
many Heads of State came together in what I thought
was a remarkably moving and eloquent statement of the
consequence of the war in Syria. I listened particularly
to King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein talk about the
impact on his country and the millions of people who
are distorting its economy, putting huge pressures on
the social structure of the country, living under the
worst circumstances and, in some areas, presenting
a threat because of the ability of Da’esh/ the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham or the Al-Nusra Front to slip
people in, posing a security threat to the country.

Finally, I would like to say that we have always made
a top priority of the intra-Syrian political dialogue,
without any preconditions, as demanded by resolution
2254 (2015) and with the participation of representatives

We listened to the young Olympian tell us about
her dreams and how she was able to compete this year
because of a refugee Olympic team. We saw the images
in a video beautifully narrated by Bono that really

8/29

16-29433

21/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7774

made us think about the consequences of that. I hope
that everybody will come here today really focused on
those consequences and not engage in word games that
duck responsibility or avoid the choices that this great
institution has in front of it with respect to war and
peace and life and death.

in this Chamber understands that there are proxies at
this table and proxies outside of the Chamber — and we
know who they are — who have the ability to have an
impact on the players in this conflict that has provided
the greatest humanitarian catastrophe since the Second
World War.

I listened to my colleague from Russia, and I felt
as though I were in a parallel universe here. He said
that nobody should have any preconditions to come
to the table. Well, we twice met in Vienna. We met
here in New York and embraced a Security Council
resolution. We met again in Munich. And in each place,
the International Syria Support Group and the Security
Council embraced a ceasefire applicable to all parties.
That is not a precondition. That is an international
agreement — arrived at four times. Countries have
said that they will do this, and four times it has been
shredded by independent actors and spoilers who do not
want a ceasefire. That is therefore not a precondition.

Let us review the sequence of events. I was
privileged to serve in the United States Senate with
a fellow who spent a lot of time here: he was the
Ambassador of the United States to the United Nations,
Daniel Patrick Moynihan. He would famously remind
us that everyone is entitled to their own opinion, but
they are not entitled to their own facts. As President
John Adams once said, “facts are stubborn things”. If
we are going to deal with this situation, I do not think
that we can let anybody here have their own set of facts
about Syria.

How can people go sit at a table with a regime that
bombs hospitals, drops chlorine gas — again and again
and again and again and again and again — and acts
with impunity? Are you supposed to sit there and have
happy talk in Geneva under such circumstances, when
you have signed to a ceasefire and do not adhere to
it? What kind of credibility do you have with any of
your people? It is not a precondition. It is something
upon which we all agreed in the United Nations and the
International Syria Support Group.
I have to say with regard to the documents that we
are prepared release — as we told people and announced
yesterday at the International Syria Support Group, and
people in the Support Group have the documents — you
do not need to read them to understand that it is against
international law to bomb hospitals. You do not need
the documents to understand that you do not drop
barrel bombs on children. Those are flagrant violations
of international law.
Therefore, I do not want to obfuscate this process. I
did not come here this morning to do that. Supposedly,
we all want the same goal — I have heard that again
and again. Russia, Iran, the United States, Qatar,
Turkey, Saudi Arabia — everybody sits here and says
that they want a united Syria: secular and respectful of
the rights of all people, and where the people of Syria
can choose their leadership. However, we are proving
woefully inadequate in our ability to get to the table, to
have that conversation, to make it happen. Everybody

Everybody here understands the depth of the
human tragedy. One wonders why people in various
parts of the world are so angry about governance: it is
because all they hear are words. We know how many
times we have demanded action, which then does not
take place. Therefore, I want to share some facts with
you this morning. Last night we received reports of
air strikes that hit a medical facility near Aleppo and
four aid workers were killed, despite the fact there was
supposed to be a cessation of hostilities. There are only
two countries that have aeroplanes that are capable of
flying during the night — or flying at all — in that
particular area: Russia and Syria.
As Minister Lavrov said, let us examine the facts
and see what happened. On Monday, 20 aid workers
were killed in an outrageous sustained two-hour attack
directed at a fully authorized humanitarian mission
near Aleppo. All of the permits had been given, and
everybody was on notice. That attack has dealt a very
heavy blow to our efforts to bring peace to Syria, and
it raises a profound doubt about whether Russia and the
Al-Assad regime can or will live up to the obligations
that they agreed to in Geneva.
Questions are also raised — not by that attack but
by other events — about some of the opposition. Those
are facts. The simple reality is that we cannot resolve
this crisis if the major parties who come to the table
and agree to do something are unwilling to do what is
necessary to avoid escalation. We do not get anywhere
by ignoring the facts and by denying common sense. The
United States-led coalition did hit people on Saturday;

16-294339/29

S/PV.7774

The situation in the Middle East

it was a terrible accident, and within moments of it
happening we acknowledged it. We did not cast out a
series of obfuscating facts, instead we said that it was
a terrible thing and that it happened. The United States
Department of Defence apologized, and we tried to find
out how it happened.
But people with guns running around on the
ground, seen from the air, is a very different thing from
trucks in a convoy with big United Nations markings
all over them. I want to lay out those facts because they
underscore why, at this moment, we just cannot do business
as usual. We cannot walk out of this Chamber and say that
we are going to try to continue to have a ceasefire, when
everybody knows it cannot work. The facts require countries
to restore credibility to this process. That is what is critical.
Let us think about what happened in the last couple of days.
First, President Putin’s Press Secretary, Dmitry Peskov,
claimed that the attack on the humanitarian convoy was
somehow a necessary response to an alleged offensive by
al-Nusra elsewhere in the country: that was the first claim.
Then a Russian ambassador said that Russian and Syrian
forces were not bombing the area, but that they were targeting
the village of Khan Tuman. Then we heard a completely
different story: the Ministry of Defence of the Russian
Federation said that the aid convoy had been accompanied
by militants in a pick-up truck with a mortar, of which we
have, however, seen no evidence. In any case, that would not
justify a violation of the cessations of hostilities. In addition,
that mortar could never have inflicted the damage caused to
those trucks.
Then the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation
switched completely and denied Russia’s involvement.
According to Ministry spokesman Igor Konashenkov,
“neither Russia nor Syria conducted air strikes on the
United Nations humanitarian convoy in the southwestern
outskirts of Aleppo”. Then Konashenkov went further and
said that the damage to the convoy was the direct result of
the cargo catching fire, that the trucks and the food and the
medicine just spontaneously combusted. Does anybody here
believe that? This is not a joke we are involved in. We are
in serious business here. If we can stand up and say that we
did accidentally have a strike, then we should have some
responsibility. Maybe it is an attempt to distract attention or
somehow deflect the issue, but I think what it underscores is
that we have a responsibility here to find a way forward.
Everything I just quoted from Russian sources is
contradicted by public information, by conclusions
already reached by the International Committee of the
10/29

21/09/2016

Red Cross, the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies, the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent, independent journalists and aid workers on
the ground, by eyewitnesses. The eyewitnesses will
tell you what happened. One of them said that he was
standing on the ground, and all of a sudden the place
became hell and the fighter jets were in the sky. That
is an eyewitness report; the place turned into hell, and
fighter jets were in the sky.
There is a lot more that I am not going to go into
because I really want the key here to be an acceptance
of responsibility, so that we can change this equation,
responsibility on the part of everybody here. The
primary question is no longer what do we know; the
primary question is, collectively, what are we going to
do about it?
In other words, this is a moment of truth. It is a
moment of truth for President Putin and Russia, it is
also a moment of truth for the opposition. It is a moment
of truth for the people who support the opposition. For
too long some elements of the opposition have relied
on an unholy alliance with Al-Nusra. Al-Nusra is
Al-Qaida — Al-Qaida’s branch in Syria. We cannot
look the other way if some groups are on the ground
fighting alongside Al-Nusra, an organization that
overtly rejects a political solution to this crisis and is an
enemy of all of us in this Chamber.
It is a moment of truth for the international
community, too. If we allow spoilers to choose the path
for us, we will encounter a path of escalation. If we
decide not to do what it takes to make this cessation of
hostilities work, then make no mistake, my friends, the
next time we convene here we are going to be facing a
Middle East with even more refugees, more dead, more
displaced, more extremists and more suffering on an
even greater scale. That is a certainty.
There is only one choice, and that is to get to that
table with Staffan de Mistura, to get to a negotiation
and get a ceasefire so that we can stop the flow of
refugees, stop the suffering, and provide the people
of Syria with a chance to breathe, a chance to live.
When the ceasefire first began, a few weeks ago, guess
what: it worked. Months ago, people were actually out
in the streets; they went to cafés again. Some people
even demonstrated, felt they had political rights. Other
people were able to walk from one place to another with
a sense of safety. All of that has dissipated.
16-29433

21/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

I want to emphasize this, and I emphasize to Russia
that the United States continues to believe that there is
a way forward, which, although rocky and difficult and
uncertain, can provide the most viable path out of the
carnage. Our shared task here is to find a way to use the
tools of diplomacy to make that happen. That is exactly
what we have been trying to accomplish.
For weeks over the summer, experts from my
Government worked with our counterparts from Russia
in good efforts to develop a plan that would take into
account the lessons learned from the original cessation
of hostilities. The key elements of that plan, launched
in Geneva two weeks ago, include the renewal of the
cessation of hostilities, excluding only Da’esh and
Al-Nusra. Importantly, it included arrangements for
the unfettered delivery — unfettered delivery — of
humanitarian aid to people in Aleppo and elsewhere in
the country. It also envisioned the possibility — provided
that the delivery of humanitarian assistance was
unimpeded and sustained and provided that there were
at least seven days of consecutive adherence to the
cessation of hostilities — that the United States and
Russia would begin to coordinate their efforts against
Da’esh and Al-Nusra.
I wish to make one thing clear. Under President
Obama’s orders, all preparations were being made
in order to achieve that cooperation, involving our
military and intelligence community in the work we
would do. We are committed to that. It was also a very
importantly part of the plan that, when those efforts of
cooperation commenced, Syrian warplanes would be
prohibited from flying over areas where the legitimate
opposition and Al-Nusra were present in order to give
us an opportunity to work at separating the two.
I have said to Russia many times: it is very hard
to separate people when they are being bombed
indiscriminately. While Al-Assad has the right to
determine whom he is going to bomb, because he
can “go after Al-Nusra” and in the process go after
the opposition at the same time because he wants to,
confusion is created that is impossible to separate out,
and the ceasefire cannot be preserved. That is why we
need to get to the prohibition on flying, my friends.
That would prevent Syria from doing what it has done
so often in the past, which is to attack civilian targets
with the excuse that it is just going after Al-Nusra.
Our purpose in the negotiation was to put an end
to the kind of horrific and indiscriminate attacks

S/PV.7774

that have been the primary cause of fear, suffering
and displacement. Under our plan, all of this could
be quickly accompanied by serious negotiations
between the parties aimed at a political transition and
a conclusion to the conflict. So I wish my colleagues
to know that the United States remains convinced that
the objectives outlined in the Geneva agreement are the
right objectives. As for the tools, many of them are the
right tools, but they may not be complete.
Our hope was that the renewal of the cessation
of hostilities and the resumption of aid deliveries, the
isolation of Al-Nusra and Da’esh, and the beginning
of the Syrian-led negotiation process would provide
a pathway out of the conflict and make possible the
restoration of a peaceful Syria. Now, clearly there are
some people, including Al-Assad and his allies, as well
as Al-Nusra and Da’esh on the other side, who fear that
very outcome. Al-Assad is a spoiler; he does not believe
in a ceasefire. Al Nusra and Da’esh are spoilers. They
do not want a ceasefire; they want to keep fighting
Al-Assad.
Therefore, the question for us here today is whether
we bend to their will or continue to pursue our agenda,
as best we can and in every way that we can, to find a
diplomatic solution to the conflict. Those who believe
that the crisis in Syria cannot become even worse are
dead wrong, as are those who believe that a military
victory is possible. This could be like Carthage and the
Romans, if one can call that a victory.
The plan announced in Geneva is far from perfect,
but I have yet to hear an alternative that is remotely
realistic and would lead to a better outcome. If we could
get monitoring on the ground, that would be ideal. We
would love to have monitoring on the ground. But most
of the countries one talks to and asks if they would go
in to monitor are very quick to say, “not on my life”.
As my colleagues from the International Syria
Support Group will attest, yesterday we had a meeting.
There was near unanimity in that room that this process,
the ceasefire, as troubled as it is, gives us the best
chance available to bring relief to the people of Syria.
Now, here is the nub of it. We have said for days that
it will take significant and immediate steps now to try
to get things back on track. How do we get things back
on track? How do we restore the concept of a ceasefire?
How do we give people, who have again and again seen
this process fall apart, some sense of confidence in
the process? Believe me, there are a lot of people who

16-2943311/29

S/PV.7774

The situation in the Middle East

believe that it cannot happen. There are some people
who believe that the major parties do not want it done.
So, I believe that in order to restore credibility to the
process, we must move forward to try to immediately
ground all aircraft flying in those key areas in order
to de-escalate the situation and give a chance for
humanitarian assistance to flow unimpeded. If that
happens, there is a chance to give credibility back to
this process. In Geneva, Russia related that Al-Assad
was prepared to live by the cessation of hostilities and
would accept the idea of not flying over agreed-upon
areas. But because of what has happened in the past
few days, my friends, we have no choice but to try to
do that sooner, not later, to move immediately to restore
confidence and demonstrate the readiness to implement
a genuine ceasefire now.
The future of Syria is hanging by a thread. I urge
the Council not to give up, but instead to support
the steps outlined by the United States and Russia in
Geneva. I call on every party in Syria and those who
support them. I call on all members of the opposition to
cooperate and revive this plan. I call on every country
to cease providing support of any kind to any party that
is trying to sabotage this plan. I call on the international
community to support United Nations efforts to begin
a real negotiation in Geneva on a political transition
that can provide the only durable route to peace. I urge
the entire international community to get behind the
best chance that we have had yet to reduce the violence,
to provide humanitarian assistance and to open up the
space for negotiations.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Abdel Fattah Al Sisi, President of Egypt.
President Al Sisi (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Let
me begin by thanking Mr. John Key, Prime Minister of
New Zealand, for convening this meeting.
I would like to express my deepest condolences
to United Nations workers who were targeted by a
cowardly attack two days ago while trying to fulfil their
mission to bring humanitarian assistance to civilians.
That should not go uncontested.
We are here today not merely to examine the
heartbreaking tragedy in Syria, which we have all
been following on a daily basis, but rather to assume
our responsibility as member States of the Security
Council, charged with the responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security and to find a practical
12/29

21/09/2016

and swift formula to stop the bloodshed in Syria and
to bring an end to the five years of conflict and reach
a unified vision for a comprehensive solution to the
Syrian crisis — one that rescues our brethren in Syria
from their prolonged ordeal.
Five years have passed, and the bloodshed in Syria
has not stopped, with hundreds of thousands of Syrians
killed and with millions of refugees and internally
displaced persons. The political solution remains
elusive. Syria continues to suffer the rapacity of regional
and international parties that are seeking to exploit its
predicament for their own narrow interests, thereby
creating a breeding ground for vicious terrorism, which
is hijacking the future of Syria.
Allow me to speak frankly about what I believe to
be the root causes of the problem and the inherent flaws
in prior attempts to contain the crisis. An honest and
critical reading of the Syrian crisis over the past five
years is imperative if we are to overcome our differences
and move forward to save Syria and its people. I would
like to summarize my remarks in three key points.
First, any honest and fair reading of the previous
attempts to deal with the Syrian crisis thus far
leads us to one conclusion: we have become overly
preoccupied with the symptoms rather than the root
causes of the problem. We continue to be consumed in
recurring debates on reaching interim arrangements,
ceasefires or cessations of hostilities to reduce the
killing and destruction, or in attempts to alleviate
the ensuing humanitarian disaster, and so forth. We
have failed, however, to move forward in addressing
the core problem, which is the absence of a just and
comprehensive political solution that takes into account
the legitimate aspirations of the people of Syria.
We welcome the cessation of hostilities reached a
few days ago thanks to the efforts of Russia and the
United States. This cessation of hostilities led to a
decrease in violence despite certain violations and the
refusal of certain parties, supported by the outside, to
uphold their responsibilities, and insisting on hijacking
the future of Syria. Despite all of those violations,
the agreement was necessary to reduce violence.
However, such an agreement in itself is not enough. It
must be complemented by an immediate resumption of
political negotiations in order to reach a just, final and
comprehensive solution to the Syrian crisis. I hereby
call upon Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura to invite
16-29433

21/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

all parties to the next round of negotiations as soon as
possible.
Secondly, the broad outlines of any political solution
in Syria are quite obvious. However, transforming
those outlines into practical measures on the ground
requires upholding the principles of the national unity
and territorial integrity of Syria and maintaining
equality among each of its citizens across the political
and social spectrums, with the single exception of
terrorist organizations, which cannot have a place in the
future of Syria that we all hope for. There is no place
for terrorism in Syria, nor is there room for attempts
to re-brand the terrorist organizations. We therefore
categorically reject any attempts to circumvent Security
Council resolutions that designate those groups as
terrorist organizations.
Thirdly, it is important that we recognize that we
are running short of time. Every day that passes by with
Syria’s wounds still open offers yet another opportunity
for terrorism to flourish and for sectarianism to
undermine the foundations of the nation-State in Syria
and the Levant. Let me be honest: anyone who thinks
that there can be a military solution to the Syrian crisis
is mistaken, and anyone who believes that terrorist
organizations can play a role in Syria’s future is
delusional.
Our experiences during the Geneva and Vienna
meetings and with resolution 2254 (2015) have proved
beyond any doubt that finding common ground
among the key stakeholders of the Syrian crisis is not
impossible and that we can make significant progress
towards a political settlement in record time should
there be a political will to do so.
Egypt’s experience in hosting an all-inclusive
conference for the various moderate Syrian opposition
groups in June 2015, which brought together Syrians
from across the political spectrum, with no foreign
interference, has shown that these parties can agree on
comprehensive documents that draw a road map for the
transition out of the current plight in Syria. The Cairo
Conference documents were produced by Syrians
without any interference from a non-Syrian party. They
clearly demonstrate that it is possible to find a Syrian
solution to the crisis. Council members must have all
noticed that these documents have been the foundation
of every subsequent effort, Syrian or international, to
put forward a practical political settlement.

S/PV.7774

The road ahead is clear. The implementation of
the cessation of hostilities should be developed into
a comprehensive ceasefire in Syria, which would,
in turn, guarantee the free passage of humanitarian
assistance to civilians in besieged and hard-to-reach
areas. As Council members know, Egypt has succeeded
in delivering humanitarian aid on two occasions to
more than five besieged areas in Syria, thanks to our
open channels of communications with all the different
parties and stakeholders. We continue to count on the
commitment of all parties to the agreement on the
cessation of hostilities as a necessary step towards
easing the humanitarian tragedy and delivering aid to
those affected by the conflict.
We reaffirm our readiness to provide all kinds
of support to this endeavour. However, the revival of
serious political negotiations remains a necessary
condition for the cessation of hostilities to hold and for
humanitarian access to continue. History has taught
us that no ceasefire arrangements have ever endured
without a political prospect that addresses the root
causes of the crisis. Syria is no exception.
Egypt’s vision of a solution in Syria is based on two
pillars. First, the national unity and territorial integrity
of the Syrian State must be preserved and the collapse
of its institutions prevented. Secondly, the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people to rebuild their own
State through an acceptable political solution that
represents them all and creates an enabling environment
for reconstruction efforts must be upheld. From this
point of view, we value the efforts of Special Envoy De
Mistura and we support his work for the resumption of
political negotiations immediately and without delay. In
that context, we reaffirm the importance of including
representatives from the Syrian Government together
with all opposition groups without discrimination in
the negotiations, in order for the negotiations to bear
fruit, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
We have no more time to lose. With the passing of
each day more blood will be spilled and more innocent
Syrians will continue to suffer. Egypt remains eager to
communicate with all parties to the Syrian crisis and is
committed to working with our partners in the region
and the international community to provide every kind
of support for the much-needed political solution in
Syria. It is our collective responsibility to restore hope
to the people of Syria. It is time for us to assume this
responsibility and tackle the root causes of the problem
immediately and without any delay.

16-2943313/29

S/PV.7774

The situation in the Middle East

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Petro Poroshenko, President of Ukraine.
President Poroshenko: First of all, I would like to
thank Prime Minister Key for his initiative to convene
this important high-level meeting. I also commend the
presidency of New Zealand for the excellent manner in
which it has organized the work of the Security Council
this month.
The Security Council was created 71 years ago to
bear the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It was meant to stop
ongoing conflicts and prevent looming ones. Back in
2000, upon the initiative of Ukraine, the Council held
its historic, first-ever summit meeting (see S/PV.4194),
in which it adopted a declaration pledging, inter alia,
“to ensure the effective functioning of the collective
security system established by the Charter”
(resolution 1318 (2000), annex). That summit
became one of many success stories throughout the
history of the United Nations.
Yet, there have been many dramatic failures. One
of them has been unfolding in front of us in Syria for
over five years. The conflict in that country is a tragedy
for millions of people and a serious challenge for the
international community. Hundreds of thousands of
people have been killed; over 13 million have been
forced out of their homes. These numbers are appalling,
and all the more so when we think of the countless
personal tragedies behind them.
The conflict has already had many serious negative
consequences: uncontrolled migration, the escalation
of terrorism, the expansion of the Islamic State and
other extremist groups, to name but a few. Yet it poses
other serious risks, including igniting a wider sectarian
war in the region. We are of the view that the Syrian
Government bears full responsibility for its country’s
present condition and for the terrible sufferings of the
Syrian people.
It was with the utmost dismay that we learned just
two days ago of a barbaric attack on a humanitarian
convoy in Aleppo. That crime came after the Syrian
regime’s unilateral withdrawal from the week-long
ceasefire. It is nothing but a clear proof of the culture
of impunity that has fuelled the Syrian conflict.
That outrageous lack of accountability is a stain on
this Council.
14/29

21/09/2016

At the same time, it is external support for the
Al-Assad regime, in particular from Russia, that has
contributed significantly to the disastrous status quo
and to the recurrent waves of violence. As was the case
in Ukraine, those actions were part of an intentional
policy to first stir up hostilities, raise the stakes and
then offer yourself as a mediator in the settlement
process. In the meantime, you may grab ground and
secure your position for imposing any solution you
please. That strategy sounds pretty familiar to my
own country, Ukraine, which continues to be a testing
ground for very similar Russian tactics.
The United Nations and the Security Council have
failed to bring peace and security to Syria. That failure
undermines the whole mission of the United Nations
and challenges its very existence. The inaction of the
Council in dealing with the armed Russian aggression
against Ukraine and the occupation of Crimea has
allowed Moscow to use the peninsula as a military
outpost for projecting power in Syria. As war there rages
on, huge numbers of Russian war assets are deployed to
Syria via ships based in Crimea, occupied by Russian
troops. That highlights once again the absolutely urgent
and critical need to reform the Council, particularly
with regard to the veto power. No veto should be able
to block the Council’s action when it has to respond to
situations of mass atrocities. With so many lives lost in
recent decades due to such crimes, we must finally start
the process of removing that obstacle to ensure a more
effective Security Council.
We strongly condemn the use of chemical weapons,
barrel bombs, torture and other crimes being committed
in Syria, specifically against civilians. Again, these are
flagrant violations of international law. We insist that
those responsible for these horrific crimes be brought
to justice. The recent findings of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism must be duly
taken into account by the international community.
Furthermore, we condemn the denial of humanitarian
access to those in need — let along the bombing of aid
convoys — and sieges against civilian population. Any
and all employment of such tactics as a tool of war is a
serious violation of international humanitarian law and
must be stopped immediately.
Ukraine once again reaffirms the imperative of
full compliance with the fundamental principles and
norms of international law everywhere, at all times and
by all. The political process in Syria should be aimed
16-29433

21/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

at restoring the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the country and establishing a credible, inclusive
transitional governing body with ample executive
power. That should be done in full compliance with the
Geneva principles of 30 June 2012 and resolution 2254
(2015). That is to be followed by the drafting of a new
constitution and elections.
A genuine political transition should be the first
and foremost priority for the Council and for all those
involved. The parties to the conflict, both inside and
outside Syria, will have to prove with deeds — not
words — that they are committed to meeting their
obligations and to fulfilling their agreements, including
the most recent. We are convinced that there is no
alternative to a diplomatic solution of the conflict and
call for consolidating international efforts to put an end
to this tragedy.
Sixteen years ago, in the declaration I referred to
at the beginning of my statement, our predecessors
pledged, “to enhance the effectiveness of the United
Nations in addressing conflict” (resolution 1318 (2000),
annex, p.2). We cannot afford to fail this time.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Macky Sall, President of the Republic
of Senegal.
President Sall (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to thank Prime Minister Key for convening
this timely high-level debate on the human tragedy
ravaging the Syrian people. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his recent briefing
and Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Staffan
de Mistura.
Whatever one’s point of view on the Syrian
conflict, which is entering its sixth year, there is one
clear image in all of our minds — a country ravaged by
war; a country in ruins; a land of fire, tears and blood.
The situation in Syria is one of the worst humanitarian
disasters of our time. Over 300,000 dead have left
behind broken families scarred by mourning and
suffering, and there is no end to the gruesome accounts
emerging. How many orphans, how many widows, how
many elderly people abandoned to their sad fate without
any assistance, how many wounded and disabled for
life, how many refugees and displaced people have
been created? No one really knows.
What is happening in Syria is untenable. Meeting
after meeting takes place, negotiation after negotiation

S/PV.7774

is held, and resolution after resolution is adopted
while thunderous bombs continue. Human lives have
been devastated and homes, markets, schools and
hospitals destroyed, in total violation of international
humanitarian law. Despite the laudable efforts of
humanitarian organizations of goodwill, an entire
people is dying and the economy and above the
centuries-old sociocultural heritage of an entire country
is collapsing. How much longer can this go on?
The cause that gathers us under one roof at the
United Nations is peace, which is not only desirable
but necessary. It is mandatory and it is achievable. The
price of peace is never higher than the cost of war. It
is certainly Senegal’s hope that a negotiated solution
to the Syrian crisis is still possible. We saw evidence
of that recently with the first ceasefire agreement
on which the Russians and the Americans were able
to agree. Regrettably, it was quickly breached, but if
both were to take the necessary measures and shoulder
their share of responsibility in the tragedy, I believe
that they would be able to assist the Security Council in
discharging its mission.
In Africa, we say that when two elephants fight,
the grass suffers. The Security Council has reached
its limits. No resolution can be drafted because of the
right of veto. That is why the Security Council must
be reformed. Could a veto be vetoed, perhaps, when
there is a risk of genocide or crimes against humanity?
Should we allow the right of veto to prevent humankind
from ending the situation unfolding right in front of us?
We see the impact of the movement of Syrian refugees
to Europe. Many democracies could crumble under
the weight of extremism. We see its effects in North
Africa — terrorism is taking place in Syria and Libya
and has reached the Sahel and Somalia. Should we wait
until the world collapses under the weight of the Syrian
crisis to act? I believe that it is time for the Council to
take up the tools it needs to discharge its mission and
end the conflict.
Senegal supports the efforts of the International
Syria Support Group and all efforts needed to achieve
effective and lasting peace throughout Syria and
to allow for the unimpeded access of humanitarian
assistance. We also support the establishment of a joint
command centre for information-sharing and improved
cooperation to combat terrorism. I welcome Egypt’s
proposals, which could very much assist its neighbours
in the quest for peaceful solutions. Senegal welcomes
the adoption of a joint, consistent, global strategy to

16-2943315/29

S/PV.7774

The situation in the Middle East

21/09/2016

ensure that the terrorists who are driven out of Syria are
unable to settle elsewhere in North Africa, in particular,
and in the Sahelo-Saharan region.

Japan calls on the international community and all
relevant stakeholders to fully abide by the Security
Council’s Syria-related resolutions.

Similarly, peace must be made among all Syrian
parties in good faith towards a political solution to the
conflict. Such peace is possible because war cannot be
the future of an entire people. I hope for momentum
in the Russian-American dialogue because peace will
depend on a serious agreement being reached between
those two great countries. We should reflect on the
wisdom of a great man of the twentieth century, John
Fitzgerald Kennedy. Fifty-three years ago, in this
very Organization, he himself delivered the following
words, “Mankind must put an end to war, or war will
put an end to mankind” (A/PV.1013, para. 40). Let us
make the right decisions.

In collaboration with the United Nations and
other international organizations, Japan has provided
non-military assistance and aided in creating as
conducive a climate as possible for the political
settlement of the Syrian crisis. Japan has supported
efforts to build societies that are resilient against
violent extremism by combining urgent humanitarian
assistance with development assistance for the people
of Syria and neighbouring countries. That support has
centred on three areas.

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Shinzo Abe, Prime Minister of Japan.
Mr. Abe (Japan) (spoke in Japanese; English
text provided by the delegation): Our agenda today,
the situation in Syria, is an urgent one. This ongoing
international crisis requires a show of solidarity from
the Security Council. We discussed Syria at the Group of
Seven (G-7) Ise-Shima Summit this year and confirmed
the importance of cooperation among G-7 members.
Today, I would like to reaffirm our commitment in the
Security Council.
We deeply deplore the situation that the nationwide
cessation of hostilities based on the agreement
between the United States and Russia is in danger.
The International Syria Support Group was convened
yesterday and the commitment was reaffirmed that the
international community as a whole will support the
agreement. Japan took part in that commitment. The
Security Council must strongly promote the transition
to a political process in which violence is ceased and
humanitarian access is improved under the leadership
of Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura.
The joint investigation of the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
identified those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons in Syria last month. This month, it was reported
that chlorine-based attacks were conducted in Syria.
The use of chemical weapons is utterly unacceptable
in any circumstances. The Security Council must unite
in order to hold perpetrators to account and bring those
responsible to justice. As a member of the Security
Council and the International Syria Support Group,
16/29

First, Japan has extended assistance to all Syrians
inside and outside of Syria. Secondly, Japan has
provided support to vocational training and capacitybuilding programmes for women. Thirdly, Japan has
provided assistance to alleviate the burdens faced by
neighbouring countries in support of regional stability.
It is especially important to bolster efforts to build
societies that are resilient against violent extremism.
In collaboration with the United Nations, Japan has
supported territories liberated from violent extremism
in order to promote stabilization. We have provided
assistance to people who are socially marginalized and
have not received even basic assistance.
As one example, Japan has collaborated with the
United Nations Development Programme to implement
the Emergency Employment Project in northern Jordan,
where the unemployment rate has risen amid a wave
of Syrian refugees. That project has supported jobseeking and business ventures for more than 1,000
young people. Nadia, a Jordanian woman, recalled,
“I cannot forget the moment when I heard over the
phone that I had been accepted to participate in the
project”. Nadia, who has three children, acquired the
necessary knowledge to start a business and decided to
open a kitchen utensil store. We believe that promoting
women’s social participation and developing a sense of
involvement among young people are effective means
to create resilient and tolerant societies and to prevent
violent extremism.
With that in mind, Japan provided more than
$1.26 billion to Syria, Iraq and neighbouring countries
from 2011 to 2015. In addition, Japan is implementing
$1.13 billion of assistance to Syria, Iraq and
neighbouring countries this year. Japan is focusing in
particular on implementing humanitarian aid, including
16-29433

21/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

the provision of food, water and vaccinations, as well
as assistance for economic development and social
stability, including education and vocational training
in collaboration with the United Nations and other
international organizations.
However, the success of Japan’s efforts depends
on how we resolve the current Syrian crisis. Japan
reiterates its determination, as a member of the Security
Council, to work on the matter in a responsible manner
because, first of all, a ceasefire is absolutely important.
Once again, Japan will continue to work on this issue.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ahmad Zahid Hamidi, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Home Affairs of Malaysia.
Mr. Hamidi (Malaysia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening today’s meeting and presiding over the
Council today. Malaysia believes that this meeting is
especially timely and important in the light of the most
recent development in Syria.
I take this opportunity to place on record my
delegation’s appreciation for New Zealand’s strong
leadership, alongside Egypt and Spain, particularly
on the Council’s efforts to address the humanitarian
dimension of the Syrian conflict.
My delegation wishes to underscore its deepest
appreciation and respect for the unflagging efforts of
the United Nations in spearheading the international
response to the Syrian crisis. In this connection, I
thank both the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for their presence and
participation today.
Malaysia is horrified and outraged by the attack on
the United Nations-backed humanitarian convoys near
Aleppo on Monday night. We strongly condemn the
killing of unarmed civilians and humanitarian workers
in that incident as yet another flagrant violation of
international law, which reflects the absolute disrespect,
disregard and contempt that the parties to the conflict
have for the values of humankind.
Malaysia stands in solidarity with other friends
of Syria in helping to alleviate the situation of its
citizens amid this grim reality. In this regard, we have
taken certain steps, including making modest, direct
financial and in-kind contributions to Syrians in need,
especially those in the border areas. We have also
committed to taking several thousand Syrians fleeing
the violence in their homeland, and I am pleased to

S/PV.7774

share with the Council the fact that this initiative has
been implemented.
The bloody and protracted conflict in Syria
continues to sorely test the Council’s ability to
unite around a common approach for a credible and
sustainable political solution to the crisis. Since 2011,
the conflict has metastasized, spawning a humanitarian
crisis of immense proportions that we are all struggling
to contain, as well as provided space and an enabling
environment for the cancerous growth of terrorism,
most notably the rise of Da’esh, whose heinous acts
and barbaric atrocities have reverberated far across
the globe.
Against that background, the Council must remain
resolute and continue to strive for unity and coherence
in both its purpose and action in order to effectively
discharge its Charter-mandated responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security. In noting
the various formats pursued in the process of seeking
to resolve the Syrian conflict, I wish to underscore that
the Council can never be sidelined and has a central
role to play.
At this critical stage, despite some highly publicized
setbacks in recent days, the Russia-United States package
of agreements reached on 9 September represents the
latest concrete effort towards, first, halting the violence
and subsequently laying the groundwork for a credible
and inclusive political process on the future of Syria.
We have also listened very carefully to the views of
the Secretary-General and Special Envoy De Mistura
on a possible power-sharing agreement between the
parties to the conflict. We understand that the primary
aim of these proposals is to end the hostilities, an aim
that we strongly support.
As a current member of the Council, Malaysia’s
support for the implementation of its decisions on Syria
is unwavering, especially those related to the cessation
of violence and on the humanitarian situation.
Particular attention must be given to the protection
of children as the most vulnerable group in any violent
conflict. We were shocked to the core by the bombing
of a maternity hospital in Idlib, which sent babies
crashing to the floor in their incubators. We winced
at images of children gasping for their last breath
after being attacked with chemical weapons; and we
were heartbroken by the sight of 5-year-old Omran
Daqneesh, covered in dust and blood, sitting quietly,

16-2943317/29

S/PV.7774

The situation in the Middle East

alone and in shock, waiting in an ambulance after he
was pulled from the rubble of his family home; many
others, sadly, did not make it out alive.
Despite the countless horrific incidents of children
being bombed, gassed and starved, the parties to the
conflict in Syria seem to have wilfully jettisoned all
reason and humanity, unable to say “enough is enough”
so as to prevent more casualties, especially of children.
We strongly demand that the conflicting parties respect
international humanitarian law, particularly in providing
unfettered humanitarian access and in protecting
civilians and civilian objects, including children, relief
or rescue personnel, schools and hospitals.
While the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) remains relevant, Malaysia is of the view that
moving the political process forward should be guided
by the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015), taken in
parallel with the implementation of the 9 September
Russia-United States arrangement. We call on all
interested partners and stakeholders to support the way
forward as outlined by Special Envoy De Mistura.
Finally, I wish to underscore that Malaysia remains
committed to seeking accountability for the various
violations and abuses committed in the course of the
conflict in Syria. We stand ready to cooperate with
all interested partners, and we will support initiatives
towards this end.
I wish to also convey Malaysia’s utmost appreciation
and respect to the many United Nations system and other
humanitarian actors and agencies, toiling untiringly
in the field and bringing some measure of hope and
dignity to a war-ravaged people.
We can never hope to repay such a debt; however,
it behoves all of us to redouble our efforts to achieve
a durable political solution, so that the guns will fall
silent and that peace, reconciliation and rebuilding of
the Syrian nation can soon commence.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Delcy Eloína Rodríguez Gómez,
Minister of People’s Power for Foreign Affairs of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Ms. Rodríguez Gómez (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Today, as we celebrate
the International Day of Peace, is the ideal moment to
examine the situation in a sisterly country that is part
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, that is, the
Syrian Arab Republic.
18/29

21/09/2016

This year, 3 September, which was just a few days
ago, marked exactly a year since the dissemination of
an image that shocked the international community:
that of the lifeless body of the child Aylan Kurdi,
on a beach in Turkey. That image truly prodoundly
touched the human conscience, embodying as it does
the humanitarian tragedy that the country is living
through: 300,000 deaths; 6.6 million internally
displaced persons; 13.5 million people in situations of
humanitarian emergency; and 4.8 million refugees. The
international community, and we deeply regret having
to say this, has become accustomed to such numbers
as if they were a normal part of daily life. We have lost
the humanitarian dimension in what is really happening
in the situation in Syria. The question is how we got
to this point. It was not due to happenstance or divine
intervention. It was because of the interference of
international Powers that have violated international
law through violation of Syria’s sovereignty, its
independence and the fundamental purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
sought to overthrow a legitimate Government, ignoring
the desire of the Syrian people.
We have not arrived at this point by chance. We
have heard about the use of chemical weapons. We
must seek the truth because, while the international
community has many regrets, it has also been the
victim of imperial lies. Or have we perhaps forgotten
the case of Iraq, where supposed existence of weapons
of mass destruction led to military intervention in
that country in the Middle East. That was not done to
provide happiness, progress or development but, rather,
to sow violence, death and destruction. The only goal
was to grab the natural resources and energy resources
of that fraternal country, which is also a member of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The international community cannot continue to be
subjected to lies sold by the centres of Power through
the international media conglomerates. I have heard
here that citizens are tired of their Governments. No, we
citizens are not tired of our Governments. Citizens are
tired of certain Powers attempting to govern the world.
That is what we are tired of. We are tired of the lack
of norms and regulations, because in our Governments
we comply with the multilateral system of the United
Nations and abide by international treaties.
Just a few days ago, on Saturday, 17 September,
when we met in Margarita at the historic Summit of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, we painfully
16-29433

21/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

witnessed with shock an attack by the United States
against the army of a brotherly country, Syria. That
incident facilitated the advance of terrorist groups on
the ground. How many more such mistakes will we see?
It is very easy to state afterwards that mistakes were
made. But such mistakes cost hundreds of thousands
and even millions of human lives. We cannot simply
remain silent before such a situation when we are told
that mistakes have been made. There are those who are
responsible for the mistakes and we have called on the
Security Council to take action.
When we see that terrorist groups are trying to
take the place of a legitimate Governments and to
disregard the will of the people, we ask ourselves, in
this place, where we are in charge of the maintenance
of international peace and security, who is supporting
them, who provides weapons and who finances the
logistical support for terrorists? Those are truths that
cannot be hidden. Or must we wait another 10 years
before the truth is known?
One cannot continue to lie to the world so shamelessly
and immorally. Clearly, in the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, we see that our Constitution considers the
development of peace not only as a founding principle,
but a fundamental right. We advocate for the right of
the Syrian people to peace and development and for
safeguardng their right to sovereignty. In that regard,
we would join any effort to promote a peaceful political
solution, based above all on respect for the Syrian Arab
Republic’s State institutions and on the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of that brotherly country.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Rodolfo Nin Novoa, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.
Mr. Nin Novoa (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank the New Zealand presidency
for convening this informative, high-level meeting to
address the challenges of one of the main threats to
international peace and security, namely, the current
conflict in Syria, on which we have focussed since the
very beginning. Uruguay particularly appreciates this
meeting because we are convinced that the Security
Council can do much more to mobilize the necessary
political will with a view to achieving negotiated longterm solutions for the Syrian people.
Every three months, the Council meets to analyse
the situation in the Middle East. At each of those
meetings, all Council members emphatically express

S/PV.7774

the urgent need to find solutions to the crisis. Also at
those meetings, my country has stressed the serious
humanitarian crisis facing the Syrian people and the
need to move towards sustainable political solutions.
We have agreed on the need to take measures in that
regard. However, we meet again today to discuss what
more we can do and should do.
We are concerned that, despite the efforts made at
the international level, we have not achieved effective
solutions to respond to the current conflict. We have
not been able to overcome the obstacles to achieving
lasting peace, or to end the suffering of millions of
people. After five years of conflict, we continue to
witness the loss of thousands of innocent lives. We
have seen violations of all human rights of the civilian
population. We have observed the use of warfare
tactics such as hunger. We have struggled to overcome
existing obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian aid
to those most in need. Worst of all, we have witnessed
indiscriminate attacks on civilian targets, including
hospitals and schools.
Those who have been able to flee are unable to
return to their homes. Their lives have been destroyed,
families have been separated and their futures erased.
They do not understand economic, political or strategic
interests. They want solutions, actions, measures and
firm political commitments.
That is why we are here today: to shoulder the
responsibility that has been assigned to the Security
Council. The Syrian population needs an urgent
response from every one of us meeting here. We
must therefore renew our commitment, set aside our
differences and commit to a negotiated solution that will
make possible a way out of the current crisis. Dialogue
requires that all stakeholders respect their obligations
under international law, particularly international
humanitarian law and international human rights law. It
is imperative to respect the provisions of the Council’s
resolutions.
Just over four months ago, the Council adopted
resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection of hospitals
and humanitarian personnel in situations of armed
conflict. However, despite the fact that the resolution
was co-sponsored by more than 80 United Nations
States Members, hospitals continue to be bombed.
No mistake can justify such action while the most
vulnerable continue to be attacked.

16-2943319/29

S/PV.7774

The situation in the Middle East

Now and forever, we condemn the increasing use
of chemical weapons against the civilian population,
which is one of the most flagrant violations of
international humanitarian law, and we repudiate the
use of barrel bombs that do untold harm to the local
populace. Those who are responsible must be identified
by the Joint Investigative Mechanism. In that context,
I reiterate Uruguay’s firmest condemnation of the
activities of terrorist groups operating in the region. We
are convinced that there can be no justification for such
acts, be it political, ideological, philosophical, religious,
ethnic, racial or of any other nature. Similarly, we are
concerned about the growing destabilizing impact of
these groups in the conflict in Syria, which adversely
affect the ability to achieve sustainable solutions to the
aforementioned conflict.
We therefore consider it essential that, together
with the political efforts being exerted in the Syrian
conflict, the commitment to the implementation of
effective and efficient measures against the financing of
terrorist groups be renewed, with a comprehensive and
long-term approach. Similarly, greater efforts should be
made with respect to arms trafficking, regulating trade
and ensuring the effective implementation of the Arms
Trade Treaty. This decision requires the commitment
of all States of the international community, which we
humbly request.

21/09/2016

The shocking images that continuously bombard
us with the horror of this conflict remind us of the
primary role of the Organization and of what we should
be doing. It is in our hands. We can and must do more.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Development of France.
Mr. Ayrault (France) (spoke in French): While
Syria has been mired in tragedy for five years, and
while each passing day propels the country further into
chaos and its people into horror, it is more urgent than
ever to work together to seek to end the conflict. That is
our collective responsibility. The peoples of the world
are watching. They will judge us severely if we fail to
uphold the mission that the Charter of United Nations
entrusts to the Security Council.
An agreement was signed last week by the United
States and Russia. France welcomed it as a response
to an emergency — that of saving human lives. For
five years, civilians have borne the heaviest toll of this
appalling war. Aleppo, a martyr city, symbolizes the
horror of this war. The fighting must stop, humanitarian
assistance must be delivered, and a momentum for peace
must be launched with a view to reaching a political
solution that includes reconstruction and the return of
refugees who have fled by the millions.

We must continue to support the work and efforts
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan
de Mistura. It is essential to restore the dialogue
between the parties so as to reach without further
delay a political, peaceful and Syrian-led solution that
takes nothing but the interests of the Syrian people
into account. Uruguay stresses the importance for this
process to enjoy the support of the United Nations and
the key actors in the conflict.

All of us around this table know how difficult
that is, as recent developments have unfortunately
demonstrated. Yet again, the logic of violence has
prevailed; yet again, the truce has collapsed; yet again,
the Syrian regime has stubbornly pursued its headlong
military strategy, although the military solution is
doomed. We are forced to wonder whether the unspoken
goal may be, after all, the fall of Aleppo and the de
facto partition and effective control of Syria.

In that regard, we are deeply concerned about
the fragility of recent ceasefire agreements. We are
convinced that without the strict compliance of all
stakeholders, a long-term political solution that ensures
peace for the Syrian people will not be possible.
Similarly, the uninterrupted delivery of humanitarian
assistance is essential, and guarantees for such effective
delivery are linked directly to the aforementioned
ceasefire. There can be no humanitarian action without
a ceasefire. We must not forget that the commitment to
peace and security in the region and with the Syrian
people is now a shared commitment.

This vicious cycle has lasted long enough. It has
lasted too long. In this conflict, where there are more
unknowns than knowns, one thing is certain — after
five years of a war that has claimed more than 300,000
dead and displaced millions, it is obvious that nobody
can win by force. There will be no winner, other than
the terrorist organizations that will continue to benefit
from the widespread chaos that will prevail. If there is
one certainty about this conflict, it is that its outcome
can only be political.

20/29

In the face of the Syrian tragedy and the risk of
failure, the time for second thoughts, short-sighted
16-29433

21/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

calculations, tactical considerations and double-talk is
over, inside the Security Council and out. We must first
ensure the sustainability of the cessation of hostilities.
In that regard, the Russian-American agreement is for
now, I repeat, the only proposal on the table. But we
must be clear-sighted; the numerous violations on the
ground are in their overwhelming majority the acts
of the regime and its allies. The heinous bombing of
a humanitarian convoy in Aleppo, which has been
mentioned several times this morning, has outraged
international public opinion. It is a sorry illustration of
the spiral of violence. The constant bombings of medical
facilities and personnel are yet another aspect. The full
truth behind these tragedies and their sponsors must
be revealed, as the Secretary-General noted earlier.
Our common moral duty is to join forces to ensure
respect for the cessation of hostilities. Our collective
commitment must be to ensure the effective, just and
lasting implementation of the truce.
I emphasize that effectiveness is critical if Syrians
are to feel the concrete impact of the cessation of
hostilities. Humanitarian assistance must therefore
be delivered. It can longer be subject to the regime’s
haggling. All bombing of civilians and moderate
opposition groups must stop. Strict monitoring is
vital. Experience teaches us that the regime exploits
truces, applied locally, to focus its military efforts on
other fronts. Why, then, do we not require the regime
to canton all its soldiers, since the effectiveness of the
truce depends on that? I propose, on behalf of France,
that the Security Council work practically to that end.

S/PV.7774

Resolution 2254 (2015), which Mr. De Mistura evoked
again a while ago, provides a road map for a political
transition and a devolution of power.
The United States and Russia of course have special
responsibility for the implementation of the agreement
they negotiated: they co-chair the International Syria
Support Group. But as I said at the International Syria
Support Group (ISSG) meeting, as well as to Sergey
Lavrov and John Kerry, and as I have said here before
members, France is convinced that only collective
mobilization will make it possible to achieve the goals
that I just mentioned. Everyone must take up their
responsibilities. It is true that this approach has its
value, but it also has its limitations. France is therefore
ready to take on its responsibility as part of the new
credible and effective monitoring mechanism we are
proposing. Such a mechanism must make possible
a shared assessment of violations of the truce and
the obstacles to humanitarian access, as well as to
determine consequences. We must leave behind the
approach of mutual accusations, which precipitated the
failure of previous agreements and was not conducive
to an atmosphere of confidence. There is too much
mistrust — a feeling I also noted at the ISSG meeting.
We must therefore create propitious conditions to
move forward. I therefore make this proposal for a new
monitoring mechanism. I have circulated here among
all Council and ISSG members the non-paper we
prepared for discussion.

The second requirement is that of justice, which
demands that no crime be ignored, even in exchange
for a truce. It has been proved that the regime has used
chemical weapons, as has Da’esh. The perpetrators of
those crimes must be punished. There will be no lasting
peace in Syria if there is impunity. It therefore up to
the Security Council, acting under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, to condemn those attacks
and punish the perpetrators. It is a moral duty, but also
an obligation of the international community, which
has wanted to eliminate chemical weapons forever.

Once an effective truce is in place and humanitarian
access is assured, which is the priority, negotiations for
a genuine political transition can, and must, resume. We
know what the parameters are, namely, the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254
(2015), which was mentioned frequently by previous
speakers. The High Negotiations Committee has
presented proposals and is ready to play a constructive
role for a Syria that is open, democratic and respectful
of its diversity. What have we seen from the regime if
not propaganda and delaying tactics? But proposals for
a negotiation? None to date. The burden of evidence is
therefore with them and its allies.

And the third necessity is that of sustainability.
The ceasefire agreement must be sustainable, for it is
essential for creating the conditions for a future peace.
A new governance arrangement must open up political
prospects and create a collective space. Certainly,
one cannot generate new hope around a figure who
divides Syrians and sows mostly death and destruction.

Finally, what is at stake in Syria is also a major
battle against terrorism. That fight has not ended,
nor must it. It must continue, both against Da’esh
and all other groups in Syria that espouse the same
ideology and violence, including, again Da’esh, as
well as Al-Qaida and the Al-Nusra Front. France again
reiterates that that must include all non-jihadist armed

16-2943321/29

S/PV.7774

The situation in the Middle East

groups, which should distance themselves from those
terrorist organizations — and fast.
France is playing its part in this common fight of the
international community against terrorism alongside
the coalition. We are acting militarily against Da’esh
and are prepared to do the same against any terrorist
group, which we must prevent from taking advantage
of the truce to strengthen themselves and prosper.
But nothing will be more useful in the fight against
Da’esh than our collective mobilization to ensure that
at long last Syria once again finds its way towards
peace and stability. If we yield to impotence, fatalism
and resigning ourselves, I think we will bear a heavy
responsibility. The press are already saying that it is all
over, definitively stating that we have failed and that
there is not even a slight chance for a ceasefire to take.
It is up to us here to demonstrate that that is not true
and that there is still hope. We must show that we do
not want to be complicit in the fall of Aleppo — which
I again say is a martyred city — or in the martyrdom of
the Syrian people. France will not resign itself to that.
And I have heard statements here this morning that
inspire me to hold out that hope.
What we need is a burst of will, a burst of
responsibility and a burst of unity to end a conflict that
has lasted far too long. That is the appeal I make before
the Council today in the name of France.

21/09/2016

problem, namely, resolution 2254 (2015), by which we
are all bound. What we lack is the courage and political
will to ensure compliance with our resolutions and
sufficient imagination to envision a political process
that brings about a definitive end to the conflict.
The second point I want to make has to do with
the humanitarian dimension. I will not repeat the
statistics of the terrible consequences of the conflict in
Syria. We all know them. I will also not mention the
consequences of the conflict on host countries, which
are having to bear the enormous burden of refugees.
We heard about that yesterday at a meeting we all
attended. And nor will I refer to the consequences
for Europe. But know that, in large part, the increase
in populism and xenophobic movements is due to the
impact of refugees in our countries. But, as I said, I do
want to talk about the humanitarian situation, although
I will not refer to the consequences of violations of
international humanitarian laws, which is one of the
main result of the conflict. We have spoken of attacks
against civilians. We have talked about attacks against
medical facilities. And we have referred to the use of
prohibited weapons.
There are two consequences to all that. There can
be no impunity for those who have committed such
crimes.

Mr. García Margallo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
My statement will focus on previous views on the
conflict, the humanitarian situation, remarks about
terrorism, the political process and the role of the
United Nations.

Some time ago, Spain proposed establishing an
international criminal court specializing in crimes of
terrorism that would try crimes that the International
Criminal Court and national courts do not have the
authority to try. As our Malaysian colleague noted,
Spain, along with New Zealand and Egypt, Spain has
been a leader on humanitarian issues in the Security
Council, since it is an area we consider particularly
important.

With regard to earlier perceptions, we all agree
that, as with other conflicts in the Middle East, the
roots of the conflict lie in the absence of political
regimes capable of ensuring cohesion among societies
that are intrinsically diverse. As a consequence, as the
French Foreign Minister just said, partial or temporary
solutions will not do. To the contrary, we need lasting
and stable solutions that address all the problems. I
also agree that there is no time to lose. At the moment
we have two avenues before us. The first is a political
framework to address the conflict, including the
Security Council and the International Syria Support
Group, and the second is a legal basis for resolving the

With regard to terrorism, Spain has broad experience
in both its domestic and international forms. In sharing
my thoughts on this with the Council, I should point out
that we are dealing with three levels of action. The first
is pursuing action at the international level, that is, by
doing away with the forums and movements that export
terrorism to the rest of the world. That is being done by
the international coalition of which Spain is an active
member. At the national level, we must eliminate the
flows of foreign fighters who come and go between our
countries and Syria, as well as financial flows and arms
trafficking. In Syria, at the domestic level, it is crucial
that we separate the wheat from the chaff — that is, the

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. José Manuel García Margallo, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Spain.

22/29

16-29433

21/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

moderate opposition groups from those that are clearly
terrorist. I am thinking in particular of Da’esh and the
Al-Nusra Front, as I think we can all agree. However,
we must also convince the 20 groups that have not yet
decided on one side or the other to make up their minds
as to which side of the divide they are on, and we should
then draw the appropriate conclusions.
Regarding the political process that I mentioned
earlier, there can be no lasting peace without dialogue
and reconciliation within Syrian society. I think we all
agree that, to start with, there is no military solution.
Neither side can win the war, and if there is no military
solution we have to reach a political solution based
on dialogue. It cannot be dialogue for its own sake,
however; rather, it must be dialogue aimed at reaching
an authentic national reconciliation — and believe me,
Spaniards know something about that. But I believe
some conditions are essential if that dialogue is to
culminate in reconciliation.
All the parties to the conflict should understand
that the new Syria will not be the precise Syria that they
have fought or are fighting for, but it will be a Syria
that is a common home for all stakeholders of goodwill
who genuinely desire peace. To achieve that new Syria,
various conditions must be met. The first is the return
of exiles, without whose cooperation it will not be
possible to build a new Syria. The second is to avoid
dismantling institutions, so as to avoid the mistakes
we made in Iraq and Libya. The third is to understand
that the Syria we want is an integrated Syria, where
the principle of territorial integrity is respected — we
cannot accept or tolerate the possibility that the conflict
will end with its partition — a plural Syria, because
Syria is a plural society, and a democratic society that
respects human rights.
To make that possible, and to launch a political
process that can result in this new Syria, some
preconditions are essential. The ceasefire must be
guaranteed, and that is absolutely the responsibility
of all us. Access must be ensured for humanitarian
aid to the individuals, populations and communities
that are suffering the most. And a political dialogue
must be facilitated. The latter is the responsibility of
the Security Council, the International Syria Support
Group and in particular those countries that can exert
more influence on the parties to the conflict, whichever
they may be. While we can see that an endless war is
developing in Syria, there are external actors that are

S/PV.7774

taking advantage of the conflict when they are not
actually fomenting it.
I would like to conclude with a quotation from the
Spanish thinker Salvador de Madariaga — himself an
international civil servant — who in 1951, when the
Spanish Civil War was finally over, addressed both the
internal and external opposition, speaking in this very
Organization, with the following words:
“Those of us who once chose liberty and lost
their land and those who chose land and lost their
liberty are reunited to light the way that will lead
us together to both land and liberty.”
Amen to that.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Boris Johnson, Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Mr. Johnson (United Kingdom): I would like to say
to Secretary Kerry that I do not think that the people of
the world are remotely fooled by what is going on in
Syria. They know that this is not just a civil war; it
is a barbaric proxy war, a conflict that is being fed,
nourished, armed, abetted, protracted and made more
hideous by the actions and inactions of Governments
represented in this Chamber. They are looking
to us — grown-ups, people with families, people
who know about the world, people with university
degrees — to set aside our differences and any selfish
sense of strategic national interest and to put the people
of Syria first. That means recognizing that there can be
no political process unless there is a genuine ceasefire,
and that there can be no genuine ceasefire unless there
is a genuine political agreement that we can have a
transition away from the Al-Assad Government.
It is the Al-Assad Government that is responsible
for the vast majority of the 400,000 deaths in Syria,
and that continues to drop barrel bombs on its own
citizens, including two incidents, documented by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
of the dropping of chlorine gas. How can we sit by and
let burning, blistering, barbaric chlorine gas be dropped
on innocent people? As for the monstrous bombing of
aid convoys and medical facilities that we have seen
just in the last day or so, as Mr. Kerry rightly said, there
are only two possible culprits. I hope very much that the
truth will soon emerge about what exactly happened.

16-2943323/29

S/PV.7774

The situation in the Middle East

However, more importantly, laying aside
recrimination, I hope that we will learn that the court of
international opinion will not continue to tolerate this
slaughter. I think the world is looking to us to do more now
than just mouth the empty platitudes of resolution 2254
(2015), but to actually put it into practical effect and get
that peace process and those conversations going again
in Geneva. I think there is scope to build on the vision
for a future for Syria, as laid out by the negotiations
committee, of an open, pluralistic, democratic Syria,
with respect for all minorities. And there is space, as
the President rightly said, to compromise, and there
should not be too many red lines. But above all, we
must use this moment — in particular, the general
debate of the General Assembly — to keep whatever
impetus is left for this precious forward momentum in
the Kerry-Lavrov process. Once again, I pay tribute to
both Mr. Kerry and Mr. Lavrov for their efforts to get
this done and move it forward.
We can do it. The people here in this Chamber can
do it. They can help to produce a ceasefire; they have
proved that before. They can get talks going, and we
can approach these issues in a spirit of compromise.
But we cannot have that spirit of compromise, talks
or ceasefire without the will — as Foreign Minister
García Margallo rightly said in his statement — and the
good will of the people in the Chamber. I believe that it
is possible and that there is the scope for compromise.
I think that it is pretty gloomy now. Let us face it.
Sometimes, the hour is darkest before dawn.
What I really want everybody to think about today
is this. If in a year’s time we are here again in anger
and there are still bombings, killings, slaughter and
massacres going on in Syria, then I am afraid that the
responsibility for that will lie overwhelmingly with the
people broadly represented in this place and above all
with the Al-Assad regime and its sponsors.

21/09/2016

The Security Council shoulders the responsibility for
international peace and security. Our world today is
peaceful in general, but we have witnessed successive
regional disturbances and local conflicts. Traditional
and non-traditional security issues are intertwined, and
international security is complex.
The turbulence in West Asia and North African
fomented by the Syrian issue has been lingering for five
years. That has brought suffering to the countries and
peoples of the region. It has also had grave effects on
international peace and security. Many innocent lives
have been lost. Numerous homes have been destroyed.
Endless conflicts have emerged and receded. All of this
has taught us the following lessons.
First, a political solution remains the only way
out. Responding to violence with violence will only
feed hatred. The use of force will not end conflicts but
fuel warfare. The stakeholders in the Middle East must
pursue dialogue and negotiations to narrow differences,
accommodate the interests of the various parties
and seek the most lasting and sustainable solutions.
The international community must pursue political
settlement with resolve and patience, and provide
sufficient time and space for such efforts.
Secondly, we must address both the symptoms and
root causes. The tensions in the Middle East are complex.
Many issues are intertwined and can be addressed only
with a multi-pronged approach. Improving people’s
livelihoods, fostering a culture of tolerance and
building harmony are fundamental to addressing the
chaos in the Middle East. They are also the essential
means of avoiding new turbulence. Countries should
follow the path of development to maintain their own
conditions. In that regard, there is no standard answer
but only tailored solutions. We must respect the choices
made by States on their own.

Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
New Zealand for having convened this high-level
meeting in the Security Council, and I also appreciate
the fact that you, Sir, the Prime Minister of New
Zealand, have come to preside over this meeting.

Thirdly, we must uphold multilateralism to resolve
the issues in Syria and elsewhere in the Middle East.
The people of the countries concerned should play the
primary role, but the international community should
also provide a helping hand. The United Nations and
the Security Council must play their part as main
channels while other forces should act in a just and fair
manner, doing more to facilitate rather than undermine
their efforts.

Peace is the shared aspiration of people throughout
the world. This very Chamber embodies the vision of
saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war.

To address the issue of Syria, the relevant Security
Council resolutions, especially resolution 2254 (2015),
must be effectively implemented. We remember that,

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Wang Yi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the People’s Republic of China.

24/29

16-29433

21/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

in this very same Chamber, all members unanimously
adopted the resolution, which has laid out the overall
direction for resolving the Syrian issue and established
the principle of a Syrian-owned and led political
process. We believe that we need to pursue progress in
parallel in terms of a ceasefire, political negotiations,
humanitarian assistance and joint efforts aimed at
fighting terrorism. We hope that this year might be a
turning point with regard to the situation in Syria.
We welcome the fact that Russia and the United
States of America have once again reached a ceasefire
agreement on Syria. We appreciate the enormous
efforts they have made to that end. Of course, we hope
that this new agreement will entail new opportunities
for the situation on the ground, but we see that its
implementation is not going smoothly. China expresses
its regret with regard to the air strike on Government
forces and the ensuing casualties. We also find the
recent attacks on the United Nations humanitarian
convoy unacceptable. All parties should strengthen
coordination and cooperation to avoid such occurrences
and ensure the full and effective implementation of the
hard-won ceasefire agreement. That will help foster the
necessary conditions for peace talks and the easing of
the humanitarian situation.
The conflicting parties in Syria should not fight
for victory on the battlefield. They should resolve
their disputes at the negotiation table. China calls for a
timely resumption of the Geneva peace talks. We call
upon all parties to follow the Syrian-owned and -led
political process to arrive at arrangements that meet the
interests of all parties. External forces should not use
the conflict to pursue their selfish goals. They should
contribute to peace. Faced by the grave humanitarian
situation, various parties and factions in Syrian must
open access to humanitarian aid to ensure its timely
delivery. The international community should continue
reach out and help the Syrian people in these difficult
times and assist neighbouring countries in properly
settling refugees.
China will also continue to carry out its own
efforts in this respect. Yesterday and today, Premier Li
Keqiang of China has laid out our positions on various
occasions. He also announced our new humanitarian
assistance programme for refugees and migrants.
Chaos in Syria has fuelled terrorism. We believe that
we should firmly combat all terrorist forces, including
the Islamic State. We should strengthen international

S/PV.7774

cooperation in the fight against terrorism in the three
areas of intelligence-sharing, stopping the use of social
media for spreading extremist ideology, and cutting off
the flow and financing channels of terrorists.
China is a sincere friend of all parties in the Middle
East. We have no selfish interests in the region. The
interests of the people of the Middle East are our
interests. Their concerns are China’s concerns. As a
permanent member of the Security Council, China will
continue to fulfil its responsibilities and play its due
role in ensuring peace and security in the Middle East.
I believe that through joint efforts we will turn sword
into ploughshare and realize peace.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Manuel Domingos Augusto, Secretary
of State for External Relations of the Republic of
Angola.
Mr. Domingos Augusto (Angola): First of all,
we wish to thank the delegation of New Zealand for
organizing this meeting. I take this opportunity to
congratulate New Zealand on the efforts that it has been
making in its presidency of the Security Council to
bridge the gaps between Council members on sensitive
and contentious issues, such as the Syrian conflict.
Today’s meeting is an expression of such efforts.
At this critical juncture, it is vital that the entire
international community diligently and constructively
initiate efforts, taking into consideration the fact that
the people of Syria continue to bear the appalling
consequences of the terrible war. Unfortunately,
political differences and strategic interests continue
to obstruct the prospects for negotiations that might
lead to the attainment of a settlement that would end
the conflict and spare millions of Syrian civilians
from violence, humanitarian catastrophe and an
unprecedented refugee crisis.
We received with optimism the news of the recent
agreement on the cessation of hostilities in Syria
brokered by the Governments of the United States of
America and the Russian Federation as a critical step
towards restarting the political dialogue, improving
the dire humanitarian situation and more effectively
combating the terrorist scourge that has permeated the
Middle East and beyond. The most heinous perpetrators
of terrorist acts and violent extremism — Al-Qaida,
the Taliban, the Al-Nusra Front, Al-Shabaab, Boko
Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
also known as Da’esh — will get stronger if protracted

16-2943325/29

S/PV.7774

The situation in the Middle East

conflicts, such as the one in Syria, where geopolitical
interests take precedence over people’s well-being, are
not resolved.
For more than five years, we have witnessed the
destruction of schools, medical services and other
civilian infrastructure, such as electricity- and waterdistribution facilities, and the erosion of the Syrian
social fabric in general. Despite humanitarian agencies’
efforts to provide assistance to those in need and
the linkage between the provision of humanitarian
assistance and the launching of a meaningful political
process, and even though the official rhetoric on both
sides has been one of de-escalation and the willingness
to resume political negotiations, the reality is that
military gains of strategic importance continue to take
precedence over peace negotiations.
Against the backdrop of this reality, the civilian
population, particularly the younger generation, which
has been forced to flee, has become marginalized,
disenchanted and frustrated and is fertile ground for
an ideology of extremism and hate and an illusionary
sense of purpose and belonging in the face of such deep
social and political grievances. It is crucial that regional
and international stakeholders preserve the political
will that led to the ceasefire and that the understanding
reached be sustained. The time has come for all relevant
actors in the region to redouble their efforts to bring the
parties back to the negotiating table and begin the slow
and arduous process of ending hostilities. This will
in turn allow for the free and unimpeded delivery of
humanitarian aid and the re-establishment of a national
dialogue for a political settlement of this irrational
conflict, with the aim of putting an end to the suffering
of the Syrian people. That should be our main priority.
In conclusion, we would like to acknowledge the
personal commitments undertaken by the United States
Secretary of State, Mr. John Kerry, and the Russian
Federation Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sergey
Lavrov, in brokering the ceasefire agreement, as well
as the tireless efforts of Special Envoy De Mistura to
bridge the existing gaps between the belligerents and
get the Syrian parties and regional and international
stakeholders on the same track, in order to facilitate the
resumption of a more fruitful round of negotiations. It
is our profound wish that the members of the Security
Council, the International Syria Support Group and
other regional stakeholders recognize the long-term
benefits of ending the conflict and exert the necessary
pressure for the resumption of negotiations and for a
26/29

21/09/2016

more effective and united combat against the everexpanding terrorist threat.
The cooperative work of those entities should be
focused on drastically reducing the flow of arms into
Syria, increasing the delivery of humanitarian aid,
establishing as the main priority an end to the conflict
and easing the plight of the innocent civilians trapped
in this bloody war. Hopefully, this debate, together
with our collective endeavours, will galvanize the
international community towards making a more
proactive effort. There is a renewed sense of urgency
to end armed conflicts, as they are at the root of rising
radicalism and extremist ideology in conflict zones and
throughout the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): First and foremost, I wish to inform the
Security Council that, as we meet here today to discuss
the situation in my country, thousands of Syrians,
honest Americans and persons from other countries are
demonstrating on 47th Street, outside the Conference
Building, calling on members of the Council to stop their
bombing of and interference in Syria as well as their
support for terrorist groups. Similar demonstrations are
also taking place in other American cities, including in
the State of California.
This important meeting about my country, Syria,
is being held at a critical time, as we are witnessing
serious disruptions that run contrary to the promising
signs of the past week. This is mainly due to the fact
that the United States disavowed the agreement it had
concluded with the Russian Federation in Geneva on
9 September. It is also due to the unwillingness to
force the armed groups supported by the so-called
international coalition to abide by the aforementioned
Geneva agreement. One must point out that the term
“international”, used to describe this coalition, does
not convey the reality. That is to say, the coalition was
formed outside the realm of international legitimacy,
without a Security Council resolution and without
coordination with the stakeholder, namely, the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. This coalition
is reminiscent of other destructive coalitions to which
many speakers today have referred, coalitions that have
brought nothing but disaster to such countries as Iraq,
Libya and Yemen.
16-29433

21/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

When the United States Administration decided to
intervene unilaterally in my country through air raids,
American officials came to us to say that Washington
would commit not to use American warplanes to target
the Syrian Army or vital infrastructure. Rather, only
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) would
be targeted. I received the personal assurances on that
point from the Permanent Representative of the United
States, who spoke on behalf of her Government. It was
a message conveyed by her Government.
Two years after the establishment of the coalition
and the beginning of the air raids, American officials
have forgotten their promises and their commitments.
American jets are bombing Syrian Army facilities and
vital infrastructure and American soldiers are now
present in Syrian territories. The American military
aggression on eastern Syria, the Turkish military
aggression on northern Syria and the Israeli military
aggression on southern Syria mean, without a shadow
of a doubt, that the proxy war has become a real war and
a true aggression on my country.
My country welcomed the Russian-American
statements on 9 September after both parties agreed
to combat the terrorist organizations, the Islamic State
of Iraq and al-Sham (ISIS) and the Al-Nusra Front,
regardless of their their names. That agreement was
concluded with the knowledge and consent of the Syrian
Government. However, the international community,
represented by the Council, received a horrific shock
before which it stood helpless, unable to issue a
condemnation or express outrage at the very least.
That shock was the unjustified, brutal aggression that
was launched by American, British and Australian and
Danish fighter jets against Syrian Arab Army targets.
The units of our army are combating the ISIS terrorist
organization in the mountainous area of Tharda, in
the vicinity of Deir ez-Zor airport. Those units had
been defending tens of thousands of Syrian civilians
besieged by ISIS in Deir ez-Zor city.
That gruesome attack resulted in numerous
casualties among the officers and soldiers of the Syrian
Arab Army — 83 martyrs and over 100 wounded. The
aggression, which lasted for an entire 50 minutes of air
raids and was preceded by reconnaissance flights by
drones over two days, paved the way for ISIS terrorists
to enter the military site of the Syrian army that was
targeted deliberately before the Syrian army was able to
recapture it again. To add insult to injury, our soldiers
and the wounded were victims of another air strike by

S/PV.7774

drones while they were evacuating their positions in
Tharda after it was targeted.
Before
that
deliberate
and
unacceptable
aggression, my country had been focusing on the issue
of disassociating terrorist groups, in line with the
statement of the International Syria Support Group
issued at a meeting in Vienna on 14 November 2015.
That is to say, we wanted to determine those that are
terrorist groups, those that are not and those that can be
considered to be opposition groups. However, it appears
that 10 months were not enough for some to solve this
puzzling mystery. It appears that some suffered from an
early bout of Alzheimer’s disease while trying to solve
this mystery.
Along the same lines, Damascus expected
Washington to fulfil its commitments in this regard
by putting an end to the policies and practices of
certain well-known countries that sponsor and support
terrorism politically, logistically, financially and
ideologically through the media. We expected an end
to the influx of terrorists, weapons and funding from
countries neighbouring Syria through the borders and
the use of terrorism as a tool for political blackmail.
American reconnaissance aircraft, surveillance
satellites and intelligence services failed to distinguish
between ISIS and those fighting ISIS. The so-called
international coalition failed to do so. It is no stranger
to such failure. For years the coalition failed to detect
thousands of foreign fighters that came to Syria and
Iraq from around the world, an issue that was dealt
with, thankfully, by a speaker in the Council today.
They failed to detect convoys of armed vehicles and
thousands of ISIS terrorists who travelled from Iraq to
Palmyra in a long journey of over 200 kilometres across
the Syrian desert. They failed to detect thousands of
lorries that steal and smuggle Syrian oil to Turkey in
order to fund the attacks of ISIS. They also failed to cut
off the funding of terrorist organizations, even though
they know very well the origin and destination of every
dollar that reaches ISIS and the Al-Nusra Front. The
only success they were able to achieve was to fabricate
false accusations, made-up incidents, politicized
reports and edited videos about the suffering of Syrians
to demonize the Syrian Government and its allies.
It is quite astonishing that the United States
Secretary of State would use the testimony of a so-called
eye witness who noticed planes over the humanitarian
convoy that was attacked yesterday in northern Syria.

16-2943327/29

S/PV.7774

The situation in the Middle East

The testimony of that eye witness, who is a member
of the so-called moderate armed opposition, the Syrian
opposition, was sufficient to establish that the air
bombing of this humanitarian convoy occurred and for
Mr. Kerry to accuse both the Syrian and the Russian
Governments. My question is, can one individual in a
crowded area that is inhabited by thousands of people,
can he, on his own, notice airplanes, while others,
thousands who live in this area, did not see these air
strikes? The issue of eye witnesses is a laughable one,
especially when we are reminded that those who accuse
the Syrian Government of using chemical weapons
relied on a single eye witness account who saw orange
smoke. That is what we were told by the Syrian
opposition. No one was there — neither the Turkish
army, nor the American army nor the terrorists who
stole Syrian helicopters from where they were parked
at the airport.
To refresh the memory of Council members, I
want to recall the mistakes by American officials. It
appears that the American side does not learn from
its mistakes. Since the establishment of the so-called
international coalition, American forces made several
mistakes. It mistakenly bombed an elementary school
for the visually impaired in the city of Raqqah and it
mistakenly air-dropped assistance over Ayn Al-Arab
city that included weapons and rockets that fell into
the hands of ISIS terrorists. It mistakenly killed Syrian
civilians near the city of Raqqah, while claiming to
target a weapons factory for ISIS. The gravest mistake
was subsequently committed by a French and American
forces when a joint air raid resulted in the death of over
200 civilians near Aleppo in the town of Manbij. One
Council member deplored the situation in Aleppo just a
few minutes ago. We note that 200 civilians were killed
near that very city in a joint air raid carried out by the
international coalition.
The latest wave of false accusations levelled
at my Government included the allegation that we
targeted a humanitarian convoy outside of Aleppo.
Such accusations are part of a filthy propaganda war
that was launched by well-known parties to exploit the
suffering of the Syrian people for the sole purposes of
scoring cheap points in the press, employing political
blackmail and upholding their agendas with no regard
for the heavy toll paid by the Syrian people whenever
those same parties reject any solution that is not in line
with their agendas. thereby prolonging the crisis.
28/29

21/09/2016

My country, Syria, has warned of the attempts
of certain regional parties to torpedo the AmericanRussian agreement ever since it was announced and
before it entered into force. I want to draw attention
to the heinous Israeli attacks on Syrian territory in
recent weeks, which intensified once the AmericanRussian agreement to combat the Al-Nusra Front and
other terrorist organizations, such as the Al-Yarmouk
Martyrs Brigade, was announced. The Department of
Peacekeeping Operations remains suspiciously silent
although we have sent many letters to the Council about
the Israeli violations and the treatment of terrorists in
Israeli hospitals.
I also wish to draw attention to the illegitimate
Turkish military operations within Syrian territory,
launched under the pretext of combatting Islamic State
of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) without prior coordination with
the Syrian Government and the Russian operations
command, which is a crime of aggression according
to the Charter of the United Nations and the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure. It is a violation of
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. That is in
line with remarks made by Turkish officials indicating
that their Government wanted to deliver humanitarian
assistance to the city of Aleppo without coordination
with the Syrian Government or the United Nations.
My country is ready to resume intra-Syrian
dialogue without preconditions and according to the
decisions and foundations that launched this dialogue
in order to reach a political solution decided by Syrians
and Syrians alone, without foreign intervention or
interference, so that Syrians can decide their future
and their options through their own leaders in a manner
that would ensure Syria’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. Syria will not become another Libya or
Iraq — we will never allow it.
In that regard, we reaffirm that the success of any
political process in Syria will require engagement,
cooperation and full coordination with the Syrian
Government as the main partner in any related domain.
No committee, meeting or conference organized to
resolve the crisis can succeed while some international
parties seek, willingly or unwillingly, to exclude or
marginalize the Syrian Government, cast doubt on its
cooperation with the United Nations or undermine the
success it has achieved in promoting and upholding
national reconciliation based on the voluntary
disarmament of foreign fighters and accompanied
by the normalization of their status, the issuance of
16-29433

21/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

pardons and their departure to other areas. That, in
turn, will allow normal life to resume to in the areas
they vacate and State institutions to restore the services
they once provided.
I have a final question. Can we allow hundreds
of armed groups and tens of thousands of terrorists to
continue their terrorist attacks against my Government,
my army and Syria’s infrastructure, as they have done
for over five and a half years? Can they continue
without external support? That is a legitimate question,
and I believe it should be acknowledged. We should not
be misled into believing that the situation in Syria is a
civil war.
The President: The representative of the United
States has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): As Secretary
Kerry quoted earlier in this session, Senator Daniel
Patrick Moynahan had said my colleagues are entitled
to their own opinions but not to their own facts. Let
us just keep in mind the facts of who is prolonging
the suffering of the Syrian people. The last speaker’s
statement was so full of untruths that I feel no need to
say anything further.
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Turkey, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representative
of Turkey to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the

S/PV.7774

relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I call on the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): I have asked for the floor to
reply to the statement made by the representative of
Syria.
The Turkish position on the political, security and
humanitarian aspects of the Syrian conflict were shared
yesterday with the United Nations membership at the
highest political level. I have nothing to add on that
score, yet I wish to emphasize our dismay with certain
parts of the statement delivered by the representative
of the regime. The statement contained distorted facts
and baseless accusations, including some levelled at
Turkey. We reject them in their entirety.
This meeting, on the other hand, was instrumental
in facilitating the exchange of views at the political
level with regard to matters of mutual interest and
importance concerning Syria. However, the utility of
the meeting could have been considerably enhanced
should the voice of the genuine representative of the
people Syria, from the High Negotiations Committee,
be heard as well. We are confident that such a day will
come soon. We are equally confident that, eventually,
those responsible for the destruction of Syria and the
suffering of the Syrian people will be held accountable
for the crimes they have committed. Until then, Turkey
will stand by the democratic expressions of the Syrian
people.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

16-2943329/29
