S/PV.9118

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9118

th meeting
Monday, 29 August 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun/Mr. Geng Shuang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Ndung’u
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-47481 (E)
*2247481*

S/PV.9118

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Markus
Potzel, Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral (Political) for Afghanistan; and Ms. Lucy
Morgan Edwards, independent researcher and author.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: People in Afghanistan continue
to face extreme hardship and uncertainty. Let me
share some numbers with the Security Council. Close
to 19 million people are facing acute levels of food
insecurity, including 6 million at risk of famine. More
than half of the population, some 24 million people,
need humanitarian assistance. An estimated 3 million
children are acutely malnourished, including more
than 1 million estimated to be suffering from the most
severe, life-threatening level of malnutrition. Without
specialized treatment, those children could die. The
malnutrition crisis has been fuelled by recurrent
droughts, including in 2021 the worst drought seen in
three decades, whose effects are still lingering. Eight
out of ten Afghans drink contaminated water, making
them susceptible to repeated bouts of acute watery
diarrhoea. Some 25 million people are now living
in poverty and three quarters of people’s income is
spent on food. There has been a 50 per cent decline
in households receiving remittances, unemployment
could reach 40 per cent and inflation is rising owing
to increased global prices, import constraints and
currency depreciation.
Those relentless layers of crisis persist at a time
when communities are already struggling. In June, a
2/26

29/08/2022

5.9 magnitude earthquake affected more than 360,000
people living in high-intensity impact areas. Since July,
heavy rains have led to massive flash floods across the
country and indeed the region, killing and injuring
hundreds of people and destroying thousands of homes
and thousands of acres of crops. Afghanistan has also
witnessed unprecedented levels of internal displacement
and population movement. Some 5.8 million people
remain in protracted internal displacement, requiring
long-term solutions. Those are the figures. They are
devastating and frankly difficult to comprehend. We
worry that they will soon become worse. Once the cold
weather sets in, food and fuel prices, which are already
high, will skyrocket. Families will have to choose
between feeding their children, sending them to school,
taking them to a doctor when they fall sick or keeping
them warm.
Afghanistan’s problems are unfortunately neither
new nor unique. Conflict, poverty, climate shocks and
food insecurity have long been a sad reality for both
Afghanistan and many other countries around the
world. But let me outline what makes Afghanistan’s
current situation so critical.
First, large-scale development assistance has
been halted for a year. Before the Taliban’s takeover,
Afghanistan was already facing severe levels of food
insecurity and malnutrition — levels that have, of
course, further deteriorated since development aid was
halted — affecting families everywhere, from rural
communities to urban centres.
Secondly, the operating environment is extremely
challenging. Engaging with the de facto authorities
at national and subnational levels is labour intensive.
There is no confidence in the domestic banking sector,
which means that Afghanistan is heading into a severe
liquidity crisis. International financial transactions
are extremely hard owing to de-risking and the
overcompliance of global banks. Humanitarians have
brought in more than $1 billion in cash to sustain
programme delivery, but the liquidity and banking
crisis continues to affect the delivery of assistance and
the daily lives of Afghans. The humanitarian-exchange
facility that we have discussed before, intended
to temporarily and partially alleviate the liquidity
issue, is still under negotiation and review by the de
facto authorities.
Women and girls have been pushed to the sidelines,
as we have also observed here in this Chamber. The
meagre gains that the country had made to protect
22-47481

29/08/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

women’s rights have been quickly reversed. It has been
more than a year since adolescent girls in Afghanistan
last set foot inside a classroom. We should not need to
explain in the twenty-first century why girls’ education
and women’s empowerment are important — to girls
and women, their communities, their countries and
indeed all of us. Afghanistan is not just a humanitarian
crisis. It is an economic crisis. It is a climate crisis. It
is a hunger crisis. It is a financial crisis. But it is not a
hopeless crisis.
Humanitarian organizations have done their
utmost to provide the population in Afghanistan with
a lifeline. Despite the many challenges that we have
just been reviewing, United Nations agencies and
non-governmental-organization partners have mounted
an unprecedented response over the past year, reaching
almost 23 million people in need of humanitarian
assistance. We all expanded our humanitarian operations
to reach affected communities in all 401 districts of
Afghanistan’s 34 provinces. That was possible because
of a reduction in conflict, the introduction of cash
shipments — the $1 billion that I referred to — and the
adoption of resolution 2615 (2021).
But of course humanitarian aid will never be able
to replace the provision of system-wide services to
40 million people across the country and the need to
support those services on a sustainable basis. Preserving
basic service delivery alongside humanitarian assistance
remains the only way to prevent a catastrophe even
greater than what we have seen over the past many
months. Poverty is deepening, the population is still
growing and the de facto authorities have no budget to
invest in their own future. I am sure it is clear to all of
us that some development support has to be restarted.
Humanitarian programming must and will continue, but
the United Nations country team in Afghanistan, under
the exceptional leadership of Ramiz Alakbarov, the
resident and humanitarian coordinator, is developing its
strategic framework for 2023 to address those broader
basic human needs.
More than 70 per cent of Afghans live in rural
areas. If agriculture and livestock production are not
protected, millions of lives will be at risk and the
country’s capacity to produce food for its population
imperilled. Hospitals and clinics at the district and
national levels must be kept running and their staff
employed and paid. Nutrition centres and preventive
care must be maintained. Those are all the basic services
to which we refer. Outreach to financial institutions to

S/PV.9118

mitigate against bank de-risking must be stepped up,
and we must continue to work to ensure that girls and
women are educated and employed and free to do so.
The consequences of inaction on both the humanitarian
and development fronts will be catastrophic and
difficult to reverse.
Currently, the humanitarian response plan for
Afghanistan has a gap of $3.14 billion, with more than
$600 million urgently required to support priority
winter-preparation activities, such as upgrades and
repairs to shelter, the provision of warm clothes and
blankets and so forth. We are up against time. Those
particular contributions are needed within the next
three months. In addition, $154 million is needed to
pre-position supplies, including food and livelihood
assistance, before the winter weather cuts off access
to certain areas. The humanitarian community has
stayed and delivered for the people of Afghanistan and
continues to do so. It is imperative that the international
community, as reflected in the Security Council,
continue to do the same.
Afghanistan’s de facto authorities must also do
their part. Bureaucratic interferences and procedures
slow down humanitarian assistance when it is needed
most. Female humanitarian aid workers — both
national and international — must be allowed to work
unhindered and in safety. And girls must be allowed
to continue their education. There are many musts, but
there are many opportunities. The path is clear and the
dangers equally so. The people of Afghanistan are still
there. They have shown incredible resilience over the
decades and in this past year. Our task is to help them
to prosper, flourish and be safe.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Potzel.
Mr. Potzel: The focus of the request for this
briefing has been on the humanitarian and economic
situation, and I fully endorse the comments by my
colleague Mr. Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Since the
takeover by the Taliban one year ago, the United Nations
has remained exceptionally focused on addressing the
humanitarian and human needs in Afghanistan. And,
as Mr. Griffiths stated, the needs in Afghanistan
continue to be significant. In just a few weeks I am
scheduled to brief the Security Council on the overall
situation in Afghanistan. In addition, the Security

22-474813/26

S/PV.9118

The situation in Afghanistan

Council will soon receive a report from the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Afghanistan. But given this
opportunity, I would like to provide a few thoughts on
the current situation.
First, the current regime in Afghanistan has not
been recognized by any member of the international
community. The reasons for that are clear. The
international community has norms regarding
human rights — especially those of women and
girls — representative governance and international
collective security. Afghanistan is part of the
international system, and the Taliban needs to adhere to
its international obligations, but instead it is requesting
recognition based on the fact that it has secured
territorial control.
Secondly, there is no question that the sanctions on
the Taliban have affected the Afghan economy since
the Taliban took control. That has been documented
in previous reports of the Secretary-General, who has
also called for measures to allow the Afghan economy
to breathe. They include efforts to facilitate access to
assets belonging to the Afghan Central Bank for the
benefit of the Afghan people, in addition to international
assistance that supports basic human needs — in other
words, interventions that go beyond merely providing
humanitarian assistance and also support the resilience
of Afghan communities. Humanitarian aid is not a
long-term solution. Poverty reduction, as well as the
delivery of basic goods and services, must ultimately
rely on sustained economic growth. Donors have
repeatedly stated that a resumption of economic
cooperation hinges primarily on Taliban action to
reverse regressive policies.
Thirdly, the Taliban de facto authorities are faced
with a growing number of governance challenges.
Ignoring persistent rumours of internal differences, the
Taliban continues to present itself as a unified, cohesive
governing entity. The Kabul-based Cabinet meets
regularly, with outcomes of meetings reported publicly
by the de facto authorities. However, the relationship
between the Cabinet in Kabul and the Kandaharbased Taliban leader Haibatullah Akhunzada remains
unclear. Practices governing by decree and through
policy decisions, which are declared to be in line with
Islam and Afghan traditions, have further curtailed
fundamental human rights and freedoms, especially for
women and girls, such as the 23 March announcement
of the continued closure of secondary education for
4/26

29/08/2022

girls. Today Afghanistan is the only country in the
world that denies girls a full right to education.
The past three weeks have seen the highest number
of civilian casualties in a one-month period since
15 August 2021, in a series of improvised explosive
device attacks in Kabul, most of them claimed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province
(ISIL-KP). Such attacks often target specific ethnic and
religious groups. We are encouraged to hear that the de
facto authorities are looking into what can be done to
ensure greater security for those communities.
In July, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) released its report entitled
Human Rights in Afghanistan, covering the 10-month
period between the Taliban takeover on 15 August
2021 and 15 June of this year. It reflects the human rights
priorities set out in the UNAMA mandate given by the
Council. UNAMA documented human rights violations
targeting specific groups, such as former Government
officials and members of the Afghan national defence
and security forces; individuals accused of affiliation
with ISIL-KP and the National Resistance Front; civil
society, media and women, including those accused
of so-called moral crimes. UNAMA is particularly
concerned about reports of action taken by de facto
officials of the committee for the promotion of virtue
and prevention of vice that has resulted in the verbal
harassment, ill-treatment and arbitrary arrest of people
as they go about their daily lives. Attacks on human rights
defenders, journalists and media workers, combined
with the impact of broader policy measures taken by
the de facto authorities, have had a chilling effect on
freedom of the media and civic activism. Last week’s
inaugural meeting of the Media Violation Commission
is a welcome development, if indeed it works to prevent
further restrictions on the free media space.
Lastly, I would like to commend the region’s response
to the current situation. Afghanistan’s neighbours
are the most immediately affected and sometimes
feel threatened by events in Afghanistan. They have
responded by convening meetings at the foreign
minister level, first in Islamabad and then in Tehran
and Beijing. The Organization of Islamic Cooperation
has also mobilized, holding a special meeting at the
Foreign Minister level in Islamabad last year. Last
month, an International Conference on Afghanistan
took place in Tashkent, with the participation of a highlevel Taliban delegation. Discussions focused on the
importance of counter-terrorism and counter-narcotic
22-47481

29/08/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

efforts, economic and infrastructure development,
inclusive governance and respect for human and civil
rights, especially the rights of women, including the
education of girls. It is especially important for the
Taliban to understand that their neighbours, regional
partners and the wider Islamic world want them to be
part of the international community. Afghanistan is
a landlocked country that depends on its neighbours
for access to trade routes, but it is also a country with
tremendous potential resources, which if properly
harnessed could benefit Afghanistan, the region and
the rest of the world.
As I have mentioned, I will have more to tell the
Council a few weeks from now about the specific
situation in the country. I believe that Afghanistan
has not recovered from serious geopolitical shocks
and interventions by foreign Powers. None of those
interventions have achieved their designs. All of them
have altered Afghanistan in ways that were unexpected
and often unhelpful. Despite immense resources
expended over the past few decades, Afghanistan
remains significantly underdeveloped, vulnerable and
in need of international assistance. United Nations
officials and UNAMA, including through the Mission’s
11 field offices across the country, continue to engage
with the de facto authorities. They facilitate engagement
between the de facto authorities, community leaders,
religious groups, women and civil society, aimed at
promoting inclusive and participatory governance and
rights and freedoms.
The Taliban has been ambiguous about to the
extent to which it wants to engage, which it predicates
on alignment with its interpretation of sharia law.
It is vital to move beyond an exchange of hardened
positions towards sustained dialogue among the
Taliban, other Afghan stakeholders, the wider region
and the international community, dialogue that should
place the interests of all Afghans at its centre. The
future stability of Afghanistan rests on meeting the
needs of the Afghan people, preserving their rights
and reflecting the country’s diversity in all governance
structures. Let us all look ahead and together improve
the situation rather than dwell on the past.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Potzel for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Morgan Edwards.
Ms. Morgan Edwards: A year after the United
States withdrawal from Kabul, Afghanistan is verging

S/PV.9118

on complete economic collapse, with severe food
insecurity, the rise of extremism and fragmentation
of the social order evident. An informed insider who
recently left Kabul told me last week that the situation
was reverting to that of 1992 and 1993, when fighting
among factions turned Kabul into a battle zone, with
civilians caught in the middle.
The rapid disintegration of Afghanistan following
the departure of the international community last year is
no surprise. To those paying attention, the signs of how
it would all end were already visible in 2001. Incredibly,
the same Western media sirens, led by the BBC, which
in September 2001 cheered on the military invasion
of Afghanistan — telling a gullible Western public
that it would lead to a liberal-style democracy — by
August 2021 were feigning surprise that the Taliban
had taken Kabul so quickly. But Taliban political
influence in rural areas grew exponentially from 2003
in proportion to the broken promises, corruption, brutal
militarized response and extrajudicial killing overseen
by the West. The fact that the Taliban initially regained
influence in rural areas by providing shadow governors
to assist with the resolution of disputes and other
services is testament to the carelessness of the West in
Afghan matters. To know why that catastrophic failure
occurred, it is necessary to understand what the main
characteristics of the post-2001 Western intervention of
Afghanistan encompassed. I list them as follows.
The first is impunity. The return and support of
unindicted warlords by Western intelligence in October
2001 proved fatal to the State-building project. It led to
knock-on effects on security, human rights and the rule
of law. I witnessed the political rehabilitation of those
allies of the West, newly empowered financially, at the
2002 emergency Loya Jirga, where I was an observer.
CNN and the BBC trumpeted the Loya Jirga as a
rebirth of Afghan democracy and obsessed over images
of Afghan women putting ballots in boxes. Behind the
scenes, the emergency Loya Jirga was overseen by the
Central Intelligence Agency and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, with United
States Ambassador Khalilzad publicly humiliating
and preventing the participation of the beloved former
king and enabling the participation of warlords and the
intimidation of democratically elected candidates by
armed groups and Northern Alliance internal security.
The corrosive issue of impunity and its effect
on the rule of law and therefore legitimacy and the
ability to build a State is an issue I focused on in my

22-474815/26

S/PV.9118

The situation in Afghanistan

doctoral research. The West failed to engage in such
concepts, preferring instead to impose its own version
of a so-called liberal democracy on Afghanistan.
Unfortunately, the result was a corrupt network State.
At a supranational level, the International Criminal
Court has also failed to indict any parties for grave
human rights abuses in Afghanistan, whether State or
non-State actors.
The second factor was the failure to support
human rights. Despite promises about a new era of
human rights and women’s rights, the West failed to
adequately fund or support the newly created Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission. It also failed
to support work on transitional justice or even truth and
reconciliation, South African-style. One example was
the site of the Dasht-i-Leili killings of members of the
Taliban who were captured by Commander Dostum in
late 2001. Mass burial sites were left unprotected and
the perpetrators unindicted because the crimes had been
committed by a Western ally. That climate of impunity
further emboldened warlords to return to their fiefdoms
to engage in illicit activities such as the expropriation of
property and children or drug trafficking, intimidation
and murder.
By 2005, when I visited NATO countries’ provincial
reconstruction teams, I found that NATO commanders
thought it appropriate to use local warlords to guard
the perimeter fences of their bases. Meanwhile, local
Afghans complained to me of the abuses committed by
the same NATO allies and felt that their concerns were
of no consequence to the West. People therefore turned
to the Taliban.
Thirdly,
there
were
military
operations
characterized by the killing of civilians, failed
intelligence and war crimes. They included, for
example, accusations that British special forces had
committed extrajudicial killings of detainees in 2011,
and that Operation Enduring Freedom and NATO had
bombed civilian gatherings, including weddings. The
United States’ 22,000-pound mother of all bombs
dropped on civilians in the Shinwar region of eastern
Afghanistan in 2017 exemplified the inhumanity of the
entire operation.
Fourthly, there was a failure to understand the
legitimate local leadership and to work with the tribal
system in rural areas. In that regard, I would add that
starting with the Bonn Agreement, many important
Pashtun tribal leaders who should have been invited to
the state-building project at the very beginning were
6/26

29/08/2022

excluded. I would also add that the peace plan, already
prepared by Commander Abdul Haq, which had buy-in
from all sides by 9/11, was well known in Washington
and London before the events of 9/11. Abdul Haq, who
was known as a brilliant commander during the 1980s
war against the Soviet Union, warned that a bombing
campaign by the West after 9/11 would change the
political landscape overnight, disrupting the elaborate
framework of cells that he had built up within the
Taliban to topple the regime internally. I document that
extensively in my book. Abdul Haq had also warned
of the extremism being fostered in training camps and
madrasas in the early 1990s.
Fifthly, with regard to corruption, as we were
warned by former President Eisenhower, General
Smedley Butler and, more recently, Julian Assange,
the money-making nexus for the military-industrial
complex that extorts the United States and European
taxpayer has been catastrophic in Afghanistan. The
human and financial costs of the war have been
extensively documented by scholars at the Watson
Institute for International and Public Affairs at Brown
University. They estimate financial spending of
approximately $8 trillion on the post-9/11 wars through
fiscal year 2022, or $300 million a day, paid by United
States taxpayers to fund the war in Afghanistan. The
human costs have included indiscriminate bombings
of innocent civilians. They have also been documented
by the Watson Institute, and, of course, the women
and children whom we were supposed to be going
into Afghanistan to assist have borne the brunt of
those illegitimate bombing campaigns. The United
States spent approximately $148 billion on supposedly
rebuilding Afghanistan. Yet the Special Inspector
General for Afghanistan Reconstruction has reported
many instances in which money was spent on useless
white-elephant projects that were simply unable to
be used.
Such failures lead to the suspicion that the projects
were more about recycling United States taxpayer
money back to military-supply contractors or arms
companies with links to the United States political
class, from Unical to Lockheed Martin, Raytheon,
Halliburton and others. There was also the failure to
involve Afghans in the design and implementation of
projects generally, which of course has been disastrous
for longer-term viability. Huge amounts were spent on
training the Afghan National Army and police force,
and a great deal focused on supplying them with
United States military equipment, much of which, as
22-47481

29/08/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

we know, was left behind in Afghanistan a year ago.
Yet salaries were often embezzled by Government
officials, and soldiers were poorly trained and unable to
function without United States air power. The Special
Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction has
documented the waste and failure of those schemes.
Lastly, there was the failure to support Afghan
agriculture, which had always been the heart of the
economy, with 80 per cent of the population previously
involved, directly or indirectly. With land, water,
labour and experience, the focus on agriculture would
have been the easiest way to develop the economy,
enable people to participate and become self-reliant and
food-secure. One of my interlocutors says that today
Afghanistan is 50 years behind what it used to be in
the area of agriculture. It is importing citrus fruit from
Pakistan, although citrus had previously been exported
from Nangarhar, for example. With more than 90 per
cent of Afghans today not having sufficient food, it
is obvious that agriculture should have been a major
focus. Indeed, when I worked for the World Food
Programme (WFP) in the spring of 2002, I was shocked
to see that the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations had just a handful of international
staff on site. It was perhaps two people, compared to the
hundreds that the WFP was employing at the time. The
focus of the WFP on bringing United States wheat into
Afghanistan has consequently also enabled farmers to
grow more opium, since their markets for wheat have
been very distorted.
These factors indicate extreme deception about
what was really at the heart of the 20-year Western
occupation of Afghanistan and what prompted the
sudden withdrawal. Far from building a stable State
that could never again be host to terrorism, it appears
that the entire project was more about recycling United
States and NATO countries’ taxpayer money into the
coffers of private business interests. When I published
my book in 2011, I naively asked an American former
intelligence officer based in Geneva how the United
States had managed to fail so miserably in Afghanistan.
His response was, “Just follow the money. To some
people, the whole project has been a staggering success”.
He urged me to look at the writings of Frida Berrigan
on the military-industrial complex. Ten years later,
with the 20 August 2021 withdrawal and Afghanistan
left as a hulking shell of itself in economic collapse,
with the rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and renewed insecurity, his words ring very true today.

S/PV.9118

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Morgan Edwards for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his assessment of
the situation in Afghanistan. We listened closely to
Deputy Special Representative Markus Potzel and
Ms. Morgan Edwards, who worked in the country for
many years in various areas and saw first-hand the
years of intervention by the United States and NATO.
Tomorrow will mark exactly one year since the
withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan. On
30 August 2021, the whole world saw the images of
a United States Boeing aircraft leaving Kabul with
panicked ordinary Afghans clinging to its landing gear.
We all remember well that that was preceded by a major
internal political change that ushered in a new phase.
After 20 years of bloody war, the former President
Ashraf Ghani shamefully fled Kabul, followed by many
other Afghan actors. The Taliban’s return to power in
the country was totally unexpected, including by those
who had recently been talking up the level of combat
effectiveness of the highly trained Afghan forces.
Today’s meeting could provide a good opportunity
to discuss the outcome and consequences of the
ignominious 20-year campaign in Afghanistan, which
cost the lives of the many thousands of ordinary
Afghans and American soldiers, resulted in hundreds
of thousands of injuries and cost $2 trillion that could
have been spent on good causes. However, we harbour
no illusions in that regard. Over the past 12 months,
we have all seen Washington hypocritically try to shift
the responsibility for the failure of its 20-year war and
the current deteriorating situation onto the current
authorities. At the same time, as we recall, in trying
to cast the United States in a positive light, President
Joe Biden announced that it had achieved all its goals
in Afghanistan.
I should remind the Council that the Americans
went into Afghanistan on a specific mission, to counter
terrorism. In fact, their arrival only strengthened its
status as a centre of terrorism and drug production and
distribution. Together with the presence of Al-Qaida
and its affiliated groups, the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS) emerged and firmly strengthened

22-474817/26

S/PV.9118

The situation in Afghanistan

its influence in Afghanistan, which for all practical
purposes was controlled by Americans and Western
allies. We have been talking about this since 2017, but our
Western partners have acknowledged it only recently.
And yet the potential of ISIS fighters has been steadily
increasing all this time, including thanks to financial
support from abroad and the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters with combat experience from fighting in other
crises around the world.
The increase in drug production over these years
has also reached an unprecedented level. The country
literally turned into a breeding ground for terrorism
and drugs before our very eyes, and the effective fight
against those threats — as our Western colleagues
claimed — is the reason that the United States and
NATO retained their presence there for many years.
All our calls to highlight the growing threat from
ISIS and Afghanistan came up against the clear desire
of Western colleagues to downplay its scope, or even
sweep the topic under the rug. At the same time, the
United States had many opportunities and time,
including the material, military and technical means,
to eliminate terrorists in Afghanistan. The foreign
military contingents that were in the country, however,
hypocritically continued to pretend that the drug
problem did not exist, even though the flow of Afghan
heroin at that time had already reached many Western
European countries. Over these years, there has been no
answer to the repeated questions in the Chamber about
unidentified helicopters transporting ISIS fighters and
their weapons to various parts of the country, including
the north, under conditions of full control over the
situation by coalition forces, as we were assured.
On the contrary, during all these years we have
constantly heard from Western colleagues about efforts
to strengthen the combat-ready capacity of the Afghan
National Security Forces, the effectiveness of their
training and control over the security situation.
Against that backdrop, the country’s socioeconomic
situation has remained dire. Incidentally, during the
Soviet years more than 140 enterprises were built in
the country, including industrial ones. They became the
backbone of the economy and laid a solid foundation for
the independent sustainable development of the country.
In addition, schools were built, student exchanges were
carried out and refresher courses were held. How many
enterprises were built or restored during the 20 years of
NATO’s presence in country? The answer is zero.
8/26

29/08/2022

On the contrary, billions in investments have lined
the pockets of corrupt American puppets. Ultimately,
the country has become dependent on external
assistance without any prospects for independent
development. Particular attention should be given to the
protection of the civilian population. To our Western
colleagues, who prefer, of late, to reduce any discussion
about Afghanistan to the subject of human rights
violations, we would like to recall the irresponsible
actions of the American and NATO forces, which
regularly carried out indiscriminate air strikes against
ordinary Afghans — not to mention the night raids and
extrajudicial killings of civilians, including women
and children.
Unfortunately, despite the reports of various
independent non-governmental organizations about
those monstrous military crimes to try to achieve
justice and to hold accountable the guilty parties,
investigations were never carried out due to the gross
blackmail by Washington. Any efforts to that end by the
International Criminal Court were roundly quashed by
the United States under threat of sanctions. Incidentally,
no one was surprised by that level of cynicism because
our American colleagues acted in the same way when
it came to war crimes committed by the United States
in Iraq.
While sponsoring the corrupt Ghani regime,
the United States held separate negotiations with the
Taliban behind the back of the Afghan people. That led
to the signing of a deal for the withdrawal of forces from
the country. Ultimately, the people of Afghanistan, who
our American colleagues have repeatedly told us they
were there to protect, were abandoned to their fate
and left alone to face devastation, poverty, terrorism,
hunger and other challenges.
The widespread humanitarian and economic crisis in
the country is one of the most horrendous consequences
of that military intervention. Many experts estimate
that the current humanitarian disaster in Afghanistan
might result in more deaths than resulted in 20 years
of war. However, instead of acknowledging their
mistakes, supporting the reconstruction of the country
and paying reparations, the United States and its allies
plan to solve the Afghan problem in the usual way.
Using politically correct language, they simply blocked
Afghan national financial resources and disconnected
the banking system from the Society for Worldwide
Interbank Financial Telecommunication, pushing poor
Afghans to the brink of survival and forcing many of
22-47481

29/08/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.9118

them to sell their organs and their children to somehow
make ends meet.

Cooperation Organization. We are also providing active
humanitarian assistance to the brotherly Afghan people.

Despite appeals from United Nations humanitarian
agencies, human rights organizations and Afghans
themselves, the United States continues to illegally
retain the country’s foreign assets under various pretexts
of human rights violations and the need to pay for the
9/11 attacks, which the Afghan people had nothing to
do with. That irresponsible behaviour by the Western
coalition and its attitude towards what is happening
in Afghanistan are not surprising, considering how
the former NATO military mission, the International
Security Assistance Force, was formally reported to
the Security Council and later replaced by the Resolute
Support Mission.

We are fully aware of the new realities that have
emerged in Afghanistan. We wish to stress that we
continue to advocate the need for the international
community to engage constructively with the Taliban.
We believe that it is through such dialogue that we will
be able to effectively meet the challenges of political
inclusiveness, counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics
and to uphold human rights, including those of women
and girls. However, we are not willing to accept the
attempts of our Western colleagues to simply turn the
page of history in Afghanistan, shifting all the blame
onto the Taliban and starting with a clean slate, as
though the past 20 years had never occurred.

Against that backdrop, it is hypocritical for our
Western colleagues to try to continue to conduct
dialogue with the de facto authorities using the language
of ultimatums and the sanctions mallet and threatening
to use various other means of pressure, including
limiting opportunities to effectively address pressing
issues of peace and stability with the participation of
those in the region. We also see attempts to manipulate
humanitarian assistance and support by demanding
that the new Afghan authorities first rectify the
internal political situation and address the challenges.
Fiery statements about the importance of resolving
the question of human rights as a precondition for
everything else do not hold water. I would like to ask
my colleagues — is it not a human rights violation that
women and children are dying because of the situation
resulting from their inaction?

Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank UnderSecretary-General
Griffiths,
Deputy
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Potzel and
Ms. Morgan Edwards for their briefings.

We have repeatedly said that stability in
Afghanistan is key to peace and stability in the region
and beyond. Russia has consistently pursued a swift
political settlement and national reconciliation in
the country. We continue to believe that the Afghans
themselves must resolve those issues. For us, what is
essential is the restoration, development and prosperity
of an independent Afghanistan that is free from the
threats of terrorism and drugs. We pay particular
attention to the issue of political inclusivity and respect
for human rights, including those of women and girls.
Our efforts are aimed at achieving all those objectives,
both through bilateral contacts with the de facto
authorities and with other Afghans, as well as through
the Moscow format, meetings of regional neighbours
and the regional organizations — the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai

Since the Taliban took power by force in
Afghanistan, Norway’s message has been clear — the
Taliban will be judged not by their words, but by their
actions. So far, we have been deeply disappointed.
The immediate worsening of the humanitarian and
economic situation has disproportionately affected
women and girls. And the decision by the Taliban to
ban girls from secondary education; restrict women’s
autonomy, access to employment and freedom of
movement; and dissolve the institutions dedicated to
promoting their rights, have had further detrimental
impact on Afghanistan’s ability to stabilize and recover.
We reiterate the united demand from the Security
Council — the Taliban must swiftly lift those
restrictions on Afghan women and girls. We commend
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
for its thorough report entitled Human Rights in
Afghanistan — 15 August 2021 to 15 June 2022, published
in July, and the substantial engagement with the de
facto authorities in that work. The report documents an
alarming number of human rights abuses attributed to
the de facto authorities, including against journalists,
other media workers and human rights defenders.
When taking power, the Taliban became
responsible for the security and welfare of the Afghan
people, and it has not delivered. Millions of Afghans
need humanitarian assistance. Earthquakes, drought,
flooding, food insecurity and lack of access to basic
services are adding to the Afghan people’s plight, and

22-474819/26

S/PV.9118

The situation in Afghanistan

winter is quickly approaching. The restrictions imposed
by the Taliban on women’s autonomy, employment
and movement impede the ability of women to both
deliver and receive life-saving assistance or generate
income with which to pay for food and basic services.
The knock-on effect on the population as a whole
is dramatic.
Norway is concerned by continued reports of
interference, discrimination and corruption hindering
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need,
in particular internally displaced persons, minorities
and households headed by women. Children continue
to be the most vulnerable. As documented in the
recent report of the Secretary-General on children in
armed conflict (S/2022/493), Afghanistan is among the
countries with the highest numbers of grave violations
against children.
There is also an increasing risk of terrorist groups
strengthening their foothold in Afghanistan. Frequent
terrorist attacks continue to target and kill civilians.
The expectations of the Security Council are clear:
Afghan territory must not be used to threaten or attack
any country or to shelter or train terrorists.
The people of Afghanistan deserve sustainable
peace. They deserve a legitimate Government that
represents all Afghans. Sustainable peace means not
just the end of violence or war. It also requires an end
to human rights abuses and discrimination.
Norway remains committed to the people of
Afghanistan. We will continue to provide support for
the basic human needs of Afghans, and we will do our
utmost to help address the economic crisis. To do so
we must continue to engage and meet with the de facto
authorities. We must hold them to their commitments.
They bear the main responsibility of protecting the
civilian population and responding to the humanitarian
and economic crisis in Afghanistan.
Ms. Bongo (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs Martin Griffiths and the
Deputy Special Representative Markus Potzel for their
briefings. We followed with interest the briefing by
Ms. Morgan Edwards.
The situation in Afghanistan is of concern to my
country out of solidarity with the Afghan people, but
also because of its ramifications and impact on peace
and security throughout the region and beyond. As you
know, Mr. President, one year after the Taliban took
10/26

29/08/2022

power, the lack of political inclusiveness continues to
be a serious issue. The diversity of the Afghan people
is poorly represented, and ethnic, geographic, political
and social minorities, including women, are kept at the
periphery of the political process. The recurrence of
violations of fundamental freedoms, the intensification
of attacks by armed groups opposed to the Taliban, the
multiplication of terrorist acts, notably by Al-Qaida and
Da’esh, and the expansion of drug trafficking, present a
terrifying backdrop that calls for a concerted response
by the international community commensurate with the
distress of the Afghan people.
We take this opportunity to express our deep
concern over the series of explosions that have killed and
injured 250 people this month and strongly condemn the
17 August attack on the Abu Bakar Mosque in Kabul.
We call on the de facto authorities to intensify their
efforts aimed at combating terrorism and protecting the
population, which is their responsibility.
Stabilizing Afghanistan requires confidence-building,
the promotion of transparent and participatory
governance, and the establishment of a structured
political dialogue between the Taliban and all Afghan
stakeholders. As the impact and positive role of women
in society is well documented, we urge the de facto
authorities to reverse their restrictions on this important
segment of the population.
For the past year, the humanitarian crisis in
Afghanistan has been exacerbated by the paralysis
of banking institutions, the weight of international
sanctions, the coronavirus pandemic and the effects
of climate change, notably through severe drought and
flooding. Nearly 5 million people have been displaced
within the country. Women and children are, once again,
the first victims of this triple economic, environmental
and humanitarian crisis, owing to their exclusion, their
being kept out of school, forced marriages and even
their being sold.
Faced with the rigid posture of the Taliban regime,
which prefers to impose an increasing number of
restrictions rather than respect the commitments given
to the international community to improve the living
conditions of the population, we must not lose sight of
the fact that the destiny of millions of people depends
on the engagement of donors. We call on donors to
continue their efforts in favour of humanitarian aid.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Gabon’s
full support for the United Nations Assistance Mission
22-47481

29/08/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

in Afghanistan and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for their efforts on the ground.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths and Deputy Special Representative
Potzel for their briefings. We have also taken note of
the briefing by Ms. Morgan Edwards.
This afternoon I will address three points: the
humanitarian situation, the conditions of women and
girls, and the scourge of terrorism.
As we have heard, the tragic reality facing millions
of Afghans is bleak. Humanitarian needs far outstrip
the international community’s ability to provide
support to a country where 24 million people require
humanitarian assistance. Some remote communities
are even experiencing near-famine conditions. As
mentioned by Under-Secretary-General Griffiths,
the effects of climate change have exacerbated this
critical situation. Heavy rains this month have affected
thousands of families, resulting in dozens of deaths.
Given this situation, it is imperative that unrestricted
humanitarian access be guaranteed. We call for the
prevention of any interference in the distribution of
humanitarian assistance and for allowing women to
participate in these tasks and for the lists of beneficiaries
not to be modified. Furthermore, it is necessary to take
the necessary measures inside and outside Afghanistan
so that transfers of resources to finance humanitarian
work can reach their intended recipients. Mexico
reiterates the importance of ensuring that no coercive
measures have a negative humanitarian impact.
With regard to the situation of women and girls,
we regret the setback that has taken place in the last
year. Contrary to its promises, the Taliban has issued
more than 20 edicts limiting the rights of women and
girls, including with regard to physical segregation by
gender, restrictions on freedom of movement and dress,
and such abysmal steps backwards as forced marriages,
including child marriage, and honour killings.
Not allowing women to work erodes the purchasing
power of families. These restrictions both reduce
income-generating opportunities and feed the vicious
cycle of poverty, hunger and discrimination. We
call for an end to the exclusion of women from the
labour market.
Equally regrettable is the decision to suspend
secondary education for girls. An entire generation

S/PV.9118

of girls will not be able to complete their schooling.
The Taliban is mortgaging Afghanistan’s chances of
overcoming the economic and humanitarian crisis
with measures that limit the participation of women
and girls.
In addition, we deplore the incidents of extrajudicial
killings, violations of freedom of expression, association
and other basic human rights, which are reflected in
the report of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan. As an international community, we have
a responsibility not to allow further deterioration of
the human rights situation of all Afghans, including
women, girls and minorities.
The terrorist attacks of recent months are clear
evidence that the threat from terrorist groups operating
in Afghanistan is real and latent. Most of the attacks
perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan Province target ethnic and religious
minorities in places of worship or schools. Mexico
unequivocally condemns those attacks.
In view of the critical humanitarian situation
in Afghanistan, I want to conclude by calling on the
international community, especially donor countries,
to continue to contribute financially or to provide
humanitarian protection to Afghan nationals, as my
country has done for more than 600 people. We also
call on the de facto authorities to immediately reverse
all decisions that restrict the public life of women
and girls, to respect human rights, including those of
minorities, and to ensure that Afghanistan never again
becomes a haven for terrorists.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me thank
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths, Deputy Special
Representative Potzel and Ms. Morgan Edwards for
their briefings.
I would like to start by offering our condolences
to Pakistan following the devastating flooding there
this week. Our thoughts are with the victims and their
families, and as my Minister, Lord Ahmad, has said, we
are working with the Pakistani authorities to establish
the support and assistance they need. The United
Kingdom stands with the people of Pakistan at this time
of need.
Russia has called for this meeting one year after the
withdrawal of international forces from Afghanistan.
As we reflect on that anniversary, we should also recall
the legacy of the Soviet Union’s 10-year occupation
of Afghanistan from 1979 until 1989, which created

22-4748111/26

S/PV.9118

The situation in Afghanistan

the conditions for devastating civil war and the rise
of the Taliban in the 1990s. Today it is clear that the
situation in Afghanistan remains critical and the needs
of the Afghan people are acute. As we have heard, more
than 24 million Afghans are in need of humanitarian
support and nearly 20 million are facing acute food
insecurity. Economic stability and the delivery of basic
services are essential to ending the cycle of suffering
in Afghanistan. There remains a vital need to inject
liquidity into the country in order to avoid economic
collapse. While United Kingdom personnel have left
Afghanistan, our commitment to the Afghan people
remains resolute. Between April 2022 and March
2023, the United Kingdom committed $676 million in
aid to Afghanistan. Our Foreign Secretary co-hosted
the United Nations humanitarian pledging conference
earlier this year, raising $2.4 billion. By contrast,
Russia has contributed nothing to the United Nations
humanitarian response plan, while China has pledged
$2 million.
On top of the humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan,
the human rights situation is stark. There are credible
allegations of extrajudicial killings, detentions and
disappearances, including of civil-society activists,
former security forces personnel and Government
officials. The past few months have also seen the
imposition of deplorable restrictions on the rights and
freedoms of women and girls, including on their access
to education, jobs and services and on their freedom of
movement and dress. It is clear to all but the Taliban that
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in society is a prerequisite for a stable, prosperous
Afghanistan. The Taliban has also been repeating other
mistakes from the past, not least the harbouring of the
leader of Al-Qaida, Ayman Al-Zawahiri, in downtown
Kabul, in breach of its international commitments. We
again call on the Taliban to meet its commitments to
ensuring principled, unhindered humanitarian access
across the country, upholding basic human rights, most
pressingly for women and girls, and making sure that
Afghanistan is never again a permissive environment
for terrorist groups.
Strong and consistent United Nations leadership
remains crucial to ensuring a well-coordinated and
prioritized response. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan has our full support in
delivering its mandate provided by the Council.
One year ago, the Council adopted resolution 2593
(2021), which set out our shared expectations of the
12/26

29/08/2022

Taliban. We hope the Council can continue to speak
with one voice to press the Taliban on its commitments
and to support the Afghan people in overcoming the
challenges ahead. We thank the United Nations for its
ongoing and tireless efforts.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths, Deputy Special Representative Potzel
and Ms. Morgan Edwards for their briefings today.
Two weeks ago, we marked one dreadful year since
the Taliban seized control of Afghanistan. One year on,
the Taliban has proved that it has not reformed. It has
shown the same unjust and cruel behaviour it had in the
past, using repression and fear. Fundamental freedoms
have been severely curtailed, while Afghanistan’s once
vibrant civil society and media landscape have been
violently suppressed. Those who raise their voices in
opposition, including women protesters, are met with
intimidation, arbitrary arrest and detention or enforced
disappearance. Human rights defenders, activists, and
journalists remain among the most at risk. The Taliban
has sought to render women invisible. They are quite
literally being systematically wiped from public life.
Banned from most places of work and subject to onerous
restrictions on when they can leave their homes, Afghan
women are living a nightmare.
Despite international condemnation, the Taliban
continues its draconian assault on human rights. The
vacuum left by Afghanistan’s Independent Human
Rights Commission, dissolved by the Taliban in May,
makes robust international monitoring all the more
important. Support for the work of the United Nation
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan’s human rights
service and the Special Rapporteur on Afghanistan
is essential.
The past year has been one of unconscionable
hardship for the Afghan people, with economic
collapse spurring one of the world’s worst humanitarian
disasters. More than 19 million people remain foodinsecure, with children suffering the most. Afghanistan
now has the highest number of people in emergency
food insecurity globally and its health system is on
the brink of collapse. Overwhelming humanitarian
need has been compounded by natural disasters,
most recently devastating flooding in central and
eastern Afghanistan.
We applaud the work of United Nations agencies
and humanitarian organizations on the ground. They
have stayed and delivered in the most challenging of
22-47481

29/08/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

circumstances, preventing a spiral into widespread
famine. The preservation of the humanitarian space is
an overarching priority for Ireland across the sanctions
regime. In that regard, we therefore strongly supported
the adoption in December of resolution 2615 (2021),
which provides a humanitarian exemption from sanctions
imposed under the resolution 1988 (2011) Taliban
sanctions regime. Such efforts to provide clarity and
facilitate the provision of much-needed humanitarian
aid are essential, and we support the introduction of
licences to further aid delivery. However, as a result of
the Taliban’s policies, dire humanitarian need remains,
as does the imperative to find solutions to relieve the
effects of economic collapse. We must also be clear on
the solutions that lie within Afghanistan. Economic
recovery is impossible while half of Afghanistan’s
workforce are confined to their homes and denied
economic opportunity. Any future economic growth is
impossible without girls graduating from high school.
Last August, we sat in the Chamber and insisted that
the international community would now have to address
the consequences of not heeding the many warnings of
Afghan civil society. Despite repeated assurances in
the weeks following its takeover, the Taliban has shown
utter contempt for its commitments made to the Afghan
people and the international community. It vowed to
respect the rights of women — instead, women have been
forcibly and systematically excluded from public life. It
promised that girls would return to school — instead,
girls have spent 345 days banned from their classrooms.
It promised to counter and combat terrorism — instead,
we have seen frequent attacks on the Afghan people,
particularly minorities, and evidence that Al-Qaida
continues to operate with the full knowledge of the
Taliban. Neither the international community nor the
Council can stand by in the face of such disregard for
international law and the principles that underpin our
common commitment to humankind.
We owe it to the Afghan people to listen, to heed
their warnings and to act. Ireland stresses again
the importance of including Afghan civil society in
the Chamber. The international community must
demonstrate its solidarity with the Afghan people by
holding the Taliban to account. Last August, we shared
our view that the Council must be prepared to consider
further measures from the toolbox at our disposal. That
includes revisiting the broad-based privileges that were
granted to the Taliban for the purposes of pursuing
peace and security. On the basis of what we have seen

S/PV.9118

to date, we cannot and should not take a business-asusual approach.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Brazil welcomes
the participation of the representatives of Afghanistan,
the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan in today’s
meeting. I would also like to thank the briefers for their
informative contributions.
I want to extend our condolences to both the
Afghan and Pakistani peoples for the lives lost
during the floods that have hit their countries. That
recent destruction adds to the extremely concerning
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. It is likely that
as we saw last year, the approach of the colder months
will herald a further deterioration in living conditions.
The international community’s continuing engagement
with Afghanistan remains a matter of life and death
for millions.
It is painful to note that one year after the
withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghan territory,
some of our worst expectations for the country’s future
have been confirmed. That is particularly true for the
scourge of terrorism. The attack this month on the
Abu Bakar Mosque in Kabul clearly illustrates how
precarious the security conditions are. Brazil expresses
its solidarity with the families of the victims and
reiterates its condemnation of terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.
Women and girls remain relegated to the status
of second-class citizens in Afghanistan, faced with
increasing restrictions on their access to work and
education. Despite the Security Council’s condemnation
of the discriminatory measures taken by the de facto
authorities, there are no signs that the Taliban is
willing to review its positions. The expectations for an
inclusive Government, with the participation of women
and minorities, remain a distant goal. The leaders
of Afghanistan are depriving half of the country’s
population its dignity. In the aftermath of the withdrawal
of foreign forces, Brazil’s Government established a
policy of humanitarian visas for Afghans threatened
by the crisis in their country, with a particular focus
on women and girls. More than 5,000 humanitarian
visas have been issued so far, providing Afghans with
opportunities to rebuild their lives in safety.
Although the prospects for engagement with
Kabul are not encouraging, we remain convinced of
the importance of fostering dialogue with the de facto
authorities. We have in mind the words of Ambassador

22-4748113/26

S/PV.9118

The situation in Afghanistan

Deborah Lyons, who as Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan reminded us that
the Taliban, which only a year ago was an insurgent
force, is transitioning to becoming a Government. At
this stage, technical contacts that can benefit the local
population, as well as the provision of services, should
be considered.
We regret that the Council could not reach a
consensus on renewing exceptions to the travel ban
for some of the individuals listed by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). We fear
that Afghan leaders’ inability to travel abroad will
delay the country’s reintegration into the international
community. The Taliban’s first experience in power,
before the 2001 military intervention, left the important
lesson that isolating it will not lead it to moderate its
positions. Preventing its leaders from travelling is not
a punishment for misbehaviour but a measure that
limits the possibilities for constructive and pragmatic
engagement. The Council should not lose sight of the
greater goal of improving the living conditions of
the Afghan population. The continuation of dialogue
is an essential condition for enabling Afghanistan’s
development and limiting the suffering of its people.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and Mr. Potzel for
their updates. I also listened carefully to Ms. Morgan
Edwards’s account.
A year has passed since the Taliban’s return to
power in Kabul — a long year that by all accounts
has been disastrously lost. As we heard, the overall
situation in the country is critical. Afghanistan is
going through one of the worst possible humanitarian
crises. Under-Secretary-General Griffiths’ briefing
needs no further comment. The economy is in free fall
and in one year the Taliban has managed to shrink it
by a third. It is therefore no surprise that human and
drug trafficking are on the rise. As if the economic,
humanitarian, human-made and natural catastrophes
were not enough, Afghanistan continues to suffer from
terrorism. The presence of the Al-Qaida leader Ayman
Al-Zawahiri in Kabul confirmed fears that have been
expressed repeatedly in the Council regarding the
persistent and pervasive ties between the Taliban and
transnational terrorist groups. We call on the Taliban
to denounce terrorism in all its forms and to cut its ties
with terrorist organizations.
Afghanistan is one of the worst places to be a
woman today. Contrary to its promises, the Taliban is
14/26

29/08/2022

undoing decades of progress in empowering women in
Afghan society. They have forced women into silence,
deprived them of their legitimate roles in society and
made them invisible in the public place. Young girls
are forced out of school — and Afghanistan is the
only country in the world to impose such shocking
measures. Girls are forced into early marriages. Women
are starving and have lost access to their hard-earned
rights, education and jobs. Under the Taliban, life in
Afghanistan has lost its colour. Oppressing half of the
population is the shortest path to perpetual misery and
obscurantism. It tramples brutally on the basic norms
of rights and dignity. We should not accept such an
aberration to continue, or worse, gain support. Afghan
women and girls need our help more than ever. We call
on the Taliban to change its course, take steps to lift the
restrictions on women and girls and respect their human
rights and to meet the expectations of the Afghans
and the world in order to permit their full, equal and
meaningful participation in work, education and public
life, as well as their freedom of movement and speech.
Those are critical prerequisites for the country’s longterm peace, stability and development.
The worsening Afghan tragedy unfolding presents
a daunting challenge even for a united and responsive
international community. The de facto rule of the
Taliban lacks legitimacy. It has given no indication
of being capable of dealing with any of the existential
challenges facing the Afghan people, except for either
letting them deteriorate or actively making them
worse. Such disarray will only fuel resistance, create
tensions and lead to violence. We welcome any help
and support to the Afghan people in these dark times
and strongly support the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, as well as that of
the non-governmental organizations present in the
country under such challenging conditions. We stand
with the Afghan people in their demand for equal
rights, in accordance with Afghanistan’s obligations
under international law, and reiterate our call on the
Taliban to respect them. It is a fact that the Taliban is
in charge. It must know that the decisions it has made
so far are punishing Afghans and further isolating the
Taliban from the international community, making
it the only entity responsible for sending the country
spiralling into an abyss. The Taliban is being judged,
and will be judged, by what it does. It is not very
difficult to understand, even for the inexperienced
Taliban, that one cannot pretend to move forward by
walking backwards.
22-47481

29/08/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths and Deputy Special Representative
Potzel for their briefings.
I am glad this meeting was called today, not for
the reasons the Russians requested it but because the
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan is grave, as we
heard from the United Nations briefers, and it requires
our attention. Flash floods, earthquakes, avalanches,
droughts and terrorism have made a desperate situation
more dire. The global food insecurity crisis, exacerbated
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, climate and
conflict, has been felt acutely by the Afghan people.
Everyone here heard the statistics Under-Secretary
Griffiths outlined, describing what he calls a “relentless
layer of crisis”. The Taliban have failed to provide for
the Afghan people. In fact, they have done just the
opposite. The Taliban’s policies repress and starve the
Afghan people instead of protecting them. The Taliban’s
exclusion of outside voices means that the people who
would contribute towards alleviating the suffering from
those crises are not allowed to help.
Among the Taliban’s most egregious actions has
been their repression and abuse of women and girls.
The Taliban have denied women the opportunity to
work, a decision that is both unjust and economically
perilous. In Chicago last week, I met with an Afghan
refugee who had found a new life in the United States.
But he is kept up at night knowing that his wife is still
there. She was educated, engaged in the private sector
and contributing to her country. Now she is secluded in
her home.
It is equally egregious that girls have not been
allowed to return to school. That is both a moral
problem and an economic one. UNICEF estimates that
the Afghan economy would gain $5.4 billion if the
Taliban let girls go to secondary school and join the
workforce. On top of that, the Taliban’s proclamation
that it would be best for women to simply stay at home
if a male chaperone cannot accompany them means that
nearly all female-headed households in the country are
not getting enough food to eat.
Instead of looking to the international community
for help with those crises, the Taliban harboured the
leader of Al-Qaida in downtown Kabul. How can the
Taliban expect to build a relationship with the world
when it provides safe haven to those who seek to do
harm to us all — and I do mean all of us.

S/PV.9118

In recent months the Taliban have even made the
delivery of humanitarian assistance more difficult.
It continues to interfere with the delivery of critical
assistance that the Afghan people desperately need.
The Taliban have increased taxes on critical assistance.
And they fail to protect humanitarian aid workers. That
is all to say that the Taliban are not providing for the
Afghan people in their time of need.
But the United States will not give up or look away.
We are determined to help the Afghan people. We have
worked multilaterally through the United Nations and
the Security Council to assist them. Last year, we led
the Council’s effort to unanimously adopt resolution
2615 (2021), which established a carve-out for the
delivery of humanitarian aid for the Afghan people.
We have strongly supported the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
whose critical work we supported extending in March.
Its good offices, outreach and human rights reporting
continue to be invaluable.
We have also worked bilaterally to help the Afghan
people directly. The United States is the world’s leading
donor in Afghanistan. Over this past year alone, we
have provided more than $775 million in humanitarian
assistance directly to the Afghan people and Afghans
in the region. We are proud to be the largest funder of
United Nations operations in Afghanistan. We have
also issued seven general licenses to enable economic
activity for the Afghan people. And we are supporting
efforts to protect, preserve and facilitate access to
approximately $3.5 billion in Afghan Central Bank
assets for the benefit for the Afghan people.
Let me be clear: no country that is serious about
containing terrorism in Afghanistan would advocate
giving the Taliban instantaneous, unconditional access
to billions in assets that belong to the Afghan people.
The countries, like ours, that have rolled up their
sleeves and tried to engage with this issue have seen
how the Central Bank of Afghanistan was hollowed
out long ago. It does not have a credible anti-money
laundering system in place. It does not have a credible
system for combating the financing of terrorism. And
it does not have an independent monitor in place to
verify improvements in capacity through technical
assistance. The Central Bank of Afghanistan therefore
cannot currently conduct responsible monetary policy
on its own.
Fortunately, there is one reason why the
afghani — the Afghan currency — has held stable:

22-4748115/26

S/PV.9118

The situation in Afghanistan

because major donors, including the United States, have
generously contributed well over $2 billion dollars in
humanitarian assistance and basic-needs programming
to the country since August 2021. Today we heard
Russia say that is not sufficient. Russia argued, as
others have in the past, that Afghanistan’s problems are
the fault of the West and not the Taliban — really? Here
is my question. What is Russia doing to help other than
rehashing the past and criticizing others? If Russia is
concerned about Afghan women and children dying,
how is it helping them? To date, Russia has contributed
only $2 million to United Nations humanitarian response
plan for Afghanistan. And it has contributed nothing
this year — not one cent. China’s contributions have
been similarly underwhelming. If Council members
want to talk about how Afghanistan needs help, that is
fine. But we humbly suggest that they put their money
where their mouths are.
In the meantime, the United States, along with
other partners and allies, including many on the
Council, will continue to diligently do everything it
can to support the Afghan people. We will continue
providing humanitarian assistance. We will continue
supporting UNAMA. We will continue to be a
champion for Afghanistan’s women and girls. We will
continue to do everything we can to help the mothers
and daughters, the fathers and sons — the people of
Afghanistan — who deserve so much.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths, Mr. Markus
Potzel and Ms. Lucy Morgan Edwards for their briefings.
Today’s meeting provides us with another
opportunity to assess the situation in Afghanistan. We
remain deeply concerned about the situation in that
country, especially the condition of women, girls and
minority groups. We are appalled by the deliberate
policies of the de facto authorities to effectively remove
women from Afghan public life, with no representation
of women in Government. To date, more than 14 million
Afghan women and girls that have lost the right to go
to work, high school and university; and they have
lost their freedom of movement. Women and girls in
Afghanistan need the support of the Security Council
and the international community in order to preserve
their rights and to hold the Taliban to its earlier promise
that women would be able to exercise their rights,
including to work and study, within Sharia law.
After decades of war, the recurring natural
hazards, chronic poverty, drought and widespread
16/26

29/08/2022

food insecurity, coupled with the coronavirus disease
pandemic, have resulted in millions of Afghans being in
need of humanitarian assistance. We note the urgency
to meet the $606 million pledge made during the flash
appeal for humanitarian assistance in Afghanistan.
We believe that the Council can play its part by urging
support from donors to enable humanitarian agencies
to scale up their interventions and bring much-needed
relief to the people in vulnerable segments of the
population, who are currently bearing the brunt of the
harsh living conditions and need to develop resilience
in order to establish sustainable livelihoods. For their
part, Ghana expects that the de facto authorities will act
in good faith and align themselves with global efforts
to bring lasting relief to Afghan citizens. In that regard,
we acknowledge the untiring efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and other
international organizations, which continue to provide
critical support on the ground.
We are deeply concerned by the security situation
and the senseless killings in Afghanistan and urge the
de facto authorities to stabilize the situation and desist
from arbitrary arrests, detentions, torture, extrajudicial
killings, collective punishment and the targeting of
members of ethnic, tribal and religious groups on
mere suspicion. However, we are encouraged by the
hesitant efforts at reconciliation as expressed through
the amnesty extended to rival groups that abstain
from fighting the Taliban and efforts to reach out to
former enemies.
We nonetheless deplore Afghanistan becoming
a permissive environment for terrorist groups and
militants and providing bandwidth to meet and
plan attacks. In that context, we remind the de facto
authorities to be mindful of their obligations under
international law and to ensure that they do not
collaborate with terrorists to make Afghanistan a safe
haven. We also call on all regional countries to help
address the security and other challenges confronting
the country, while taking into account their proximate
interests. The Taliban need to understand that the
Security Council and the international community are
prepared to act in a manner that will further constrain
them, should it continue along the course that they
have chosen.
In conclusion, we urge the Taliban to stop all
forms of discrimination and immediately remove all
restrictions in place in order to give all Afghan citizens
equal rights to participate freely in civic life. We
22-47481

29/08/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

urge the authorities to channel their energy towards
rebuilding the economy of the country for the benefit
of the Afghan people, which is one of the cardinal
purposes of government.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffiths, Mr. Potzel and Ms. Morgan Edwards for
their briefings.
This month of August marks a sobering anniversary.
Just over a year ago, Afghanistan sank into chaos.
Since then, the humanitarian situation has continued
to deteriorate. Afghanistan is among the countries
in the world experiencing the worst food crisis, with
nearly 20 million people affected, 6 million of whom
are at risk of starvation. Afghans, especially Afghan
women, are no longer able to enjoy their most basic
rights and freedoms. We know who is responsible for
that situation: the Taliban. Their seizure of power by
force and all their actions since then have brought
Afghanistan to the brink of collapse.
The expectations of the international community
were clearly set out in resolution 2593 (2021), which was
adopted a year ago and which defined the prerequisites
for the stability and reconstruction of the country and
recalled the obligations flowing from the conventions
ratified by Afghanistan, including the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Despite the Taliban’s systematic and repeated failure
to respect their own commitments, the international
community has nevertheless continued to reach out to
help the civilian population and to leave the door open
to dialogue. France, together with the European Union,
has played its full role in that collective effort. We
responded without delay by contributing €123 million
since last September. The European Union has
contributed more than €335 million since 2021.
The Security Council adopted resolution 2615
(2021) to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the Afghan people and to prevent any
diversion of funds. However, we must remain cleareyed. The Taliban are choosing isolation. Far from
grasping the outstretched hand, they continue to flout
their commitments, as evidenced by the ban on girls’
access to secondary education. In the face of the
serious human rights violations, which are multiplying,
it is clear that the international community cannot trust
its interlocutors.

S/PV.9118

Respect for human rights, and in particular
women’s rights, cannot be an adjustable variable. It
is a principle enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. Women and girls in Afghanistan, who have
been deprived of all their rights, are prisoners in their
own country. In the face of their tragic situation, we
cannot allow impunity, and we cannot afford to provide
development assistance that would support the Taliban
in their human rights violations.
The recent neutralization of Al-Qaida leader
Ayman Al-Zawahiri is another example of the Taliban’s
betrayal of their commitments. That is a success in
the fight against terrorism, but it also confirms our
fears, which have been expressed many times in this
Chamber: the Taliban continue to shelter and support
terrorist groups, in particular Al-Qaida.
The Taliban must meet five conditions in order to
emerge from isolation: the ability for Afghans who wish
to leave to do so in safety; free access for humanitarian
assistance throughout the territory of Afghanistan;
respect for the fundamental rights of all, especially
women and girls; the establishment of a representative
Government; and the complete and concrete severance
of ties with terrorist groups. To date, none of those
conditions have been fully met.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate France’s
full support for the Afghan people, its readiness to
participate in the efforts necessary to alleviate their
suffering, and its full cooperation with the United
Nations, including the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, I would like to thank Russia for requesting this
timely meeting to discuss the situation in Afghanistan.
I also thank our briefers — Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths, Deputy Special Representative Potzel and
Ms. Morgan Edwards — for their briefings.
A full year has passed since the withdrawal
of international forces from Afghanistan and the
Taliban’s capture of Kabul. During that time, we have
seen the conditions for ordinary Afghans deteriorate,
with a growing number of people facing starvation
and lacking access to many basic services, including
health care. Over the past year, we have heard heartwrenching accounts of the catastrophic humanitarian
situation. Afghanistan is now the only country on Earth
where girls cannot attend high school and where the

22-4748117/26

S/PV.9118

The situation in Afghanistan

fundamentals of a dignified life are systematically
denied to women.
At the same time, the international community and
the Afghan people were promised that Afghanistan
would be placed on a path to stability and peace.
That has not been the case so far, as confirmed by the
presence of Al-Qaida’s most recent leader, killed last
month in Kabul, and a series of attacks by Da’eshKhorasan Province. The alarming security situation
appears to be worsening rather than stabilizing.
Of course, challenges existed in Afghanistan before
the onset of the worst food security crisis the world
has seen in a generation, which is hitting the already
vulnerable Afghan population very hard, with more
than 90 per cent of Afghanistan’s population struggling
to meet basic food needs.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) will continue to be a crucial
partner in addressing those critical challenges and in
managing the international community’s relationship
with the Taliban. We are therefore concerned that more
than two months have passed without the appointment
of a successor to Special Representative Lyons, and
we commend her tireless efforts in that role. We urge
a swift appointment and the Council’s full engagement
with UNAMA.
I want to elaborate further on the worsening
situation of women and girls in Afghanistan, which
remains profoundly troubling. Our fears about the
Taliban reversing the gains made in women’s and
girls’ empowerment over the past two decades have,
unfortunately, materialized. On this issue, there is
agreement around the Council table: we have all rejected
the restrictions imposed on women and girls and the
erosion of their access to equal opportunity. This is not a
question of competing priorities or cultural or religious
norms. Ensuring that women and girls can participate
fully, equally and meaningfully in all aspects of life is
part and parcel of what is required if Afghanistan is
to progress into the twenty-first century, and that must
remain a mainstay of the Council’s demands.
The security situation also continues to be fragile,
and countering extremism and terrorism remains a top
challenge. Reports by the Secretary-General and the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
clearly state that the threats posed by Al-Qaida and
Da’esh-Khorasan Province remain of concern. We
recall the Council’s clear and repeated demand that
18/26

29/08/2022

the territory of Afghanistan not be used to shelter or
train terrorists. The United Arab Emirates calls on the
Taliban to live up to their commitment to combating
terrorism and on the Council to use the full tools at its
disposal to ensure that that is the case.
The United Arab Emirates is also very concerned
about the fact that the economy of Afghanistan continues
to be in freefall. According to World Bank estimates, the
economy shrunk by between 20 per cent and 30 per cent
in the past year, and humanitarian indicators continue
to worsen. Although the humanitarian carve-out from
the 1988 sanctions regime, to which the Council agreed,
was necessary to relieve some of the pressure, it did not
and could not address the desperate need for liquidity,
access to banking services and the Central Bank’s core
functions. Those are all building blocks that need to
be in place to incentivize economic activity and lead
to recovery. We recognize that there are difficult and
significant policy issues and constraints at play here, but
we urge the redoubling of efforts by all those involved to
come to an agreement to restore the essential operation
of Afghanistan’s economy. The United Arab Emirates
is ready to play its part in contributing to such efforts.
The United Arab Emirates has been clear-eyed
about those challenges for the past year. However,
the basic question of how we move forward remains
unanswered. The international response cannot be the
isolation of Afghanistan. Calibrated engagement with
the Taliban needs to be maintained, and shutting off
communication channels with the de facto authorities
will not yield results in any of the areas where the
international community would like to see progress.
However, we need a coordinated strategy — and that is
alarmingly absent from our deliberations today.
We would also like to highlight that Islamic
countries have a special role to play in relation to
engagement with the Taliban to help promote religious
and cultural dialogue, respect for diversity and the
elimination of discrimination. The Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC), alongside other regional
organizations, has played an important role in that
respect. The United Arab Emirates, as a member of
the OIC, stands ready to contribute to a renewed effort
for stability and prosperity in Afghanistan and for its
people, as we have done over the past five decades, with
more than $2 billion in humanitarian assistance.
Since August of last year, we have witnessed the
emergence of seismic global political and economic
challenges to our international system. We cannot let
22-47481

29/08/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

ordinary Afghans pay the price of increasing global
polarization. In the case of Afghanistan, identifying
our common ground and speaking with a single voice
should not be beyond the countries represented in the
Chamber. The United Arab Emirates will continue to
work with all Council members to ensure a constructive
approach to the challenges facing Afghanistan in the
coming period. We need to keep our focus on that goal.
Mr. Ndung’u (Kenya): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths,
Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan Markus Potzel and Lucy
Morgan Edwards for their briefings.
Kenya stands in solidarity with the people of
Afghanistan in their unflinching quest for peace, justice
and progress. We have watched their unparalleled
resilience in the face of formidable challenges. Apart
from the protracted conflict that has ravaged millions
of lives and livelihoods, the people of Afghanistan have
suffered many other man-made and natural calamities.
Only recently, flooding claimed more than 180 lives
and destroyed thousands of houses. Earlier in June, a
devastating earthquake claimed more than 1,000 lives.
In addition, there is other climate-induced
insecurity, as well as rising global food prices. All
those have conspired to cause an overwhelming
humanitarian situation that the already constrained
humanitarian assistance programmes cannot meet.
As the winter season approaches, we call on the
international community to urgently step in and support
the more than 23 million Afghans in need with all the
necessary assistance.
Sadly, a year since the Taliban seized power, the
people of Afghanistan are no better off than they
were before. If anything, they are worse off. It is the
collective responsibility of the international community
and the obligation of the Taliban to create a better
environment for the people of Afghanistan that enables
them to govern themselves and determine their social
and economic progress. The time has come for the
international community to consider ways of engaging
with the Taliban to articulate practicable near-term
policy objectives to rebuild Afghanistan’s economy and
social fabric.
The end goal should be to align humanitarian aid
and other forms of development assistance to achieve
economic recovery and sustainability to reduce aid
dependence. In that regard, such engagement should

S/PV.9118

include how to ensure that Afghanistan’s frozen assets
are deployed in a structured manner, with a clear
monitoring mechanism, to help the ailing economy.
However, in our view, such engagement should be
predicated on the Taliban committing in word and deed
to two fundamental imperatives.
First, the Taliban must be committed to upholding
the rights of the millions of Afghan people without
any discrimination based on gender, age, ethnicity or
religion. The Taliban must, in particular, accord women
and girls equal rights and opportunities as their male
counterparts in all areas, including access to education,
employment opportunities, leadership roles at all levels
and freedom of association and movement. We expect
the Taliban to engage women at all levels and incorporate
their voices in mapping out non-discriminatory policies
that address challenges facing the country.
Secondly, the Taliban must disassociate from listed
terrorist groups and ensure that Afghanistan is no longer
a base for terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State and
Al-Qaida, used to launch attacks in Afghanistan and
further afield.
For its part, the international community, especially
the members of the Security Council, must be motivated
by the interests of the people of Afghanistan when
engaging on the matter. It is concerning that the major
Powers continue to pull in opposite directions, as they
use the deteriorating situation to advance their own
interests at the expense of the well-being of millions
of Afghans.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our unwavering
solidarity with the people of Afghanistan and stand
ready to support all endeavours aimed at securing their
safety and well-being.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Allow me to thank the
delegation of Russia for requesting today’s meeting. It
provides us with an opportunity to take stock of the
situation prevailing in Afghanistan. Let me also thank
the briefers for their briefings.
As we have repeatedly stated in the Security
Council, India has direct stakes in ensuring the return
of peace and stability, given its position as a contiguous
neighbour and long-standing partner of Afghanistan, as
well as its strong historical and civilizational linkages
to the Afghan people.
In response to the humanitarian needs of the Afghan
people, as well as to the urgent appeals made by the

22-4748119/26

S/PV.9118

The situation in Afghanistan

29/08/2022

United Nations, India has dispatched several shipments
of humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan. They include
32 tons of medical assistance in 10 batches, containing
essential life-saving medicines, anti-tuberculosis
medicines and 500,000 doses of the coronavirus
disease vaccine. Those medical consignments have
been handed over to the World Health Organization and
the Indira Gandhi Children’s Hospital in Kabul.

1988 (2011) indicate that the current authorities need
to take much stronger action to fulfil their counterterrorism commitments. There has been a significant
increase in the presence of Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP) in the country
and its members’ capacity to carry out attacks. ISILKP, with its base reportedly in Afghanistan, continues
to issue threats of terrorist attacks on other countries.

India has also dispatched more than 40,000 metric
tons of wheat to Afghanistan so far. To ensure fair
and just distribution of India’s wheat assistance, the
Government of India has signed an agreement with the
World Food Programme for the distribution of wheat
in Afghanistan.

The series of attacks at religious sites of the minority
community, including the recent attack at the Sikh
gurudwara on 18 June in Kabul, followed by another
bomb explosion near the same gurudwara on 27 July,
are hugely alarming. The linkages among groups listed
by the Security Council, such as Lashkar-e-Tayyiba
and Jaish-e-Mohammed, as well as provocative
statements made by other terrorist groups operating out
of Afghanistan, pose a direct threat to the peace and
stability of the region. We need to see concrete progress
in ensuring that such proscribed terrorists, entities or
their aliases do not get any tacit or direct support either
from Afghan soil or from the terror sanctuaries based
in the region.

In order to closely monitor and coordinate the
efforts of various stakeholders for the effective delivery
of humanitarian assistance and in continuation of our
engagement with the Afghan people, an Indian technical
team has also been deployed at our Embassy in Kabul.
As always, our approach to Afghanistan will be
guided by our historical friendship and our special
relationship with the people of Afghanistan. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
firmly held conviction that humanitarian assistance
should be based on the principles of neutrality,
impartiality and independence. The disbursement of
humanitarian aid should be non-discriminatory and
accessible to all Afghans. In particular, assistance
should reach the most vulnerable first, including
women, children and minorities.
India was the President of the Security Council
in August 2021 when resolution 2593 (2021) was
adopted (see S/PV.8848). The resolution set forth the
expectations of the international community in clear
and objective terms. They included: ensuring that the
territory of Afghanistan is not used to launch terrorist
attacks against other countries; the formation of a truly
inclusive and representative Government; combating
terrorism and drug trafficking; and preserving the
rights of women, children and minorities. The same
message has been reiterated in subsequent resolutions,
including the most recently adopted resolution 2626
(2022). With those benchmarks in mind, the present
situation is indeed one of concern.
With regard to terrorism, the recent findings
contained in the report (see S/2022/547) of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
20/26

On the political front, India continues to call for an
inclusive dispensation in Afghanistan that represents
all sections of the Afghan society. A broad-based,
inclusive and representative formation is necessary for
both domestic and international engagement.
We also express our concern about developments
in Afghanistan that directly impact the well-being
of women and girls. We join others in calling for the
protection of the rights of women and girls and for
ensuring that the long-fought gains of the past two
decades are not reversed.
Peace and security in Afghanistan are critical
imperatives that all of us need to collectively strive
for. India will continue to play its role in the pursuit of
that objective. The interests of the Afghan people will
continue to be at the heart of our efforts in Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I thank the Russian Federation for its initiative
to hold this meeting. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths, Deputy Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Potzel and Ms. Morgan Edwards
for their briefings.
22-47481

29/08/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

Exactly one year ago, Kabul was going through the
most surreal moment in its history. Foreign troops were
being hurriedly evacuated from the airport, from which
the echoes of explosions could be heard. Civilians were
falling from military planes that were forcibly taking
off, and soldiers were shooting innocent civilians. The
world was shocked to see such myriad signs of chaos.
The two-decade-long war ended in panic, chaos and
ignominy. Looking back at those 20 years, we cannot
help but ask: What did that war accomplish for us?
The war, which was waged in the name of
counter-terrorism, did not eliminate terrorist forces
in Afghanistan. Instead, terrorist activities became
increasingly rampant, and terrorist forces, such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, continue to grow.
The war claimed more than 200,000 lives, including
50,000 Afghan civilians and more than 60,000 military
police and thousands of foreign soldiers. It has left
millions of people homeless and displaced. Behind
every lost life is a family in anguish. Another 20 years
might not be sufficient to heal their wounds. The war,
waged under the banner of democratic transformation,
did not bring about peace, stability or prosperity, but
rather left behind a fragmented and shattered country.
Although foreign troops have withdrawn, the impact of
the war continues, and the Afghan people continue to
suffer from its various consequences.
The fiasco of the past 20 years has once again
demonstrated that military intervention and power
politics are not the right way. Foreign models and
democratic transformation cannot win the hearts and
minds of the people, and the tragedy in Afghanistan
should never be allowed to happen again. China has
always stressed that the withdrawal of foreign troops is
not the end of responsibility, but rather the beginning
of reflection and correction. The countries concerned
should have seriously reflected on their mistakes and
corrected them in a timely manner instead of walking
away and shrugging their shoulders.
Regrettably, rather than duly fulfilling their
responsibilities, the relevant countries have cut off
development aid, frozen Afghan assets and imposed
political isolation and a blockade. That does not amount
to only evading responsibility and abandoning the
Afghan people, but also perpetuating their mistakes
and exacerbating the suffering of the Afghan people.
It is even more perplexing that we do not see any
reflective thought indicative of humility or sincere

S/PV.9118

effort to correct the mistakes made. On the contrary, we
hear malicious accusations and attacks against others.
With the withdrawal of foreign troops, the Afghan
people have an opportunity to truly take control of their
own destiny. The past year has seen the Afghan interim
Government in action and the significant improvement
of the security situation. The interim Government has
promoted political dialogue and recently held a new
Loya Jirga. Currently, many things need to be done in
the country, and its peaceful reconstruction is facing
multiple challenges. The country still has a long way
to go.
We expect the Afghan interim Government to
pursue sound and inclusive domestic and foreign
policies, actively safeguard and improve people’s
livelihoods, resolutely combat all forms of terrorism
and live in harmony with all countries, including
its neighbours. The international community
should support Afghanistan in advancing peaceful
reconciliation, restoring public services and market
activities and engaging in regional and international
economic and trade cooperation.
The international community should strengthen
its engagement with the Afghan interim Government
in a rational and pragmatic manner. Since 2019, in
order to facilitate dialogue on peace and stability in
the country, based on the United States proposal, the
Security Council has granted exemptions to the travel
ban for some Afghan Taliban personnel. From the very
beginning, that was not meant as a reward for anyone
or as bargaining chip in negotiations on other issues.
Regrettably, however, certain Council members
now oppose the extension of the exemption, citing
the Taliban’s failure to live up to its commitment to
upholding women and girls rights. Undeniably, the
rights of Afghan women and girls should be guaranteed,
and we also expect efforts to be made by the Afghan
authorities in that regard. At the same time, linking
the two issues is unreasonable. Ending exemptions
will only close the door to dialogue and exacerbate
antagonism and division, and it will never achieve the
desired effect. We call on the countries concerned to
take a constructive stance by supporting the extension
of the existing exemption.
As we learned from the briefings, the humanitarian
situation in the country is grave, and the survival and
development of tens of millions of people, including
women and girls, are worrisome. Many women and girls

22-4748121/26

S/PV.9118

The situation in Afghanistan

have no food or clothing, and some families even rely
on selling organs and children to survive. Without food,
survival is out of the question. How can we expect girls
to go to school or women to take part in political life
under such circumstances? It is ethically hypocritical
and practically deadly to clamour for the rights of
Afghan women and girls while slashing humanitarian
and development aid to the country and stubbornly
maintaining unilateral sanctions against Afghanistan.
The current humanitarian and economic
predicament faced by the country results from
economic stagnation and the lack of liquidity caused
by foreign sanctions. Afghanistan’s overseas assets
belong to the Afghan people, and freezing those assets
is tantamount to depriving them of their life-saving
funds. We note that more than 70 renowned scholars
published an open letter earlier this month calling on the
United States to immediately return the frozen assets
in full, pointing out that splitting the frozen $7 billion
is arbitrary and unjustified. We once again urge the
United States to return those assets to Afghanistan in
full, unconditionally and without delay.

29/08/2022

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Somewhere in the lengthy arguments of our
United States colleagues, we heard a call for Russia
and China to reach for their wallets and pay for the
reconstruction of Afghanistan. They say that the United
States and its allies alone are paying for everything,
while Russia and China are only whipping up hot air.
The cynicism of such statements is stunning — we
are being asked to chip in for the reconstruction of a
country whose economy was essentially destroyed by
20 years of United States and NATO occupation. That
is to say that, instead of admitting their mistakes and
trying to remedy them, they are now reprimanding
us for not wanting to settle other people’s bills. That
is a very original proposal. However, for quite some
time now we have ceased to be surprised by anything.
I say to our former Western partners — no, they are
the ones who need to pay for their mistakes. But first
they must return to the Afghan people the money stolen
from them.

As Afghanistan’s largest neighbour, China has
always firmly supported its peace, stability and
development, and we have been making tremendous
efforts in that regard. Since last winter, the Chinese
Government has provided emergency assistance to the
country totalling ¥300 million and imported more than
1,400 tons of Afghan pine nuts through the “Air Corridor
of Pine Nuts”, thereby helping the Afghan people,
including many housewives, to increase their revenue.
Apart from contributing to the United Nations response
plan for Afghanistan, China will follow through on
the announced ¥1 billion in bilateral aid, and we will
actively strength economic and trade cooperation with
Afghanistan and promote the country’s integration into
regional efforts.

We have been helping — and will continue to
help — Afghanistan, and we recommend that our
Western colleagues focus on compensating the Afghans
for the 20 years of senseless occupation that destroyed
Afghanistan and left its people on the brink of survival.
And not everything is measured in monetary terms. The
lives of those killed in the attempt to plant democracy
in Afghanistan and of those maimed as a result of
fighting in that military campaign cannot be measured
in monetary terms, and neither can the United States
buy the loyalty of the Afghan people, which the United
States seems to have lost once and for all.

China’s assistance to Afghanistan is tangible and
has always been delivered as promised, benefitting
the Afghan people and reflecting equality and mutual
respect. We urge the international community,
especially the countries responsible for the war, to take
concrete actions to continue helping the Afghan people,
rather than abandoning or punishing them. Afghanistan
needs the help of the international community, and the
world also needs a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I will be brief. Let me just state that, if the
Russian Federation believes that there was an economy
in Afghanistan to be destroyed, it has been destroyed
by the Taliban.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
22/26

The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of the United States has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.

Also, let me be clear that the United States has not
turned its back on Afghanistan. We have remained in
the country and have continued to provide essential
assistance to the Afghan people. We are working
closely with the international community and partners
to support the establishment of mechanisms that will
22-47481

29/08/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

protect, preserve and disburse, on a limited basis,
the assets of the Central Bank of Afghanistan for the
benefit of the Afghan people.
I also want to be clear that we will not turn those
funds over to the Taliban to be used for their purposes,
which do not contribute to the well-being of Afghans.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Faiq (Afghanistan): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely briefing
on the humanitarian and economic situation in
Afghanistan. I also wish to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths, Mr. Markus Potzel, Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Ms. Lucy Edwards for their presentations and their
calls of urgency regarding the humanitarian situation
in Afghanistan.
We are discussing the situation in Afghanistan
one year after the Taliban’s takeover of Afghanistan
by force. As we heard in the briefing by Mr. Griffiths,
Afghanistan is going through one of the worst social,
political, economic and humanitarian crises at a global
level. The people are suffering the combined impact of
multiple natural and human-made catastrophes, such as
floods, poverty, unemployment, internal displacement
and migration. Women and girls, constituting half of
the population, are being deprived of their legitimate
rights and are being systematically erased from
social and public life. The doors of secondary schools
for girls are still closed; our youth remain hopeless
about their future. Afghan citizens from diverse
religious and ethnic groups remain highly vulnerable.
Professionals and educated people, the human capital,
are unemployed or are being dismissed or forced to
leave the country. In addition, there are credible reports
of detention, torture, extrajudicial killings and forced
disappearances of former security forces, journalists,
human rights activists, protesters and civilians accused
of having links with resistance forces in Baghlan,
Panjshir and Takhar provinces, as well as collective
punishment and forced displacement in those provinces
by the Taliban. In general, the outlook for a secure,
stable and prosperous Afghanistan is bleak and opaque.
The good news is that, as compared to previous
years, there has been a noticeable decrease in the level
of civilian casualties, an increase in national income
resources and a sharp decrease in corruption. However,
the Taliban de facto authorities have failed to earn

S/PV.9118

national and international trust, nor have they fulfilled
their commitments on core issues, including the
reopening of girls’ schools, respecting the fundamental
human rights of all citizens, particularly those of
women and girls, and establishing an accountable,
functional and inclusive system to effectively address
the current crises. Instead of putting Afghanistan
on a path towards economic development and selfsufficiency, the Taliban continued to consolidate its
rigid rule by imposing restrictions on citizens and
monopolizing power through convening gatherings of
religious scholars.
The current situation has triggered discontent
among the people and increased civil and military
resistance against the Taliban. In addition, there are
credible reports about the presence of regional and
international terrorist groups in Afghanistan, raising
concerns that the country might once again become
a safe haven for terrorism and extremism. The recent
multiple terrorist attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant-Khorasan Province and the killing of
Al-Qaida leader Ayman Al-Zawahiri in Kabul city
are testimony to this fact. What happens today in
Afghanistan will not stay in Afghanistan. To address
these common threats and challenges, collective and
genuine cooperation by all stakeholders — the Afghan
people, including the Taliban, regional and international
partners — is required.
On behalf of the people of Afghanistan, I would
like to reiterate our call for a national dialogue to
break the current impasse and provide the people of
Afghanistan with the opportunity to discuss and agree
on core issues through a framework or a road map for
formation of a representative and inclusive system.
I want to stress that only an inclusive, accountable
and functional system based on the well-being of
people, rule of law and justice, and the involvement of
professionals and credible people from all backgrounds
and with good reputations, including women, can save
Afghanistan from the current humanitarian crisis and
end the cycle of war. This cannot be achieved without
the support of the United Nations, which, as a credible
and legitimate organization, can engage actively with
all stakeholders and formulate a pathway to peace,
stability and prosperity in Afghanistan.
While we wholeheartedly appreciate the work
and efforts of the United Nations in Afghanistan, we
demand a stronger role for and further engagement from
it, beyond humanitarian assistance. In this context,

22-4748123/26

S/PV.9118

The situation in Afghanistan

we call on the Security Council and all international
partners to support and facilitate intra-Afghan dialogue
and a comprehensive political road map that can guide
all relevant efforts aimed at an inclusive, stable and
prosperous Afghanistan. I would like to express our
appreciation to the Council members who spoke before
to reaffirm their commitment to supporting the people
of Afghanistan, particularly Afghan women.
To ensure aid effectiveness and delivery of
assistance to the vulnerable people who desperately
need it, a transparent and accountable mechanism to
oversee and report on humanitarian aid in Afghanistan is
needed. I want to highlight that humanitarian assistance
is merely a short-term solution, and Afghanistan needs
development assistance operating within a transparent
system, which should include, among other conditions,
full transparency in the execution of a budget. We also
appreciate neighbouring countries and countries of the
region for their continued efforts to engage, through
the hosting of conferences and issuance of statements
in support of the Afghan people, including Afghan
migrants and refugees.
I call on the Taliban to protect and respect
the fundamental human rights of all citizens of
Afghanistan without prejudice based on gender, ethnic
and religious identity. This includes reopening girls’
schools and restoring full respect for women’s human
rights. The Taliban authorities must honour their
amnesty announcement, immediately end detention,
torture, forced displacements and extrajudicial killings
of former members of security forces and civilians,
and bring perpetrators of such acts to justice. These
acts are violations of international human rights and
international humanitarian law, as well as Islamic values
and principles. Afghanistan is home to all citizens who
have peacefully lived together for thousands of years,
with no minority or majority. We need inclusiveness
for the social, political and economic development of
our country.
In conclusion, my plea to the Security Council
and all regional and international partners is to have
a united stance and a cohesive approach in their
engagements on the issue of Afghanistan. The people
of Afghanistan have suffered immensely from the
protracted conflict and the wars imposed on them. We
hope that the Security Council stays fully engaged in
supporting the Afghan people and acts in accordance
with the principles and mandate entrusted to it by the
24/26

29/08/2022

United Nations Charter in ensuring peace and stability
in Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank the
Russian Federation for requesting today’s important
meeting and thank you, Mr. President, for convening it.
I also thank the briefers for their insightful briefings.
Just a year after the irresponsible withdrawal
of foreign forces from and the Taliban takeover
of the country, Afghanistan is now dealing with a
number of interconnected and overlapping crises.
The humanitarian situation is particularly dire.
Approximately 25 million people are now living in
poverty, with many going hungry. A prolonged drought
is also exacerbating food insecurity, and human rights
continue to be violated, particularly those of women
and girls, who are still denied access to education.
Meanwhile, the de facto authorities have yet to fulfil
their international obligations.
This catastrophic situation entails the responsibility
and obligations of those foreign forces that illegally
invaded and occupied Afghanistan under the guise of
fighting terrorism, leaving nothing but devastation in
their wake. It also serves as a reminder that military
intervention in other countries under the pretext
of combating terrorism, while claiming to bring
democracy, peace and prosperity, not only degrades
those common values, but also harms those States and
their peoples.
Against this backdrop, I would like to emphasize the
following points. The international community should
continue to support Afghanistan, particularly in terms
of providing humanitarian and development assistance,
which have been critical to keeping the Afghan people
alive, maintaining basic services and bolstering the
economy. We call once more for the return of frozen
assets belonging to the Afghan people, which is critical
for assisting the Afghan economy and saving lives; this
matter should not be politicized or conditional.
The Taliban must heed the international community’s
repeated calls for the formation of an inclusive
Government that accurately reflects Afghanistan’s
multiethnic society. An inclusive Government is
the only way to ensure and protect the rights of all
Afghan people, including women and girls, as well
as linguistic, racial and religious minorities. Despite
22-47481

29/08/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

repeated international calls, the Taliban has failed to
make significant efforts to ensure that the Government
is truly ethnically and politically inclusive. The
formation of an inclusive Government is a prerequisite
for and critical component of international recognition.
New reports on the resurgence of Da’esh, Al-Qaida
and their affiliated groups in Afghanistan are alarming,
particularly in the light of the recent spate of terrorist
attacks across the country that have killed and injured
more than 250 people this month, the most recent being
the attack on a mosque in Kabul on 17 August, resulting
in at least 54 casualties. The emergence of terrorist
groups could pose a serious threat to Afghanistan, its
neighbours, the region and beyond. This trend highlights
the international community’s ongoing demand that the
Taliban must commit to fighting terrorism and ensure
that Afghanistan no longer serves as a safe haven for
such terrorist organizations as Da’esh and Al-Qaida.
The security, stability and prosperity of Afghanistan
are intertwined and inseparable from those of its
neighbours, which have legitimate related interests
and immediate and grave concerns for Afghanistan’s
overall situation, particularly its security. They also
have significant capacity to bring peace and prosperity
to the country. The United Nations, and the Security
Council in particular, must use that capacity to improve
Afghanistan’s currently deteriorating humanitarian
situation and ensure the country’s long-term peace
and development.
We support the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan’s efforts to promote peace and stability
in Afghanistan in accordance with its mandate. The
United Nations can play a vital role in addressing
Afghanistan’s humanitarian crisis, as well as in
facilitating the intra-Afghan political process.
The Islamic Republic of Iran continues its efforts
to assist the people of Afghanistan and work with
Afghanistan’s neighbours and other partners to
ensure durable peace and sustainable development in
Afghanistan. We believe that a democratic, prosperous
and stable Afghanistan that is free of war, terrorism and
drugs benefits its people and is in the best interests of
all of its neighbours, the region and the world. We must
all work tirelessly and collectively to help achieve that
goal, while fully respecting Afghanistan’s territorial
integrity, unity and political independence.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.

S/PV.9118

Mr. Akram (Pakistan): First of all, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on a very successful presidency
this month. I would like to express my gratitude to those
delegations that expressed their condolences in the
light of the devastating floods in Pakistan. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths, Deputy Special
Representative Potzel and Ms. Morgan Edwards for their
briefings. We are grateful to the Russian Federation for
calling for this meeting and to you, Sir, for convening
it. This is a timely discussion on Afghanistan one year
after the withdrawal of foreign forces and the Taliban’s
takeover in Kabul.
It can be said of this long war — as of all wars
in Afghanistan — that it could not have been won
and should never have been fought. The withdrawal
of foreign forces was inevitable; the important issue
was what was left behind. A comprehensive political
solution among all Afghan parties, as well as between
them and the foreign presence, would have been the
best way to end the 20-year conflict.
Unfortunately, despite the efforts made — especially
by Pakistan — such an outcome proved elusive. The
Security Council, Afghanistan’s neighbours and the
international community are obliged to deal with the
realities in Afghanistan, not with subjective perceptions
and desires. What could not be imposed by force is
unlikely to be secured by sanctions, assets freezes or
travel bans.
Regardless of the ideology and the internal policies
of the Afghan interim Government, the primary interest
of the international community and of Afghanistan’s
neighbours — especially Pakistan — is the restoration
of sustainable peace and security in Afghanistan. That
implies, first and foremost, avoiding another civil war.
It would be irresponsible for anyone, neighbour or not,
to encourage or sponsor any insurgency or any terrorist
group in Afghanistan.
It is vital to continue humanitarian and economic
assistance to Afghanistan in order to avoid another civil
war, to arrest the rise of terrorist groups such as Da’esh
and to prevent economic collapse, a humanitarian crisis
and another refugee surge from Afghanistan. Even as
Pakistan and its people grapple with the devastating
impacts of the unprecedented floods that are ravaging
my country, we urge the international community to
fulfil the Secretary-General’s call for $4.2 billion in
humanitarian assistance and economic support to the
people of Afghanistan. Pakistan’s help to Afghanistan
will also continue.

22-4748125/26

S/PV.9118

The situation in Afghanistan

Similarly, we call for the release of all of
Afghanistan’s frozen national reserves and the creation
of effective mechanisms for their disbursement to,
and use by, the Afghan people. Without such support,
economic collapse and chaos may be the consequence.
The early resumption of reconstruction and the
implementation of shovel-ready connectivity projects
with Central Asia and other neighbours, including the
extension of the China-Pakistan economic corridor to
Afghanistan, can consolidate economic stabilization
in Afghanistan.
We are disturbed by the disagreement within the
Council on the resumption of the travel ban exemption
for the 13 Taliban leaders. We hope it does not signify
a geopolitical divergence on Afghanistan between
major Powers. That would have serious implications
for Afghanistan and the entire region. The isolation
of the Afghan interim Government is neither in the
interests of the Afghan people nor of the international
community. While we appreciate the frustration of
many Governments with the non-fulfilment of early
promises made by the Taliban on women and girls’
education, human rights, inclusivity and counterterrorism, isolating the Kabul leadership is unlikely to
persuade it to change its policies, much less its ideology.
It is only through sustained engagement that we can
advance the objectives of the international community
in Afghanistan, that is, respect for human rights,
political inclusivity and counter-terrorism. Despite
the difficulties, Pakistan believes that the Council,
the international community and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) should
develop a clear pathway to advance those three objectives.
Pakistan hopes that the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General will be appointed soon and that
UNAMA’s constructive engagement with the interim
Government will be maintained.
We agree with the representative of the United Arab
Emirates that the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC) has a special role to play in developing a pathway
towards normalization. We have presented the views of
the OIC to the Council previously. On human rights and
girls’ education, the OIC countries will seek to make
advances, inter alia, through conversations between
the Taliban and delegations of Islamic scholars and

26/26

29/08/2022

Ulema. Pakistan has initiated such exchanges, and we
are hopeful that progress can be made through that
process. Similarly, the OIC hopes, as do Afghanistan’s
neighbours, that progress can be made on the issue
of political inclusivity. Perhaps, in the first instance,
that could be promoted at the functional level. Any
encouragement of dissident groups can reverse efforts
to promote political inclusivity and reconciliation.
For Pakistan and for most of the international
community, the greatest concern is to prevent terrorism
from and within Afghanistan. We expect the Afghan
interim Government to prevent Afghanistan’s territory
from being utilized for terrorism against neighbours
or any other country, in particular by eliminating the
threat posed by Islamic State in Iraq and the LevantKhorasan Province, Da’esh, Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan,
the East Turkestan Islamic Movement and the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan, as well as Al-Qaida and other
terrorist groups, which is of vital importance.
Pakistan will support all sincere efforts by
the Afghan interim Government to neutralize and
eliminate those terrorist groups while fully respecting
Afghanistan’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Certain spoilers, however, who wish to encourage
terrorism against Pakistan from Afghan soil must be
vigorously dissuaded. Their objectives are focused on a
strategic advantage against Pakistan and its friends. We
will resist them vigorously
In response to its cooperation on terrorism, human
rights and political inclusivity, it is natural that the
Afghan interim Government desires reciprocal steps,
including humanitarian, economic and financial
assistance, the early removal of sanctions and eventual
diplomatic recognition. Those steps must not be
perceived in Kabul as being a bridge too far.
It is only through continued engagement and mutual
accommodation that peace and security will be restored
in Afghanistan. Pakistan will continue its endeavours
to that end within the format of Afghanistan’s six
immediate neighbours plus Russia; within the OIC;
with UNAMA; with the European Union; with other
friendly countries; and, if so desired, within the
platform of the troika plus Pakistan.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

22-47481
