S/2017/473*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 June 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2301
(2016), by which the Council renewed the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) until 15 November 2017 and requested me to report to the Council by
1 October 2016 and every four months thereafter. The report provides an update on
major developments in the Central African Republic and the implementation of the
mandate of MINUSCA since the issuance of my previous report ( S/2017/94) on
1 February 2017.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The period under review was marked by uneven progress in the political
process. Intensified clashes between armed groups in central and eastern prefectures
marred peace and recovery efforts, causing a deterioration of the humanitarian
situation. In contrast, a period of sustained calm in Bangui created the conditions
for key institutions to address the multiple stabilization and recovery challenges.
The presence of armed groups was also successfully reduced in Bambari thanks to
the robust posture of MINUSCA, enabling initial steps to restore State authority and
basic services in the country’s second most important town. This created an
environment in which all of the 14 main armed groups participated, for the first time
since the Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation, in 2015, in a dialogue with the
Government at the fourth meeting of the Consultative Follow -up Committee on
Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation. Meanwhile, while
progress was made towards establishing constitutionally mandated institutions,
political competition increased, in particular between the executive and legislative
branches of government. Some progress was recorded through the initial
disbursement of funds committed at the Brussels Conference for the Central Afr ican
Republic, held on 17 November 2016, but more will be required to deliver highly
anticipated peace dividends to the population and catalyse the implementation of the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan.

* Reissued for technical reasons on 8 June 2017.

17-08028* (E)

080617

*1708028*

S/2017/473

3.
Intense fighting continued among ex-Séléka groups over control of lucrative
swathes of territory in the central and eastern prefectures. The violence essentially
pitted the Unité pour la paix en centrafrique (UPC) against a coalition led by the
Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique (FPRC), uniting some
ex-Séléka factions and self-defence groups loosely referred to as anti-balaka. The
continued conflict between the FPRC coalition and UPC led to repeated attacks on
the Fulani population over its perceived affiliation with UPC. The attacks are also
driven by attempts to seize their resources (cattle, in particular). Anti -balaka aligned
with the FPRC coalition also targeted Muslim communities in the south and east.
This pattern of violence coincides with an increase in cattle migratin g into the
eastern Central African Republic, generating friction between local farmers and
herders and Fulani herders or armed militia, causing animosity towards the Muslim
community. In this environment, the targeted killing of Muslims in Bangassou on
13 and 14 May sparked reprisals in Bria from ex-Séléka members against
anti-Balaka elements of the FPRC coalition, demonstrating the fractured and
opportunistic nature of the FPRC coalition, as well as the risk that armed elements
may be easily manipulated by spoilers acting for self-serving reasons.
4.
In a context of continued violence, the Government convened the fourth
Consultative Follow-up Committee on Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration
and Repatriation on 20 and 21 April. Following robust actio n by MINUSCA in
February, FPRC and Maxime Mokom’s anti-balaka group decided to designate
representatives to the Committee, with the result that all 14 main armed groups
attended the meeting. During the proceedings, the President, Faustin Archange
Touadera, called for an immediate ceasefire and a broad dialogue under his auspices
on political issues and confirmed that he had accepted the offer of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation to support this dialogue.
5.
Several initiatives to support the peace process continued, including the
African Initiative, led by the African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, with the
support of Angola, Chad and the Republic of the Congo. For its part, the Community
of Sant’Egidio convened closed-door sessions with representatives of some of the
armed groups in February and March in support of peace. In this context, many
members of the National Assembly and civil society representati ves took public
stands against amnesty for individuals who have committed serious crimes and
human rights violations. On 13 April, the President of the National Assembly, Karim
Meckassoua, announced that the Assembly would launch its own peace initiative,
which he later clarified would be in support of the Government’s efforts.
6.
President Touadera marked one year in office on 30 March with an address to
the nation that highlighted his Government’s progress, including the establishment
of six institutions required by the Constitution such as the Constitutional Court,
progress towards operationalizing the Special Criminal Court, and the continued
deployment of civil servants to the prefectures. The President visited Bossangoa and
Obo, and Bambari twice, first in March with the Vice -President of the World Bank
for Africa and again in April with the Secretary-General of the International
Organization of la Francophonie. The President of the United Nations General
Assembly visited Bangui on 10 and 11 May to express his support for peacekeeping
and the country’s recovery efforts.
7.
The National Assembly held its second extraordinary session from 27 January
to 6 February during which it adopted legislation on intellectual property and the
postal system. The first ordinary session of 2017, held from 1 March to 31 May,
elected a new bureau of the Assembly on 9 March and adopted laws creating the
National Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms Commission and establishing

2/18

17-08028

S/2017/473

the new Military Justice Code, and ratified the African Charter on Democracy,
Elections and Governance.
8.
To foster greater collaboration and coordination with international partners on
economic recovery and development, humanitarian response, and key political and
governance reforms, the Government established structures to operationalize the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and the Framework for Mutual
Engagement between the Central African Government and the international
community On 22 March, the President convened the first meeting of the advisory
board, the highest-level forum within this architecture and the venue for discussions
between the Government and international partners on strategic issues related to
peace, stability, human security and recovery.

B.

Security situation
9.
In contrast to the relative calm in Bangui, armed group violence remained high
across the country, especially in Haute-Kotto, Mbomou, Ouaka, Ouham and OuhamPendé prefectures, driven by competition over seasonal livestock migration and
efforts to control resource-rich territory.
10. Hostilities rose sharply between the FPRC coalition and UPC in the centre and
eastern prefectures during February and March, but decreased in intensity in April
with many FPRC coalition fighters returning to their original positions. With the
intention of capturing Bambari and expelling UPC leader Ali Da rassa, the FPRC
coalition captured various UPC positions north of Bambari in February. On
11 February, following repeated warnings by MINUSCA that any further advance
towards Ippy (80 km north-east of Bambari, Ouaka prefecture) would be considered
a clear threat to civilians, a MINUSCA armed helicopter engaged a column of
approximately 300 members of the FPRC coalition 12 km east of Ippy after they
crossed the line stipulated by MINUSCA. Around this time, the former
Rassemblement patriotique pour le renouveau de la Centrafrique chief of staff and
leader of FPRC coalition operations in Bria, Joseph Zoundeiko, was reportedly
killed in circumstances that remain unknown. MINUSCA reinforced its position in
Ippy to prevent further movement towards Bambari. On 21 F ebruary, alleged FPRC
coalition elements fired upon MINUSCA between Ippy and Bambari, wounding four
peacekeepers.
11. As part of MINUSCA’s robust efforts to advance its mandated strategic
objective and protect civilians in and around Bambari, and in close coordination
with the Government, MINUSCA pressed the armed group leaders to leave Bambari
and subsequently launched “Operation Bekpa” to stabilize the town and enable the
gradual restoration of State authority. On 22 February, Ali Darassa and some UPC
elements withdrew from Bambari. Anti-balaka leaders followed suit shortly
thereafter. On 26 February, MINUSCA again used its armed helicopters to engage
FPRC coalition fighters as they attempted to infiltrate Bambari in violation of the
previously communicated line. MINUSCA subsequently detained Mouvement
patriotique pour la Centrafrique (MPC) political leader Idriss El Bachar and FPRC
political leader Yaya Idriss, and transferred both to national judicial authorities in
Bangui.
12. Security in Bambari was bolstered by a reinforced MINUSCA presence and
through the deployment of national security forces. However, armed group elements
remain in Bambari, though they are not displaying weapons or military attire. The
FPRC coalition continued to attempt to control the major routes around Bambari
and pursued UPC as it moved east, attacking Bakouma (110 km north of Bangassou,
Mboumou prefecture) on 20 March and gaining control of the Nzako mining site

17-08028

3/18

S/2017/473

(45 km north of Bakouma) on 21 March. Reports indicate that anti -balaka targeted
primarily Muslims in Bakouma, killing some 16 persons, while the FPRC attack on
Nzacko left two dead. Tensions also mounted between the FPRC coalition and the
Fulani population in and around Bria, Haute-Kotto prefecture. On 15 February,
UPC-affiliated Fulani armed men torched Makili village 60 km south of Bria. On
9 March, an armed Fulani group attacked Grao (70 km south-east of Bria), resulting
in IDP movement towards Bria.
13. Self-defence groups, loosely referred to as anti-balaka, in loose association
with the FPRC coalition increased attacks against UPC and ethnic Fulanis. During
the seizure of Bakouma, on 20 March, anti-balaka elements systematically attacked
Fulani civilians. On 24 March, MINUSCA repelled an anti-balaka attack on the
Fulani neighbourhood of Gobolo in Bria, detaining 11 anti -balaka elements, two of
whom were wounded; the other nine were transferred to national custody in Bangui.
On 11 April, MINUSCA seized a large cache of weapons and ammunition allegedly
destined for anti-balaka in Bangassou. On 8 May, anti-balaka ambushed a
MINUSCA convoy 20 km east of Bangassou, Mbomou prefecture, killing five
peacekeepers, and injuring ten, making this the deadliest attack against MINUSCA.
On 9 May, in Alindao, Basse-Kotto prefecture, anti-balaka clashed with UPC
causing an estimated 100 casualties, which led MINUSCA to deploy peacekeepers
to the area to protect some 14,000 displaced persons.
14. On 13 May, heavily armed anti-balaka launched an offensive against
MINUSCA in Bangassou, followed by attacks on the predominantly Muslim Tokoyo
neighbourhood. One peacekeeper was killed and one injured during the effort to
repel the offensive. Anti-balaka destroyed the access bridges to Bangassou, took
control of water points, and displaced some 2,500 persons who took refuge in the
cathedral, the mosque and the hospital. An estimated 7,200 persons remain
displaced in the town while some 2,750 have fled to the neighbouring Democratic
Republic of the Congo. At least 115 persons were killed and 64 injured. MINUSCA
reinforced its deployments in the area to stabilize the situation, including by
deploying additional peacekeepers and making use of its attack helicopters and
escorting some 1,000 Muslims to safety at the cathedral. Following the violence in
Bangassou, clashes broke out in Bria on 16 May between anti-Balaka and armed
elements from the Arab community, currently led by Ahmat Issa, loosely affiliated
with the FPRC-led coalition. The clashes, which lasted for several days, left at least
49 dead and 35 injured and caused the displacement of some 38,267 people.
15. Kaga Bandoro remained relatively calm, yet the number of security incidents
remained high, and ex-Séléka and anti-balaka continued to extort money from and
threaten some 9,000 internally displaced persons living around the MINUSCA
camp, preventing their return or relocation to another displaced persons camp in
Kaga Bandoro, currently sheltering 4,050 individuals after 6,700 reportedly returned
to their residences.
16. In the absence of State authority in the central and eastern prefectures, FPRC
and MPC are increasingly establishing parallel administration structures. Armed
elements purport to enforce order by illegally detaining and sentencing persons
suspected of committing crimes and extorting payments from them. FPRC in Ndélé
and Birao, and FPRC/MPC in Kaga Bandoro, occupy existing gendarmerie
buildings, appearing armed and in uniform, effecting illegal detentions and handing
down arbitrary sentences for alleged crimes. In Nzako, Mb omou prefecture, FPRC
elements oversee the activities of gendarmerie, police, custom services and mining
sites. FPRC recently provided fuel and medicine to Ndélé prefectural hospital,
threatening to take over the administration of the hospital if the State would not
address capacity gaps. In Vakaga prefecture, FPRC increased its presence along the

4/18

17-08028

S/2017/473

borders with Chad and the Sudan to control cross -border movements of persons and
goods.
17. In south-east Mbomou and Haut-Mbomou prefectures, security was affected
by criminal activities attributed to the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), the LRA
dissident Doctor Achaye, Sudanese poachers and rogue UPC elements. Along the
Zemio-Obo axis, unidentified armed elements killed two civilians on 31 January and
attacked a truck contracted by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) 110 km west of Obo on 10 February. On 17 February, presumed LRA
elements looted a town on the Dembia-Djema axis and temporarily abducted five
men. On 30 March, some 40 presumed LRA elements unsuccessfully attempted to
halt a MINUSCA logistics convoy 40 km east of Rafaï. In this context, the Uganda
People’s Defence Forces deployed in the Central African Republic as part of the
African Union Regional Task Force formally handed over sec urity to the Central
African authorities in a disengagement ceremony in Obo on 18 May, while the
United States forces supporting Task Force in the Central African Republic
terminated their operations on 25 April. On 12 May, the African Union Peace and
Security Council requested the Security Council to take disarmament of the Lord’s
Resistance Army into account in the mandate of MINUSCA.
18. In the north-west, the security situation was characterized by the efforts of
armed groups to control livestock. There is information about recriminations among
members of the National Assembly over allegations of support to local anti -Balaka
groups. MPC/Revolution et Justice (RJ) attempted to expand its area of influence
across Ouham and Ouham Pendé prefectures to the border with Cameroon,
generating conflict with anti-balaka. Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation (3R) and
anti-balaka clashed over the livestock trade along the Cameroon border in Ouham
Pendé prefecture. On 28 January, anti-balaka reportedly ambushed a convoy of
Fulani traders escorted by 3R near Koui, Ouham-Pendé, killing 12 individuals. On
2 February, 3R clashed with anti-balaka in Bocaranga, leaving two civilians and
seven 3R elements wounded, one anti-balaka dead and several thousand civilians
fleeing the area. During the incident, anti-balaka elements opened fire on
MINUSCA, prompting the peacekeepers to return fire. In March, MINUSCA
established a buffer zone to halt clashes between anti-balaka and MPC in Bozoum
and Gouzé, Ouham-Pendé prefecture.
19. The security situation remained relatively calm in Bangui. On 7 February,
MINUSCA supported an operation led by national security forces to arrest Youssouf
Malinga (alias “Big Man”), a member of a self-defence group. During the operation,
Malinga’s bodyguards responded to the attempted arrest by firing at the national
security forces. In the ensuing exchange of fire, Malinga and one of his men were
killed, in addition to two civilians, one of whom was a child. In a series of reprisal
attacks, Malinga’s men targeted civilians and religious buildings in the area,
including by hurling a grenade into a crowd. In total, 11 people were killed and
18 injured.
20. On 9 March, a MINUSCA police officer in civilian attire was assaulted by
suspected criminals in the third district of Bangui and died from his wounds. A
national investigation, supported by MINUSCA, was opened into the incident.

C.

Reconciliation
21. The first pillar of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan is aimed at
supporting peace, security and reconciliation as essential underpinnings to recovery
and normalization. In this regard, a network of local peace and reconciliation
committees will be created at the local, regional and national levels. Of the 16 local

17-08028

5/18

S/2017/473

peace committees, two have been established with support from the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). However, national authorities have yet to take
full ownership of these initiatives. Following the departure of UPC from Bambari,
the local peace committee was reconstituted. It organized community awarenessraising campaigns, reopened the central market and provided a platform for farmers
and herders to resolve their differences, free from control by armed groups.
22. The one-year anniversary of the non-aggression pact between the
predominantly Muslim PK5 district and the Christian neighbourhood of Boeing in
Bangui was celebrated on 11 February. Community leaders articulated a strategy for
ensuring the peaceful return of displaced Muslim families to the fifth district of
Bangui and established a committee to implement the strategy. Leaders also held
dialogues on freedom of movement, trade and peaceful coexistence.

III. Progress in implementing resolution 2301 (2016)
23. In line with its revised mission concept, MINUSCA’s integrated mandate
implementation approach focused on robust efforts to protect civilians in the light of
the persistent clashes, while simultaneously facilitating dialogue with armed groups
to persuade them to cease hostilities and honour their commitment to engage in the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation process. Through
Operation Bekpa, MINUSCA and partners are focusing efforts in and around
Bambari to implement an “armed group-free city” initiative and support the
Government to advance restoring State authority, including by coordinating efforts
with the United Nations country team and international partners.
24. MINUSCA continued strengthening mobility and responsiveness, including in
the context of Operation Bekpa through establishing an ad hoc joint task force for
Bambari. In an environment of inaccessible roads and destroyed bridges, the
combined use of transport and attack helicopters allowed the projection of forces
from Bangui and the adoption of a robust and dynamic posture. For example, in
March, a platoon was rapidly airlifted from Bangui to protect civilians under threat
in Bakouma, while robust patrols and mobile deployments were decisive in
preventing armed groups from entering Bambari. In the light of emerging new
hotspots in the south-east, MINUSCA continued to adjust its force posture by
redeploying troops in a flexible manner, but the situation is further compounded by
increased fighting among armed groups, which includes the targeting of MINUSCA,
and the departure of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces. Efforts are also focused
on assessing the broader military needs, including additional deployments within
the authorized troop ceiling.
25. MINUSCA strengthened its strategic use of communications in support of the
mandate and increased its outreach activities, including through the MINUSCA
radio station, Guira FM. It held 73 public information events across the country,
involving more than 85,000 people, to promote peaceful coexistence. This was
particularly important in Bambari to explain the redeployment of State authority and
the impartiality of the Mission in the light of accusations of bias.

A.

Immediate priorities
Protection of civilians
26. Efforts to continually adjust deployments enabled MINUSCA to enhance its
response time to early warnings and protection flashpoints. Likewise, increasing

6/18

17-08028

S/2017/473

community-level engagement in the design and implementation of community
protection plans allowed MINUSCA to enhance its protection of civilians’ efforts.
27. Violence associated with seasonal migration was characterized by cattle rustling
and reprisals involving anti-balaka militias and armed groups. The Government’s
operational plan to reduce violence associated with seasonal migration remains
largely unimplemented owing to funding shortages. The government institutions and
subregional mechanisms that regulated the seasonal migration prior to the crisis are
no longer functioning, resulting in cycles of violence and depriving Central Africans
of seasonal pastoralist income. In this context, MINUSCA continued to conduct
long-range patrols along migratory corridors, while local committees are pursuing
solutions at the community level.
28. Some 21 MINUSCA joint protection teams were deployed to investigate armed
group violence against civilians in different prefectures. These integrated teams
documented abuses of human rights and gathered information to enhance the ability
of MINUSCA to prevent and respond to violence. Through the United Nations Mine
Action Service, MINUSCA disposed of 9,598 ammunition and explosive devices in
populated areas and provided risk education to 74,710 beneficiaries.
Promoting and protecting human rights (including women and children)
29. MINUSCA documented 492 human rights violations or abuses or violations of
international humanitarian law committed against 834 victims, comprising 442 men,
103 women, 172 children (58 boys, 56 girls and 58 unidentified minors), and another
117 unidentified victims. These incidents comprised arbitrary killings, violations of
physical integrity, conflict-related sexual violence, arbitrary arrests and detentions
and abductions. The following armed groups were responsible for 326 human rights
abuses or violations of international humanitarian law: ex -Séléka factions (202),
anti-balaka (67), LRA (38), MPC/RJ (7), 3R (7), Front démocratique du peuple
centrafricain (4), and the Union des forces démocratiques pour le rassemblement
(UFDR) (1). Nearly half of these abuses occurred in the context of the conflict
between the FPRC coalition and UPC. National security forces were responsible for
165 violations, including 153 cases of arbitrary detention, of which 104 were
attributed to the national gendarmerie and 49 to national police.
30. The human rights mapping report on serious violations and abuses of
international human rights law and humanitarian law committed from 2003 to 2015
is slated to be launched on 30 May. The report will contribute to combating
impunity by supporting the prosecutorial strategy of the Special Criminal Court and
the development of transitional justice mechanisms.
31. The United Nations system continued to apply the United Nations human
rights due diligence policy. Of the 35 requests for support by non-United Nations
security forces (military, gendarmerie and police), 29 were approved, with risk
mitigation measures recommended when appropriate.
32. MINUSCA conducted 19 workshops to raise awareness on human rights,
including conflict-related sexual violence and transitional justice, for 796 individuals
(440 men and 356 women), local authorities, civil society and journalists. MINUSCA
also conducted 29 outreach campaigns on human rights -related issues, in which
2,625 people (1,267 women and 1,358 men) participated.
Conflict-related sexual violence
33. MINUSCA received reports of 27 conflict-related sexual violence incidents
affecting 20 women and 12 girls. Of the cases, 25 involved rape and 2 sexual

17-08028

7/18

S/2017/473

assault. The following armed groups were allegedly responsible: ex-Séléka factions
(13), the RJ/MPC coalition (5), LRA (6), anti-balaka (2) and UFDR (1).
Children and armed conflict
34. Grave violations and abuses committed against children by armed groups
continued to be verified by the country task force on monitoring and reporting.
Hostilities between the FPRC-led coalition and UPC continued to take a toll on
children. A total of 14 children (of whom 6 were girls) were killed; 13 children
sustained injuries; 12 girls were raped; and 6 children were abducted. A total of
16 children were recruited or joined armed groups, while two hospitals and four
schools were occupied and looted. Perpetrators of these grave child rights violations
included the FPRC coalition, UPC, anti-balaka, RJ, LRA and unidentified armed
individuals.
35. In order to enhance the monitoring of grave child rights violations and the
protection of children, 257 MINUSCA peacekeepers were trained on child rights
and child protection. The training was extended to 432 external partners, including
local communities, non-governmental organizations and national defence and
national security forces.
36. UNICEF provided integration support to 420 children released from armed
groups, while 239 children (of whom 55 were girls) were separated from anti -balaka
groups. As part of efforts to end the association of children with armed groups,
MINUSCA in collaboration with local partners organized a week-long campaign in
February to sensitize armed groups, community members and authorities in five
localities on the impact of armed conflict on children.

B.

Sustainably reducing the presence of, and the threat posed by,
armed groups
37. MINUSCA continues to implement a comprehensive strategy aimed at
achieving the strategic objective of sustainably reducing the threat and presence of
armed groups. This strategy is informed by the primacy of the political process.
Support for reconciliation and the extension of State authority
38. MINUSCA used its good offices to assist the Government in advancing
reconciliation, including by encouraging it to rapidly mobilize and deploy donor
funding to deliver essential services to the population and generate popular trust in
the Government’s commitment to equitable development. The United Nations
supported local dialogue among communities and provided short -term employment,
vocational training and awareness-raising sessions for 18,002 youth at risk,
members of vulnerable groups and displaced persons. MINUSCA facilitated 30 trips
by parliamentarians to consult their constituents on the work of the legislature.
39. MINUSCA supported the deployment of 410 civil servants countrywide,
primarily from the Ministry of Education. MINUSCA and UNDP supported the
Ministry of Interior in developing a guide to promote understanding of concepts of
good governance among civil servants in the regions. MINUSCA and UNDP, with
financial support from the Peacebuilding Fund, mapped the actual deployment of
government personnel and the conditions required to ensure that they are
operational.
40. Redeploying State security, judicial, social service and administrative
authorities to Bambari was prioritized to demonstrate t he ability of State institutions
to function properly to the benefit of the populations when armed conflict is

8/18

17-08028

S/2017/473

restrained. Some 90 gendarmes and police officers have deployed to Bambari after
being trained by MINUSCA and reviewed under the United Nations human rights
due diligence policy, and are working in tandem with MINUSCA uniformed
personnel. MINUSCA also supported the return of the local Prosecutor to Bambari.
Support for disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
41. MINUSCA facilitated the organization of the fourth meeting of the
Consultative Follow-up Committee on Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration
and Repatriation. A significant outcome of the meeting was the agreement by all
armed groups to participate in a pilot disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation/integration project, targeting 560 participants. However, FPRC
declined to validate the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme pending the fulfilment of several preconditions, including
the signature of a political agreement. The World Bank committed $30 out of the
$45 million required for the reintegration component of the national disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme .
42. In the absence of a political agreement and a national disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme, community violence
reduction and pre-disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
continued to play a vital role. A total of 4,324 ex-combatants, including 737 women,
are participating in pre-disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
programmes in eight locations through cash-for-work programmes, as a transitional
means to longer-term income generating projects, as well as through training to
support the sustainable reinsertion of ex-combatants.
43. The community violence reduction project in Ouham-Pendé prefecture,
implemented with the International Organization for Migration, engaged 6,723
beneficiaries, of whom 1,623 are women, in cash-for-work jobs and intercommunal
dialogue. In Bangui, through the community violence reduction projects launched
with the United Nations Office for Project Services, 543 beneficiaries, of whom
40 are women, completed vocational training and 777 beneficiaries, of whom 47 are
women, are participating in agro-pastoral training conducted by the Food and
Agriculture Organization. Community violence reduction beneficiaries also
included youth at risk through labour-intensive income-generating programmes.
44. The destruction of 169 items of unexploded ordnance and 840 rounds of small
arms ammunition and the safe storage of weapons collected through the
pre-disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation proc ess contributed
to the removal of weapons and ammunition from circulation and their potential use
by armed groups.
Support for security sector reform
45. Significant progress was achieved in designing an enabling strategic
framework for security sector reform, although this sector continues to suffer from
insufficient financing. The National Security Policy was adopted by the Council of
Ministers on 2 February. The elements contained in the policy were further
articulated in the 2017-2022 National security sector reform Strategy, adopted by
the Strategic Committee for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegra tion and
Security Sector Reform and National Reconciliation on 10 March. The strategy is
focused on three key areas: strengthening security se ctor capacity; reinforcing
security of persons, goods and restoration of State authority; and fostering good
governance and the rule of law. On 21 March, the Ministry of Defence launched the
development of a national defence policy, with support from the E uropean Union
Military Training Mission in the Central African Republic.
17-08028

9/18

S/2017/473

46. The European Union Military Training Mission completed the training of the
first battalion of national defence forces (Forces armées centrafricaines) and started
training the second battalion in May, while the Central African authorities are still
considering their deployment. The issue of equipment, sustainment and logistical
support for this trained battalion remains unresolved. MINUSCA conducted
training-of-trainers sessions for 120 military personnel, including 24 officers, on
information and communication sciences and battalion administration. MINUSCA
rehabilitated and furnished Camp Leclerc training centre in Bouar and is scheduled
to hand it over to the national authorities in May.
47. MINUSCA continued to support weapons and ammunition management
efforts; completed the training of 17 members of the security forces and
implemented three infrastructure projects, including the construction of one
armoury in Bangui and the deployment of one armoury container in Bambari.
Meanwhile, the establishment of the National Commission on Small Arms and Light
Weapons was made official on 14 February through a decree, drafted with support
from MINUSCA.
48. The recruitment process for 250 police officers and 250 gendarmes conducted
by national authorities continued to advance with MINUSCA support. Of 13,649
applications received from all 16 prefectures, 10,370 (of which 28 per cent were from
women) were assessed to meet the minimum requireme nts by a mixed oversight
committee comprising government, UNDP and MINUSCA representatives. The
committee prepared the selection tests, to ensure balanced geographical and gender
representation. The written and physical selection tests were completed by 27 May.
MINUSCA is coordinating with the Peacebuilding Fund and UNDP to ensure the
coverage of the running costs of the police and gendarmerie academies, while the
Government has committed to include the payroll of the 500 new officers in the
national budget for 2018. On 20 May, MINUSCA supported the launch of the
written examination for the recruitment of the gendarmes and police officers in all
the prefectures of the country, except for Haute-Kotto and Mbomou prefectures,
where the tests were postponed owing to security concerns.
Support for the rule of law and efforts to combat impunity, including through
the operationalization of the Special Criminal Court
49. Efforts to combat impunity continued to advance through the significant
progress made in operationalizing the Special Criminal Court, beginning with its
investigation and prosecution capacity. Three out of a total of six international
magistrates have been appointed, including the Special Prosecutor and two female
investigating judges. All five national magistrates were also appointed, while the
national Chief Registrar has yet to be selected. While the Special Prosecutor is
deployed on 25 May, investigation and prosecution can only begin after the Central
African authorities complete the selection of judicial police officers to form a team
of investigators. Full funding for the Court’s first 14 months has been secured, but a
significant gap remains with regard to the full five years of its initial duration.
Following the adoption of the Military Justice Code by the National Assembly on
7 March, MINUSCA is working with the Central African authorities to clarify the
provisions of the code regarding the need to maintain the exclusive jurisdiction of
the Special Criminal Court on crimes against humanity, war crimes and genocide.
50. MINUSCA continued its efforts to support the rule of law. The Mission
apprehended 92 alleged perpetrators, using urgent temporary measures in 57 cases.
Owing to insecurity and the lack of functional courts and prisons outs ide the capital,
MINUSCA temporarily detained and supported the transfer to Bangui, at the request
of the Government, of 33 of those apprehended. MINUSCA continued to provide
advice to investigations into some 17 people allegedly involved in serious crimes ,
10/18

17-08028

S/2017/473

most notably against 13 FPRC coalition members indicted in March 2017 on counts
of war crimes and crimes against humanity.
51. The High Judicial Council continued to rotate judicial personnel, with
magistrates taking up new posts in February and March. A total of 19 new
magistrates were named throughout the country and 10 took up their posts by early
March in Bangui. Housing and payment of salary for magistrates continue to
undermine their sustainable redeployment beyond Bangui.
52. Challenges afflicting the justice system are having a significant impact on
overcrowding in prisons. The Ngaragba central prison and its annex at Camp de
Roux stand at 178 per cent and 116 per cent, respectively, of their capacity. In the
past six months, MINUSCA has continued to engage the Prosecutor at the appeals
court in Bangui to develop strategies to accelerate the processing of pending cases,
including limiting incarceration in cases of minor infractions to time served in
pretrial detention. Magistrates unable to return to some regions owing to insecurity
were temporarily assigned to Bangui in April to help reduce the backlog of cases,
thereby enabling weekly court sessions to be doubled, from three to six.
53. To prevent further overcrowding in Bangui, MINUSCA financed the
reconstruction of three detention facilities in Bangassou, Kaga Bandoro and Mbaïki
through quick-impact projects. As part of MINUSCA’s support to the national
authorities to demilitarize prisons, it completed an initial assessment of the needs in
this area and for the rehabilitation and social reintegration of prisoners.
Overcrowding, poor conditions and a general lack of prisoner activity have
contributed to insecurity within prisons. In March, with support from Canada and
Sweden, 60 MINUSCA corrections officers participated in specialized prison
intervention training to enhance the ability of MINUSCA ability to address prison
insecurity.
Natural resources management
54. MINUSCA provided logistical and security support for national authorities
during their field inspection and monitoring missions related to the Kimberley
Process, with the aim of assessing the extent of armed group presence, improving
security to enable the free movement of goods and persons, and restoring and
extending State authority in the mining areas in the south-west of the country.

C.

Coordination of international assistance and the Mutual
Engagement Framework
55. The Government established mechanisms for the implementation, monitoring
and evaluation of the Mutual Engagement Framework and the National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan. The three-tiered coordination structure comprises a highlevel policy advisory board, a joint executive committee, and a technical level
coordination forum for each pillar of the development strategy. The pillar on peace
and security is co-chaired by the Presidency and the United Nations and has
completed a mapping of projects and identified potential gaps in funding.
Consultations are still under way for the co-presidency arrangements of the other
two pillars, which has delayed their operationalization.
56. At the Brussels Conference in November 2016, donors pledged $2.28 billion
to support the 2017-2021 National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. To date,
donors have confirmed an estimated $2.23 billion, or 97 per cent, of the total
pledges. The final amount, however, could be higher, as some donors have increased
their pledges, while others that were not present in Brussels later decided to support

17-08028

11/18

S/2017/473

the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. Of all pledges committed,
approximately 43 per cent were allocated to economic recovery and the productive
sectors, 40 per cent to strengthening the social contract between the State and the
population and 14 per cent to support peace, security and reco nciliation, and 3 per
cent to other issues. For 2017, expenditure to date on ongoing projects is
$54.2 million (or 25.9 per cent) out of a projected $209.3 million for the first year.

IV. Humanitarian situation
57. The worsened violence over the past six months resulted in increased
humanitarian needs, with multiple new hotspots emerging across the country,
including in areas where there were already displaced populations. In April alone,
more than 40,000 people were displaced as a result of fighting in the north-western
and eastern parts of the country. One out of five Central Africans is currently
displaced outside or inside the country, while armed violence is preventing them
from returning home. The total number of internally displaced persons increased
from 401,072 in February to 426,100 in March. This increase was predominantly
due to new displacements recorded in Mbomou, Ouaka and Ouham-Pendé prefectures.
During the same period, several displacement sites closed in Bangui with returns
observed in the sub-prefecture of Bakala, Ouaka prefecture, and in Kaga Bandoro.
Over 1,000 people fleeing violence crossed the border into Chad and Cameroon,
which are hosting some 230,000 refugees. The number of refugees in neighb ouring
countries has increased slightly to 483,000 as at 30 April. Some 1,639 South
Sudanese refugees relocated from Bambouti to Obo, Haut-Mbomou prefecture.
58. Some 2 million people — or approximately 50 per cent of the population —
remain food insecure. Meanwhile, despite efforts to mobilize donors, including a
high-level briefing with donors on humanitarian challenges held in Yaoundé on
15 March, humanitarian activities remain severely underfunded. As at 15 May the
Humanitarian Response Plan for 2017 had garnered only 16 per cent of the
$399.5 million funding necessary.
59. Humanitarian actors also face insecurity, as they continue to be targeted
indiscriminately. Some 31 per cent of attacks against non-governmental
organizations recorded globally in 2016 took place in the Central African Republic,
thereby making it the most dangerous place in the world for humanitarian actors.
60. While ongoing hostilities in the east have severely limited humanitarian
access, other areas of concern include Koui in Ouham-Pendé prefecture in the west,
which has been inaccessible since October 2016, and Ngaoundaye, where armed
groups recently provoked the displacement of an additional 20,000 persons in early
April, some of whom sought refuge in Chad. Accidental fire and torrential rains in
April greatly damaged the camps for internally displaced persons in Batangafo,
Ouham prefecture, and Kaga Bandoro, Nana Grébizi prefecture, causing deaths,
injuries and loss of property.

V. Socioeconomic developments
61. Growth stood at 4.5 per cent in 2016, driven by forestry and agriculture.
Subject to improved security, a portion of the $2.28 billion pledged to support the
2017-2021 National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan is expected to be used to
inject money into the economy through public investment to address social needs.
62. Pursuant to the approval of a $120 million three-year extended credit facility,
the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, Christine Lagarde,
12/18

17-08028

S/2017/473

visited Bangui on 24 and 25 January and called upon the Government to raise
domestic revenue, repay current debt, refrain from contracting new debt and
improve public finance management.

VI. Deployment of the Mission
A.

Military
63. As at 15 May, MINUSCA had deployed 10,471 military personnel (97.4 per
cent of the authorized strength of 10,750), comprising 11 infantry battalions, a
special forces company, a quick reaction force company, an unmanned aerial vehicle
unit (deployed on 7 April 2017) and several enabling units, namely a military police
unit, four engineering companies, a heavy transport company, three level II hospitals,
a signal company and three helicopter units, including a combat helicopter unit.
Women comprised 1.5 per cent of military personnel. Troo p-contributing countries
continued to improve the equipment of their respective contingents.

B.

Police
64. As at 15 May, MINUSCA had deployed 1,845 police personnel (89 per cent of
the authorized strength of 2,080), comprising 302 individual police officers (75 per
cent of the authorized strength of 400, largely owing to the need for specialized
recruitment profiles), as well as nine formed police units and two protection support
units, comprising 1,543 personnel (92 per cent of the authorized streng th of 1,680),
including 103 women. A total of 81 individual police officers are deployed in
10 locations outside Bangui, while of the nine formed police units, three were in
Bambari, Bouar and Kaga Bandoro. The remaining unit is expected to deploy in
Bria in June.

C.

Civilian personnel
65. As at 15 May, MINUSCA had deployed 1,329 civilian personnel, representing
an incumbency rate of 77 per cent against a total of 1,724 authorized positions
(790 international, 696 national and 238 United Nations Volunteer positions). Female
staff members constitute 25 per cent of civilian personnel deployed and 22 per cent
of personnel holding a senior position at the P -5 level or above. The recruitment and
retention of female staff, including United Nations Volunteers , remains extremely
challenging.

D.

Status-of-forces agreement
66. Despite government efforts to address outstanding issues related to the status of-forces agreement, there were serious breaches. On 2 February, the importation of
four containers of flour for military contingents was blocked by customs for almost
two months. The containers were released on 23 March, but the incident had already
had negative consequences on the distribution of rations to MINUSCA peacekeepers.
On 6 March, two containers of arms and ammunitions to support the deployment of
a Jordanian formed police unit were seized and searched by local authorities in the
absence of a United Nations representative. Although the incident was resolved, a
firearm was missing when the containers were inventoried. On 14 March, two
containers carrying plastic pipes were searched by customs officials in the absence
of a United Nations representative.

17-08028

13/18

S/2017/473

67. The reimbursement to the United Nations of fuel taxes, which had been
improperly imposed on MINUSCA in 2015 and 2016, was discussed at a meeting of
a joint Government-MINUSCA working group on the implementation of the status of-forces agreement held on 12 April 2017. Government representatives agreed that
MINUSCA is exempt from fuel taxes pursuant to the agreement and affirmed that a
procedure for reimbursing previously paid fuel taxes would be established. The
Ministry of Finance confirmed that United Nations staff members are exempt from
lease registration and related tax payments. Moreover, the practice of imposing
taxes on MINUSCA personnel leaving the country with the residue of their pay and
emoluments ceased.

VII. Safety and security of United Nations staff
68. The challenging security situation in the country is negatively impacting
United Nations personnel, civilian and uniformed, national and international.
Demonstrations and carjacking were recorded in Bangui and the outlying regions. In
recent months, armed groups have begun issuing threats to kidnap both national and
international staff in retaliation for the operations of the Mission. 134 security
incidents affected 107 personnel of the United Nations security management system.
In addition, 6 peacekeepers lost their lives as a result of attacks and 30 were
seriously injured.

VIII. Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
69. Between 1 February and 30 April 2017, 14 allegations of serious misconduct
were reported to MINUSCA, including 5 allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse,
representing a significant reduction in the number of new allegations reported, as
compared with the same period a year ago. One of the new allegations relates to
misconduct reported to have occurred in 2016 and four to incidents in 2017. In line
with the MINUSCA sexual exploitation and abuse action plan, the Mission continued
to enhance preventive efforts, including increasing the number of training of trainer
sessions; better monitoring and oversight of training provided to all contingents;
frequent risk assessments; increased sensitization by sexual exploitation and abuse
focal points within military and police components; and paying particular attention
to troops serving in remote areas and newly rotated contingents.
70. MINUSCA collaborated with United Nations agencies to improve its victims’
assistance tracking tool and strengthen reporting, information sharing and
coordinated responses with regard to the processing of sexual exploitation and ab use
allegations. Consistent with my directive, MINUSCA appointed a victims rights
advocate and will use its resources to provide, inter alia, psychosocial assistance
and legal assistance to address criminal incidents or, where the alleged victim is a
minor, security, shelter and temporary financial support to a victim or their family
based on need.

IX. Financial aspects
71. The General Assembly, by its resolution 70/271, appropriated the amount of
$920.7 million for the maintenance of MINUSCA for the period from 1 July 2016 to
30 June 2017. As at 15 May 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special
Account for MINUSCA amounted to $52 million. The total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
$1,679.2 million. Reimbursement of troop and formed police unit costs has been
14/18

17-08028

S/2017/473

made for the period up to 30 January 2017, while reimbursement of the cost of
contingent-owned equipment has been made for the period up to 31 December 2016,
in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

X. Observations
72. Over recent months, the Central African Republic has oscillated between
consolidating gains achieved since the election of President Touadera, primar ily in
Bangui, and a serious deterioration of the security situation in other parts of the
country, including deadly attacks against United Nations peacekeepers. As relevant
as many of the advances to date have been, the latest spate of violence that erupted
in May in some towns in the east and centre of the country risks derailing the
progress achieved over the last year and spreading with disastrous consequences,
both for civilians and the country’s stability. We must avoid the persistent violent
conflict and the associated tensions setting the country yet again on a downward
spiral. I remain personally committed to exploring all possible options to contributing
to reversing this negative trend and assisting the country in consolidating peace.
73. The clashes between armed groups in particular FPRC and UPC and violence
perpetrated by anti-balaka groups operating in the south-east are of grave concern.
The attacks against civilians on account of their ethnicity or religion and against the
peacekeepers deployed to protect them are unacceptable. I call upon all armed
groups to immediately cease hostilities and demonstrate their commitment to
peaceful dialogue. I reiterate my call on regional leaders and institutions to use their
influence to bring an end to the violence.
74. MINUSCA has demonstrated that it stands ready to act robustly to protect
civilians and defend its mandate. I commend the call of President Touadera for an
open, inclusive and genuine dialogue with the armed groups, and welcome the
recent participation of all 14 armed groups in the national consultative committee
for the implementation of the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme. I urge all groups and the Government to engage in this
dialogue as a matter of urgency and to honour their commitment to pursue a
political agreement vital to the success of the national disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programme and longer -term security sector reform. It
is essential that this dialogue be inclusive and build upon the recommendations of
the Bangui Forum.
75. I welcome the acceptance by President Touadera of the offer of assistance by
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation, which has the potential, with
strong regional and international support backed by a unified Security Council, to
support a comprehensive peace agreement between the Government and all armed
groups. I have expressed the full support of the United Nations for the African
Initiative, and urge the African Union and the other members of the Initiative to
quickly define and implement a road map to take this process forward. I wish to
stress that time is of the essence. We have to work quickly in order to offer an
alternative to violence to some armed groups and offer a short respite for the
process to move forward. The onset of the rainy season should limit armed group
movements. At the same time, I encourage the subregion to take concrete steps to
address cross-border issues that foster insecurity in the Central African Republic
and its neighbours, most notably illicit arms trafficking and seasonal migration. As
the pastoralist season has peaked, subregional solutions to this sensitive political,
economic and social issue are urgently required.
76. The capacity of the State remains extremely limited and State authority is only
very gradually extending in areas where the security situation is relatively stable.
17-08028

15/18

S/2017/473

Progress is slow and not without tension between the executive and legislative
branches as they adjust to their democratic roles. It is now incumbent on all national
actors to make the most of the present engagement with the support of the
international community, to work in an inclusive manner to accelerate efforts to
advance reconciliation, consolidate the fragile gains and translate them into peace
dividends, in particular beyond Bangui.
77. Further progress requires that Central Africans begin to see the dividends of
peace. I urge national leaders to act swiftly and decisively to establish the capacity
to mobilize, receive, manage and account for the generous donor funding pledged
during the November 2016 Brussels conference. In doing so, a return to the corrupt
practices and poor governance that triggered the crisis of recent years must be
prevented. I urge donors to make funds available as quickly as possible, including
for labour-intensive infrastructure projects that both gainfully employ young adults
and weave the country together through a road network and social service systems.
The impact of donor funding will be short-lived without the political commitment of
those elected to serve the population and the resolve of all stakeholders to forfeit
short-term gains for the long-term benefit of Central Africans countrywide. In this
vein, I encourage the Government to use the Mutual Engagement Framework to
obtain political support for, and demonstrate progress towards, agreed commitments.
78. The significant donor pledges demonstrated the determination of the
international community to assist the Central Africans in this journey. I call upon all
partners to take advantage of the presence of the peacekeeping operation in the
country to prioritize and align responses, taking advantage of the security efforts of
MINUSCA to inject development funding and quickly provide evidence of the
benefits of stability, namely, employment, infrastructure and social services. The
approach of the World Bank to working in fragile States such as the Central African
Republic is a good example of such partnership with the United Nations.
79. I welcome the progress achieved towards the restoration of security and State
authority in Bambari. The relative absence of armed groups in the town may be a
source of cautious optimism, but we must not allow the town to be isolated in a sea
of turmoil. This is why I urge the Government to prioritize the lasting redeployment
of capable and accountable State authority, basic services and security in order to
rebuild trust with the local population. The United Nations system in the country,
together with its partners, will continue to support these efforts through an
innovative whole-of-system approach. This will be buttressed by the continued
readiness of MINUSCA to act decisively to ensure the protection of the people of
Bambari.
80. The steps taken to develop a strategic framework on security sector reform are
encouraging. While the adoption of key security sector reform documents signals
the formal commitment of national authorities to establish professional, ethnically
representative and regionally balanced national defence and security forces, I urge
the Government to translate this vision into tangible actions. The launch of the
recruitment of 500 new gendarmerie and police officers is a welcome development
in this regard. I call on the Government to ensure that the composition of these new
recruits is geographically representative and gender-balanced. I also welcome the
progress in the training of the Central African armed forces by the European Union
Training Mission, even although concerns remain that the lack of coherent
operational and logistical support arrangements will hamper any future deployment.
I urge the Government to allocate sufficient funding in its budget to sustain its
security forces and call upon international partners to provide additional funding,
equipment and logistical support.

16/18

17-08028

S/2017/473

81. I am encouraged to see steady progress towards the operationalization of the
Special Criminal Court, which is expected to have jurisdiction over crimes against
humanity, war crimes and genocide. I call upon the national authorities to take the
necessary steps to ensure that the Special Prosecutor can immediately start
investigations. I commend the mapping of serious violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human rights law, which will inform
transitional justice mechanisms, as well as the work of the Special Prosecutor.
82. I am outraged by the continued attacks on peacekeepers and aid workers, both
international and national. I strongly condemn the cowardly attack that killed
5 peacekeepers and wounded 10, making this the single deadliest attack against
MINUSCA. The loss of a sixth peacekeeper in the subsequent attack on Bangassou
is reprehensible. These attacks constitute serious crimes under international la w, and
I call for the perpetrators to be held accountable.
83. I am deeply concerned about the impact that the security situation is having on
the humanitarian situation, which is further compounded by the persistent gap
between humanitarian needs and resources. We need to stem the flow of
humanitarian actors leaving the country because of lack of funding and insecurity.
The continued attacks against aid workers who are helping the destitute must stop. I
urge the international community to urgently contrib ute to the Humanitarian
Response Plan to avoid a further deterioration of the situation.
84. I express my sincere gratitude to my Special Representative, Parfait Onanga Anyanga, for his unflinching dedication to consolidating peace in the country. I pay
tribute to the women and men of MINUSCA, the United Nations country team and
to the troop- and police-contributing countries for their dedication to the cause of
peace in a highly demanding and challenging environment. I am also grateful to my
Special Representative for Central Africa and Head of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa, François Louncény Fall, for his role in the subregion in
support of the Central African Republic. I thank the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the European Union, the World Bank,
international partners and non-governmental organizations for their continued
efforts to contribute to peace and security in the Central African Republic.

17-08028

17/18

S/2017/473

18/18

17-08028
