S/PV.8610

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8610th meeting

Thursday, 29 August 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 1 August 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2019/619)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-26518 (E)
*1926518*

S/PV.8610

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.

unity. We thank all the members for their involvement
in the negotiations and for their spirit of compromise.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 1 August 2019 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2019/619)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Israel and Lebanon to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2019/690, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/619, which contains the text of a
letter dated 1 August 2019 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2485 (2019).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2485
(2019), illustrating the Security Council’s collective
support for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), whose role is essential to preserving peace
in a volatile regional context. As it does every year,
France worked energetically to maintain this Council
2/6

29/08/2019

UNIFIL is vital to stability in Lebanon and the
region and must remain the guarantor of the cessation of
hostilities between Lebanon and Israel, in keeping with
resolution 1701 (2006). We, members of the Council, are
all guarantors of UNIFIL’s credibility. It is important
that UNIFIL remain a peacekeeping and dissuasive
force seen as neutral by all the parties It must remain a
mediation tool in the service of conflict resolution.
Under the impetus of the Council, UNIFIL has
made considerable efforts over the past two years
to implement resolutions 2373 (2017) and 2433
(2018) — for example, by stepping up patrol operations
on the ground, in close cooperation with the Lebanese
Armed Forces. We wanted this momentum to continue
this year on the occasion of the mandate renewal. We
also wanted to reflect the concerns raised by several
of the delegations, all the while maintaining consensus
within the Council.
This new text clearly reiterates the need to
guarantee UNIFIL’s freedom of movement and security
throughout its area of operation, in coordination with
the Lebanese authorities. Protecting the integrity of
UNIFIL’s mandate contributes to the political stability
and security of Lebanon and the region at a time when
the balance is fragile. France repeats its attachment to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
In the light of recent tensions, it is imperative that all
parties show the utmost restraint and adhere to Security
Council resolutions by refraining from any violation
of the Blue Line. In the end, only the presence of the
Lebanese State and of its armed and security forces will
create the conditions for long-term stability in southern
Lebanon and in Lebanese territorial waters. It was with
this ultimate objective in mind that we this year again
approached the mandate renewal.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we welcome the adoption of resolution 2485
(2019), which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for one year without
amendment of the mandate or a reduction of forces. We
thank France, the penholder, for its professionalism and
constructive cooperation throughout the negotiations.
This unanimous extension reflects the continued support
of the Security Council for UNIFIL’s mandate and our
joint belief in UNIFIL’s important and significant role,
in close cooperation with the Lebanese Government
19-26518

29/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

and army, for promoting security and stability in the
country and the region.
The negotiations on the draft resolution coincided
with worrisome developments on the ground, in
particular the recent incident involving two Israeli
drones in Beirut. We reiterate our condemnation of
Israel’s continued violation of Lebanese sovereignty
and resolution 1701 (2006), as well as its other repeated
airspace violations, which have been condemned by the
Secretary-General in all his consecutive reports on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). The Security
Council should send a stern message to compel Israel to
stop such violations.
The recent escalation by Israel reaffirms the
importance of UNIFIL’s role in alleviating tensions
and maintaining peace and security in south Lebanon.
Preserving that important role is what led us to work
together in order to maintain UNIFIL’s mandate and
show our unity in supporting it.
In conclusion, we thank UNIFIL troops for their
efforts and sacrifices, as well as all contributing
countries. We call once again on all parties to respect
the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of Lebanon as well as its right to take back the
Sheba’a Farms, the Kfar Shuba Hills and the Lebanese
part of Al-Ghajar village, which are occupied by Israel.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The United
States joined the consensus in support of today’s
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). We commend France for
the cooperative spirit in which it led this process. I also
want to express our deep appreciation to the troopcontributing countries for their ongoing sacrifices in
support of UNIFIL’s critical work.
We of course welcome the active approach that
UNIFIL’s leadership has taken to de-escalate tensions
along the Blue Line and preserve the mission’s vital
access to it. The United States remains steadfast in
its commitment to UNIFIL and to Lebanon’s security,
stability and sovereignty. We have a common interest
in seeing UNIFIL succeed, but it continues to be
prevented from fully implementing its mandate. We
cannot continue to accept that status quo.
The implementation of the arms embargo under
resolution 1701 (2006) remains a top priority for the
United States. While some Council members did not
want to include language that was too prescriptive in

S/PV. 8610

this mandate renewal, in the coming year the Secretariat
needs to take serious steps to build on the annex and
increase the United Nations reporting on and ability to
effectively monitor and verify the implementation of
the arms embargo. As we made clear to the Council just
a few weeks ago, we continue to see UNIFIL prevented
from accessing areas of concern. Eight months after
their discovery, UNIFIL still cannot access suspected
Hizbullah tunnel sites on the Lebanese side of the
Blue Line because Lebanese leaders have not directed
their armed forces to investigate suspected sites
with UNIFIL. In this renewal, we made serious efforts
to address access issues. There was some progress, but
we were unable to include a time frame for facilitating
access, which is necessary for accountability. We must
do more to ensure that UNIFIL has unimpeded, timely
access to the entire Blue Line and to urge the Lebanese
civilian leadership to address these concerns.
The fact that UNIFIL cannot access all of the areas
within its area of operations leads us to believe that it
is time to re-examine the troop strength and begin the
process of putting the mission on a trajectory toward
right-sizing. In the year ahead, we will be scrutinizing
the ability of the mission to implement its mandate, and
we hope that the United Nations will take the assessment
of the continued relevance of UNIFIL’s resources and
options for mission efficiencies seriously.
We have all endorsed the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. One of those commitments is to pursue
clear, focused, sequenced, prioritized and achievable
mandates by the Security Council matched by
appropriate resources. If UNIFIL is prevented from
fully implementing its mission within the parameters
of its current mandate, it is the Council’s responsibility
to adjust the mandate accordingly.
We look forward to working with the Council over
the course of the year, but I must reiterate that we need
to see serious progress and cannot, and will not, accept
the status quo, moving forward.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): We welcome today’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 2485 (2019), renewing
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). We want to explicitly thank France,
as penholder, for the professional and constructive
conduct of the negotiations. The extension of UNIFIL’s
mandate is proof of the Council’s continuous and strong

19-265183/6

S/PV.8610

The situation in the Middle East

support for the mission and its appreciation for its work.
In the current regional context, the role of UNIFIL in
preserving calm at the Blue Line and beyond cannot be
overestimated. For all of us who want to see stability
between Lebanon and Israel, investment in the mission
is worthwhile. UNIFIL remains a crucial de-escalating
element in the region that we must preserve, support
and strengthen.
In that regard, we call on Lebanon and Israel
to use the instruments of UNIFIL, in particular
the communication channel through the Tripartite
Mechanism, in order to find a way to de-escalate and
reduce current tensions. We call on all sides to exercise
restraint with regard to both action and rhetoric, respect
the provisions of UNIFIL’s mandate and avoid any
action that violates resolution 1701 (2006) and threatens
the stability between Lebanon and Israel.

29/08/2019

My delegation has repeatedly stressed the important
and positive role of UNIFIL, in cooperation with the
Lebanese Armed Forces, in sustaining the cessation
of hostilities, preventing new conflicts and assisting
the Lebanese Government to ensure the return of its
effective authority in the area.
As a troop-contributing country. Indonesia
has always highlighted the importance of the
professionalism of our peacekeepers in implementing
their mandates on the ground. That includes engaging
with the host country and local communities in order
to assist the mission in ensuring that its activities are
indeed effective in improving the lives of the people
whom it is deployed to serve and protect.

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia would like to
thank France, as the penholder, for its hard work in
facilitating the mandate renewal process. My delegation
voted in favour of resolution 2485 (2019), primarily as
a result of fully respecting and preserving the unity of
the Council. We have always stated that the unity of the
Council is of the utmost important.

Regarding the request to the Secretary-General to
conduct and provide the Council with an assessment of
UNIFIL’s resources, my delegation would like to stress
that such an assessment needs to be conducted in close
consultation with all relevant stakeholders, particularly
the troop-contributing countries. It is only logical that
countries whose people participate in peacekeeping
missions should be properly engaged. Clearly, the
United Nations peacekeeping operation must be fully
prepared, especially in the face of the changing and
complex situation, as well as the increasingly dangerous
security environment. However, it is also critical to
ensure that the mission be given clear mandates, with
the necessary equipment and resources.

Indonesia commends the dedication of all men
and women serving under the Blue Flag in the various
United Nations peacekeeping operations around the
world, including the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). For the past two decades, United
Nations peacekeeping operations have proved to be
highly adaptable. They have significantly contributed
to the declining number of conflicts and have become
flagship activities of the United Nations. Let that
be clear.

Lastly, there are those who question the
performance and effectiveness of the Blue Helmets
in serving UNIFIL. I would like to say that such a
view is not only demeaning but also disrespectful to
the many peacekeepers who have sacrificed their
lives serving humanity and peace, including the 314
peacekeepers who gave their lives serving UNIFIL and
the world to date in 2019. That is the highest number of
fatalities of United Nations peacekeepers in all United
Nations missions.

For Indonesia, it is therefore unacceptable if the
objective and activities of such missions, including
those of UNIFIL, are to be undermined. Indonesia is
concerned about the trend of the systemic approach in
weakening the role of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. It is important to ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping operations will always be collective
efforts, in which all stakeholders of United Nations
peacekeeping operations play an important role in
those concerted efforts.

I would like to be clear in saying that I hope that we
have all made the right decision today. May the souls of
those 314 peacekeepers rest in peace,

Finally, we want to commend the valuable work of
all peacekeepers on the ground under the leadership of
Force Commander Del Col. It remains essential that
UNIFIL be able to fully implement its mandate.

4/6

Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2484 (2019), which demonstrates the Security Council’s
overall recognition of the important support for the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
It is conducive to maintaining stability in southern
19-26518

29/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Lebanon and facilitates the further implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006).
China recognizes the important contribution
of UNIFIL in continuing to effectively implement
its mandate and maintaining overall calm in its area
of operations and regional stability. The Tripartite
Mechanism is a good example of conflict-resolution
through dialogue and consultation. We commend the
great dedication of the troop-contributing countries
and all peacekeeping personnel and hope that the safety
of those personnel can be effectively guaranteed.
Currently, there are escalating tensions in the
region, as well as frequent local conflicts. All parties
should effectively respect Lebanon’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. UNIFIL should
communicate and consult closely with the countries
concerned and focus on its core mandate by maintaining
stability in the area of the Blue Line. It should urge
Lebanon and Israel to adhere to the agreement on the
cessation of hostilities and actively help the Lebanese
Armed Forces to enhance its capacity-building and
increase its deployment across the country.
China welcomes the practical measures taken by
the Secretary-General to improve the effectiveness
and efficiency of UNIFIL and the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, particularly
regarding the management of UNIFIL’s civilian
resources. We hope that he will continue to push
forward the process.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom continues to support a sovereign, stable
Lebanon, governed and underpinned by legitimate
State institutions. We recognize that the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon makes a significant
contribution to Lebanon’s stability and security and we
are pleased to renew its mandate for a further year. We
reiterate the need for all parties to allow the mission to
deliver its mandate in full. That is particularly pertinent
at the present time.
The United Kingdom is deeply concerned about
the recent escalation between Israel and Hizbullah,
and we condemn all violations resolution 1701 (2006).
We strongly urge all parties to show restraint and to
de-escalate. Conflict is in no one’s interest.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): The Dominican Republic
recognizes the work and important role performed by

S/PV. 8610

the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
in contributing to maintaining stability in Lebanon and
the region. We therefore strongly support the renewal
of its mandate for another year. We commend the work
of France in coordinating the negotiations and the spirit
of consensus in the Security Council on the renewal of
the mandate in the light of the prevailing situation and
competing national priorities.
We call on the parties to strengthen their
commitment to complying fully with resolution 1701
(2006), exercise maximum restraint and avoid anything
that may contribute to an escalation of tensions, thereby
consolidating the recent period of relative calm into a
permanent ceasefire that would contribute to regional
stability. We highlight that UNIFIL’s capacity to deter,
prevent and reduce tensions remains crucial at this time,
as does the support of the Lebanese Government in full
exercise of its sovereignty and territorial control, while
strengthening its capacities, abilities and presence.
As this is the final public meeting during Poland’s
presidency, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on the exemplary manner in which you have
conducted the work of the Security Council throughout
the month of August. You and your team have once again
exhibited the highest standards of professionalism,
transparency and excellence in discharging your
sensitive responsibilities. We therefore express our
thanks and admiration in the strongest possible terms.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Dominican Republic for his very kind words.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
Before adjourning this meeting, which is the last
scheduled meeting in the Chamber for the month of
August, let me express, on behalf of the Polish Mission,
our sincere appreciation and thanks to all the members
of the Security Council for their continued support and
cooperation during this very busy month. I also thank
the States Members of the United Nations for their
active participation in our meetings: they are always
with us.
I would like to thank all members of Council members’
teams, including the permanent representatives, deputy
permanent representatives and political coordinators
as well as the experts on the various issues we have
discussed for their hard work and dedication.

19-265185/6

S/PV.8610

The situation in the Middle East

We thank Director Hasmik Egian, James Sutterlin,
who is with us today, and the professional Security
Council Affairs Division team for their assistance, as
well as the conference officers, interpreters, verbatim
reporters and security staff.
I also thank the members of my team for their work,
organization and dedication throughout our presidency.

6/6

29/08/2019

I am grateful for their tireless efforts to fulfil this
delicate task in the most efficient way possible.
I am now pleased to turn over the gavel to the
Russian Federation and wish its team great success in
September, which I am sure they will achieve. We offer
them our full support and cooperation.
The meeting rose at 3.25 p.m.

19-26518
