S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4295

th meeting
Thursday, 15 March 2001, 3 p.m.
New York

26

President:

Mr. Yel’chenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ukraine)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ahsan
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Ryan
Miss Durrant
Mr. Issouf Oumar Maiga
Mr. Neewoor
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Ben Mustapha
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian Question
Letter dated 13 March 2001 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Arab Emirates to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2001/216).
*

__________________

* Reissued for technical reasons.
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-28810* (E)

*0128810*

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Cuba, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dausá
Céspedes (Cuba) took a seat at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: Members of the Council have
received photocopies of a letter dated 14 March 2001
from the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2001/231.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation attaches great
importance to continued discussion in the Security
Council of the question of the settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The statements made on 14
March at the meetings of the Security Council by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel, Mr. Shimon
Peres, and by the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
the United Nations, Ambassador Al-Kidwa, provided
an opportunity for the members of the Security Council
to hear about the approaches of the Israelis and of the
Palestinians to ways of overcoming violence on the
West Bank and in Gaza and to the search for a way out
of the deadlock in the peace dialogue.
The Russian Federation has been following with
great concern the situation of tension that has prevailed
for more than half a year now in the Palestinian
territories, as well as the continued acts of violence that
have led to the deaths of several hundred people,
mostly Palestinians. Since the very beginning of the
crisis, the leadership of Russia has been undertaking
maximum efforts towards a settlement of the situation
and a resumption of the peaceful dialogue between the
parties. To this end, the President of Russia, Vladimir
Putin, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Igor
Ivanov, have remained in constant contact with the
Palestinian and Israeli leaderships and with the leaders

2

of other interested States, as well as the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
Unfortunately, the tensions are not easing. The
situation is being exacerbated by the actions of the
Israeli side, aimed at the isolation of the West Bank
and Gaza, with the use of heavy military equipment.
There is a virtual economic blockade of the territory of
the Palestinian National Authority. We take note of the
clarifications that were made in the statement by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel, Shimon Peres, at
yesterday’s Security Council meeting, and which were
also reiterated today by the Permanent Representative
of Israel to the United Nations. We are convinced,
however, that the economic blockade must be
immediately lifted.
It should be clear also that no terrorist acts — and
Russia condemns all such acts — can serve as a
justification for such harsh measures as those that are
now being taken against the Palestinians. On the
contrary, we are convinced that such steps can only
play into the hands of those who want the violence to
continue and who are against a resumption of the
Palestinian-Israeli negotiating process.
We believe that at this stage, a priority task must
be the speedy overcoming of violence in the West Bank
and in Gaza. On that basis, we call upon the
Palestinians and the Israelis to demonstrate maximum
restraint and prudence in order to avoid any further
escalation of the conflict.
We are convinced that, now as never before,
compromise is important, and that both sides must
meet each other halfway, demonstrate flexibility and
realism and ensure the continuity of the peace process,
on the basis, first and foremost, of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and of the
Madrid principles. To this end, there must be a speedy
establishment of direct Palestinian-Israeli contacts,
inter alia, at a high level. Only in that way will it be
possible to eliminate the obstacles to a normalization
of the situation and to the resumption of the peaceful
negotiations.
In that context, we note the exchange of messages
that took place between the leader of the Palestinian
National Authority, Yasser Arafat, and the Prime
Minister of Israel, Ariel Sharon. We note also that that
exchange was carried out in a rather constructive spirit.
The most important thing is that both leaders have
reaffirmed their aspiration to achieve peace. In

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

Moscow, hope is being expressed that these positive
signals will be further developed in the very near
future.
For its part, the Russian Federation is continuing
to make every effort to promote the elaboration of a
strategy to resolve the current crisis that would be
acceptable to the parties directly involved in the
conflict and that would promote a speedy settlement of
the situation in the region. It is precisely those
approaches that will be guiding us in the Security
Council in the consideration of the question of a
possible international presence in the occupied
Palestinian territories. We are counting on the fact that
the Security Council will be able to achieve consensus
on this question.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): The
Ambassador of Sweden will express the position of all
of the countries of the European Union in his
statement, which France wholeheartedly supports.
However, France would like to stress several points.
France wishes first of all to express its very deep
consternation at the tragedy that has been unfolding
over the past six months in the Palestinian territories
and in Israel. More than 400 people have died, most of
them Palestinians, including dozens of children. Here
we would like to express our deepest regrets and
extend our condolences to the families of all the
victims.
The situation is serious. The parties appear to
have less and less control over the events. There is
continuing insecurity in the Palestinian territories and
in Israel, despair on the part of a people with no
prospects, and a disastrous economic situation.
Negotiations between the parties have been broken off
since the Tabah meeting, and a climate of deep-seated
suspicion and even hatred prevails. The gains of the
Oslo process are in jeopardy.
It is crucial that calm be restored. France and the
European Union have on several occasions condemned
violence in all its forms: the use of excessive force by
the Israeli army against Palestinian civilians and the
unacceptable summary executions, but also the acts of
terrorism that have caused grief among the Israeli
people.
France and the European Union have also
registered their deep concern at the measures taken by
Israeli Government, including the blockading of

territories and the refusal to hand over to the
Palestinian Authority the taxes that have been assessed
on its behalf — these are among the many collective
reprisals that can only exacerbate tensions and the
resentment of an entire people. Generally speaking,
Israel must respect human rights and international
humanitarian law, namely the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which applies to all of the occupied
Palestinian territories.
The easing of travel restrictions imposed by the
Israeli Government, if indeed it takes place, is a move
in the right direction. The strategy followed in recent
weeks could only fuel frustrations and worsen the
already catastrophic economic situation. The European
Union and its members — the largest provider of
assistance to the Palestinian people — have taken
special measures to assist the population and the
Palestinian Authority. The entire international
community must take part in this spirit of solidarity.
These violent confrontations are all the more
troublesome considering that the two parties had never
been so close to peace, both at Camp David and at
Tabah. Openness on both the Israeli and Palestinian
sides had made it possible to obtain, for the very first
time, a glimpse of an agreement, even on the most
sensitive aspects — Jerusalem, refugees and the
territories.
Hopes for peace and for harmonious coexistence,
focused on cooperation and the future, must live on.
We continue to believe that the negotiations of the last
few months have paved the way for us to follow. The
solutions that have been explored will one day form the
basis of the long-awaited final settlement. Such a
settlement must be based on Israel’s right to live in
peace within recognized borders and on the right of the
Palestinian people to have a state, a territory and a
capital. It is based on resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), on the principle of land for peace, and on the
terms of reference of the Madrid Conference.
Weapons must be silenced, and dialogue must
resume. We solemnly call upon the Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to do all within their power to halt
the spiral of violence. The current situation, in which
each is waiting for the other to make the first move,
can only lead to an impasse. Firm acts are necessary to
restore real trust. Respect for the agreements signed
since Oslo and a real freeze on settlements will greatly
contribute to this.

3

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

The Palestinian issue cannot be separated from a
just and comprehensive settlement of the conflict
between Israel and the Arab countries. We call for the
resumption of negotiations between Israel and Syria
and between Israel and Lebanon on the basis of
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
How can we help negotiations between Israel and
the Palestinian Authority? We have to think about how
to restore a minimum of trust between the parties. The
impetus provided by the United States remains
essential. The European Union, Russia, Egypt, Jordan
and the United Nations can also contribute to this, as
they showed at the Sharm el-Sheikh summit. In
particular the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, who
has close contacts with all the parties involved in the
Middle East crisis, can play a useful role. We fully
support his action.
However, the Security Council also has a part to
play. The current situation is a threat to peace in the
region and therefore comes under its jurisdiction. It has
already addressed the historical background and the
origins of the crisis by adopting resolution 1322
(2000). It is now up to the Security Council, with Israel
and the Palestinian Authority, to think about proposals
that would facilitate contacts between the parties and
would guarantee the desired results.
Sending observers to the field could be a useful
mechanism in this regard, to ease tensions and to
monitor compliance with commitments undertaken by
the parties. That is why France, along with other
countries, particularly the United Kingdom, initiated
this idea last November. This mechanism will be
helpful if it is accepted and agreed upon by the parties,
and if it enjoys their full cooperation. The work of the
observers would be an extension of the work begun by
the Mitchell commission. The mechanism will be
useful only if it is a part of a larger picture: the
reduction of violence, compliance with commitments
undertaken at the Sharm el-Sheikh summit and the
resumption of negotiations.
It is in this spirit that we are considering any
action that might be taken by the Council. But the
Council will be heard by the parties only if it is united.
We should not judge the past. Rather, we should define
a positive approach and facilitate the search for a
solution to this tragedy, working together with Israel
and the Palestinian Authority.

4

Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Yesterday the Israeli Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Shimon Peres, and
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, Ambassador Al-Kidwa, separately briefed the
Council on the latest developments in the PalestinianIsraeli situation and presented their respective views.
Today, at the request of some of the Council members,
the President organized this open debate. This has
positive significance for the United Nations efforts to
promote the peace process in the Middle East.
At present, the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
continues. It has not only aggravated the suffering of
civilians and deepened hatred and hostility on both
sides, it has also brought grave consequences for the
peace process and regional security in the Middle East.
If this situation is allowed to continue, the Palestinian
and Israeli efforts, as well as the efforts made by the
international community, which have yielded good
results, might come to nothing.
The Council has been following the PalestinianIsraeli conflict and the peace process in the Middle
East. In order to restore and maintain peace and
security in the Middle East, the Council has made
many positive efforts. The proposal to send an observer
mission to the ground has received wide support. The
proposed observer mission is intended to ease and
pacify the ongoing violence, which is in the interest of
both parties. It must be pointed out that the
understanding, cooperation and support of the Israeli
side will be essential for the smooth deployment of the
observer mission and its subsequent successful
implementation of its mandate.
We continue to hope that the Israeli side will
consider positively this proposal. At the same time, we
also hope that the Secretary-General will continue to
play a positive role in maintaining close contacts with
both sides and will urge both sides to exercise restraint,
demonstrate flexibility and seek solutions that are
acceptable to both sides to stop the violence and
resume peace talks.
We have noted that the new Israeli Government
has indicated that achieving peace has become a central
task and it has particularly emphasized that peace
should be achieved with words instead of bullets. The
leaders of both sides have recently indicated their wish
to resume peace talks, and this has provided a fresh
opportunity to restore the peace process. This

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

opportunity must be seized, for it could easily be
missed. We hope that both parties will consider their
long-term interests, make sound judgements about the
general climate, seize the opportunity and translate
their positive political will into concrete actions as
early as possible.
China has consistently, positively and actively
supported the peace process in the Middle East. We
strongly believe that achieving peace and stability in
the Middle East is a common aspiration of the people
of the region. It is in the fundamental interest of all the
countries of the region. It is also in the interest of the
international community, including China.
The peace process in the Middle East has now
entered a very critical period. The immediate priority is
for Palestine and Israel to stop the violence and resume
peace talks. The relevant United Nations resolutions on
the Middle East, particularly resolution 242 (1967) and
resolution 338 (1973), which were adopted
unanimously by the Security Council, and the land-forpeace principle, which has been universally recognized
by the international community, are the basic
guidelines for achieving peace. It is imperative that the
parties concerned implement fully and effectively the
agreements concluded and commitments undertaken.
This is a realistic way to stop the violence and get the
Middle East peace process out of its present deadlock.
China is ready to work with the international
community and will, as always, contribute its own
efforts towards the achievement of a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East at an early
date.
Mr. Cunningham (United States): The situation
in the Middle East is exceedingly precarious. We all
realize that. In this highly combustible atmosphere, the
international community needs to consider both its
words and its actions very carefully. We should
concentrate on developing ways to initiate, encourage
and support the parties’ own efforts to end the
violence, to restore confidence and to return to
negotiations.
Unfortunately, violence breeds violence; actions
breeds reaction; mistakes are made; and tensions
mount. We wish it were otherwise, but violence cannot
and will not be halted from the outside. Nor will it be
ended by charges and counter-charges and heated
rhetoric.

Yesterday, Deputy Prime Minister Shimon Peres
met with the Security Council and conveyed several
important points. First, he underscored that security for
Israelis and Palestinians depended on the two parties,
not outside forces or an international presence.
Secondly, he reminded us that peace cannot be imposed
and asked the Council to support peace, not one side or
the other. As Ambassador Wang and others have
pointed out in our discussion already, both sides say
that they want the dialogue, the peace process, to go
forward. We should be encouraging that and not make
it more complicated by inopportune action by the
Council outside of a context that foresees a result that
the parties agreed to.
Mr. Peres reaffirmed the commitment of the
Government of Israel to the Sharm el-Sheikh
understandings and to the Mitchell fact-finding
commission, inviting them to conduct a thorough
review of the situation. That is certainly a welcome
step. He informed us that the commission will be in
Israel next week and urged the Council to postpone
deliberations on next steps until we have a report from
that body. He also confirmed that Prime Minister
Sharon will be in New York on 21 March to meet the
Secretary-General. We welcome these ongoing efforts
and the new Israeli Government’s engagement with the
United Nations.
We want the Security Council to support peace
and dialogue. It cannot do so if it acts precipitously. It
can only do so in support of both Israel and the
Palestinians. The United States remains firmly
committed to ensuring that the Council does not adopt
any resolution that is not supported by both the
Palestinians and the Israelis.
Last December the Council wisely decided not to
adopt a resolution calling for the premature
establishment of an international presence in the
region. The Council sent a clear and unmistakable
signal at that time. The message was simple and clear.
It was that we all look forward to a time when the
parties reach an agreement and turn to the Council for
support and assistance in implementing it. It is entirely
possible that an international presence that has an
achievable mandate will be a part of that
implementation effort. At that time of prospective
peace, the United States will join with the rest of the
Council in giving full support to the parties’ own
efforts to secure the final blessings of peace.

5

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

Much as we may hope otherwise, the road to
peace does not begin in this Chamber. It must begin
anew in the region. The Council has already expressed
its support for an end to all the violence and a return to
dialogue. For now, the Council’s mission, and indeed
the mission of every member of the United Nations,
must be to encourage the parties to end the violence, to
come together in peaceful negotiations and to make the
difficult choices necessary to reach a final status
agreement. Suggesting that the Council can somehow
impose itself between the parties and play a
constructive role by observing violence only serves to
divert the parties from the absolute necessity to meet
and shape their shared destiny, which is a just and
lasting peace that provides security and dignity to
Palestinians and Israelis alike. The United States
Government is committed to that goal.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland): It is right that the
Council should be addressing the situation in the
Middle East, because there is widespread and deep
concern across the United Nations membership at the
continuing violence, at the closures of the occupied
territories and the isolation of towns and villages
within them. Above all, there is profound anxiety at the
deteriorating prospects for peace between Israel and
the Palestinians, which have implications well beyond
the borders of Israel and the Palestinian areas.
The situation today is grim. Many roads inside
Gaza and the West Bank are still closed, today. In the
last two days, two Palestinians have died at
checkpoints, delayed on their way to hospital. Thanks
to the continued closure of Gaza airport, thousands of
Palestinian pilgrims cannot return from Mecca. Tension
is increasing, and that is a matter of immediate and
international concern.
The Council has to live up to its responsibility to
address peace and security in this region as elsewhere.
We must find a way forward that improves the
situation, not worsens it. We must find a way forward
that provides the maximum unity in the Council, to
guide the parties towards a peaceful course. The United
Kingdom is ready to contribute to that effort.
The United Kingdom, in support of the European
Union position which will later be set out in full by the
Union presidency, has repeatedly pressed the Israeli
Government to end the practices of closure and
extrajudicial killings. The Israeli Government has told

6

us that these measures are necessary for the protection
of Israeli lives. But, in fact, these practices radicalize
the Palestinian population and fuel violence in the
occupied territories. Thus, they cannot achieve their
stated purpose. We will continue to press the Israeli
Government to end these practices, and in this regard I
welcome the assurance by the Israeli Deputy Prime
Minister yesterday to the Council that these measures
would not comprise the policy of the new Israeli
Government. We wish to see that fully put into effect.
A further step that needs to be taken is to resume
the payments of revenues withheld from the Palestinian
Authority. Meanwhile, the Palestinian Authority itself
must make good-faith efforts to end the violence and to
restore security cooperation.
So what needs to be done right away? Both
parties must take urgent steps to reduce the violence
and build confidence between them. Both parties must
pursue contacts between them, for example, to make
real progress in security cooperation. There is in reality
no alternative to the parties themselves deciding to
arrest the current cycle of violence and return to the
path of negotiations. But the record — not least the
melting away of the Sharm el-Sheikh agreement —
shows that they need help. That should be the purpose
of any action the Council decides to take. We should
always be thinking of how to improve conditions on
the ground, for people on both sides. We should
explore proposals that can achieve that goal.
We continue to believe, with France, Ireland,
Norway and others, that an observer presence in the
occupied territories could be beneficial, but that this
can only be achieved with the acceptance of both
parties. This issue should not be allowed to become a
totem, dividing the parties and, still worse, the Security
Council. It is the responsibility both of those who are
traditionally supportive of Palestinian positions and of
those traditionally supportive of Israeli positions to
make a real effort to prevent such a harmful division
occurring.
We have all made clear to the parties our
conviction that an observer force could be useful. The
parties bear the primary responsibility to agree how
this might be possible. Our aim should be to encourage
them to work together, not to polarize disputes and
perpetuate the breakdown in constructive dialogue.
The Council has a challenge before it. We have to
make this a common endeavour: how to maximize the

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

prospects for renewed negotiations; how to help the
parties move back from violence; and how we can give
them practical support on the ground.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): It is almost a decade since
the first Middle East Peace Conference in Madrid in
1991. At the time, we were filled with hope and
expectations. For the first time the two sides
recognized each other’s right to exist and vowed to
work together towards peace.
Over the last six months, the situation in the
Middle East has deteriorated dramatically. The
situation is critical, both in terms of the overall security
situation and the level of violence and acts of
terrorism. We have also seen a worsening of the human
rights situation, the living conditions for the
Palestinians and the fiscal situation for the Palestinian
Authority.
There is no alternative to peace. In our view, the
peace process is the only viable way of resolving the
difference between the parties. However, it will take a
lot of time and effort to bring the peace process back
on track. Building a sustainable peace means finding a
balance of interest and establishing mutual trust
between the parties. If the Security Council is to play a
constructive role in order to achieve this aim, we need
a common approach and a common platform. The
priority at this stage should be to halt the violence and
to stabilize the situation. Furthermore, we should
strongly encourage confidence-building measures, in
order to re-establish the dialogue between Israel and
the Palestinians. The Security Council should be a
bridge-builder and should strive to achieve the broadest
possible agreement on issues related to peace and
security in the region.
Norway has repeatedly urged the parties to
resume the negotiations and to renew their dialogue on
security issues. We have also called on both Israel and
the Palestinians to bring an end to violence. While we
understand Israel’s security needs, Israel must also
respect the safety and security of the Palestinians.
Furthermore, we have urged the Israeli Government to
lift the closure of the West Bank and Gaza and to
transfer the outstanding tax revenues owed to the
Palestinian Authority. We have also called on Israel to
freeze settlement activities.
The basis of any solution to the present crisis
must be Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)and
338 (1973)and other relevant United Nations

resolutions. Norway also wants to stress that the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, relative to the protection
of civilian persons in time of war, is fully applicable to
the Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem.
We urge Israel as the occupying Power to comply with
its legal obligations and responsibilities under the said
Convention.
Norway supports the idea of an international
observer presence. If such a presence is to play a
meaningful role, it must have the full support of both
parties. We therefore call on the Secretary-General to
continue his consultations with the parties to ascertain
when and within what framework such a presence
might appropriately be established in the area.
The Sharm el-Sheikh fact-finding committee, of
which the Norwegian Foreign Minister Thorbjorn
Jagland is a member, is due to visit Israel and the
Palestinian area next week. In our view, the committee
can play a moderating role in the present situation and
assist in charting the way ahead.
Norway believes that the Security Council has a
clear role to play in the continuing quest for peace in
the Middle East. We should do what we can to bring
the parties back to the negotiating table and bring the
present situation of violence and bloodshed to an end.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I wish to associate my
delegation fully with the statement to be made shortly
by the Permanent Representative of Sweden on behalf
of the European Union.
Ireland has long desired a just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We believe
this can only be brought about on the basis of an
agreement that respects Israel’s right to peace and
security and, at the same time, secures the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people. It is greatly regretted
that the hard work to achieve a final status agreement
solution during the lifetime of the previous Israeli
Government did not bear fruit and that once again the
Palestinian territories have been engulfed in violence.
There are deep differences regarding the causes
of, and responsibility for, the violence. It is clear,
however, that the current phase of violence arises
primarily out of the frustration to which long years of
occupation have given rise. The Foreign Ministers of
the European Union, in their ministerial declaration of
15 November last, pointed out that the lack of progress
achieved in the peace process, including on the

7

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

problem of the settlements, lies at the heart of the
Palestinian people’s frustration and of the violence.
My authorities were concerned and horrified at
the widespread use of lethal force against Palestinians
and at the failure to use non-lethal methods that are so
readily available, especially in the early stages of the
current disturbances. Last October, the Council quite
properly condemned the excessive use of force, in
resolution 1322 (2000). The European Union warned at
that time that the disproportionate use of force would
only aggravate the situation further. This warning was
not heeded and was, unfortunately, vindicated by the
tragic events which followed.
I wish to stress that we also condemn in the
strongest terms the ongoing attacks on Israeli people.
They are utterly wrong in themselves and they will do
nothing to bring about the justice desired and deserved
by the Palestinian people.
The current situation has given rise to a
particularly vicious nexus of problems that have very
serious political, economic, social and moral
ramifications. There is the mounting violence, the
failure on both sides to live up to the commitments
made at Sharm el-Sheik, the collective punishments,
the closures and restrictions on movement, the resultant
devastating impact on the Palestinian people and on the
Palestinian economy, the disastrous financial situation
of the Palestinian Authority, the increasing terrorism,
the extrajudicial killings, and the receding prospect for
Israel of secure and recognized borders and acceptance
in its region. I have enumerated these matters not with
the purpose of holding either of the parties up to
obloquy, but rather to emphasize the dimensions of the
problem, its international character, and the
responsibility of the Security Council in relation to it.
There is a clear and urgent need for a committed
return to the negotiating process. This requires positive
action. It requires engagement, not disengagement. It
requires the full support of all around this table and of
all Members of the United Nations. The message that
goes out from this debate must not be one of negativity
or barren recrimination. Reprehensible actions must be
condemned by the Council: that is no more than our
duty. But beyond that, there is a need to be forwardlooking and to offer understanding, encouragement and
support.
Yesterday we heard from Deputy Prime Minister
Peres of the Israeli Government’s decision to ease the

8

closures and blockades and to enable the restoration of
some normality to the lives of the Palestinian people.
We welcome this positive decision, and we will watch
developments in this regard carefully. We heard, too,
that the Israeli Government would now cooperate with
the fact-finding mission. This is also important and
positive, and we look forward to the follow-through.
We will also follow this process, carefully.
More is needed. The revenues due to the
Palestinian Authority must be restored to it. It is simply
not in the interests of peace, and it cannot be in the
interest of Israel itself, for the financial and
institutional situation of its interlocutor to be
undermined and possibly destroyed.
There is a need to re-establish continuity in the
peace process. No partner should be asked to accept a
situation where it is obliged every so often to restart
negotiations from a different position. It is self-evident
that this cannot make for a viable and stable process.
The Security Council a long time ago established
the basis for a solution in the form of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973). For a long time — since the
establishment of the Madrid principles and especially
since the Oslo Agreement — the Council has stood
aside and left it to the parties, with the assistance of
mediators, to advance the peace process and to achieve
a final settlement on a basis that meets the essential
interests of all sides.
The peace process has been in difficulties before.
This time, however, the difficulties are so grievous and
the international ramifications so potentially grave that
my Government are convinced that the Council must
again look closely at all elements of the situation and
work to help the parties to resolve the conflict.
The proposal for an international observer
mission, which has been raised by a number of
delegations, has the potential to help the parties in the
current situation. I would appeal to the Israeli
delegation and the Israeli authorities not to characterise
this proposal as something it is not, and was never
intended to be. There is no suggestion that this
observer mission could prevent individual acts of
terrorism. There is no question of it interposing itself
between opposing forces or being able to stop a riot.
Neither can it reasonably be regarded as an incitement
to violence. The fear has been expressed that the
presence of observers would induce Palestinians to
stage violent events with the aim of provoking

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

repressive action. On the contrary, unlike television
cameras, experienced international military and police
observers would readily detect riots, stone-throwing or
other forms of violence that are mounted with the
object of inducing repression and would report
accordingly to all sides concerned.
The Ambassador of Singapore perhaps put it best
at yesterday’s private meeting when he said that a
monitoring mission could act as a catalyst in breaking
down the psychological barriers to a resumption of the
peace process. Deputy Prime Minister Peres in fact
referred in stark terms to these psychological barriers
yesterday. It goes without saying that it is very
important that any such measure is formulated so as to
receive the widest possible support in the Council.
I was very pleased to hear this morning the
welcome expressed by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the meeting yesterday between Deputy
Prime Minister Peres and the Security Council. I agree
with Ambassador Al-Kidwa that this was good and that
Mr. Peres is indeed a veteran politician. Israel’s
engagement with the Council was a most welcome
development. We hope and believe that this should lead
to an ongoing framework for engagement and
cooperative dialogue with Minister Peres and his
Government. It is of the highest importance that it
should do so. In this regard, we look forward very
much to Prime Minister Sharon’s forthcoming meeting
with the Secretary-General.
I very much hope that Mr. Peres yesterday, and
Israeli people in general today, will take from the tenor
of our discussions the message that the United Nations
and the Security Council seek only to promote peace
between Israel and its neighbours. If we have pointed
to some hard facts, it is solely with the objective of
promoting necessary careful reassessment of certain
practices that, in our considered judgement, are
obstacles to peace. We suggest that it is in Israel’s own
overall national interest to do so. We suggest careful
assessment of our comments and advice on that basis.
Ireland, for its part, will seek to encourage and
support action by the Council that will make a real
contribution to ending the tragic conflict between the
Israeli and Palestinian peoples, which has disfigured
the entire region for far too long.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome this opportunity to exchange opinions on
the situation of the occupied territories, which is a

matter of great concern to my delegation and, as we
have seen from today’s debate, to the entire
international community.
Yesterday we had the opportunity to listen to Mr.
Shimon Peres, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Israel. We would like to thank him
for having been the one to ask to come to convey to the
members of the Security Council the views of the new
Government of Israel on the current situation. At
yesterday’s meeting we had an opportunity to convey
to Mr. Peres and to the Permanent Observer of the
Palestine the views of the members of the Council on
the situation of the occupied territories. We hope that
both parties also listen to what the other Members of
the Organization think about the situation in Palestine.
The current wave of violence is lamentable, given
the fact that a few months ago the parties were very
close to reaching an agreement. The history lesson is
clear: we should take advantage of opportunities for
peace, and we should bear in mind that it is easier to
erode a peace process than it is to build one. The
current wave of violence is unacceptable because it
takes the region back to the situation that prevailed
nearly 10 years ago.
A great deal has been said about the
disproportionate Israeli response to what was initially a
street protest by young people throwing stones.
Violence breeds further violence. That violence takes
on a momentum of its own that later is more difficult to
stop. In this regard, we would like to call on all the
parties to take all necessary steps to end the violence
and bring the situation back to normal so as to be able
to resume negotiations on a basis acceptable to all.
It is crucial that financial remittances be resumed,
as there is a risk of strangling the Palestinian
economy — something that would have unforeseeable
humanitarian consequences and could eventually lead
to an escalation of violence.
The parties should determine the basis for
discussions while taking into account the progress
previously achieved. In addition, the leadership of the
Palestinian Authority should be maintained. In
summary, it is necessary to return to the path of
cooperation in order to improve security and make
possible the restoration of a minimum level of trust to
end the current wave of violence and re-establish the
conditions that will enable progress towards a
definitive agreement.

9

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

The volatility of the situation in the Middle East
is well known. Current events clearly pose a threat to
international peace and security. In that regard, it is
necessary that the Security Council continue its
permanent review of the situation in order to comply
with its responsibilities.
My delegation believes that an international
presence under the auspices of the United Nations
would be a catalyst for the restoration of peace in the
occupied territories. We hope that today’s deliberations
will send clear signals about the unanimous
expectations and wishes of the community of nations
for peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Maiga (Mali) (spoke in French): I would like
to express my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
convening this public meeting of the Security Council
to debate the serious violent situation that continues to
prevail in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem. Mali is keenly concerned at the continuing
violence in the occupied Palestinian territories. We
believe that unless these tragic events are dealt with
quickly, they will be a real threat to peace and security
in the entire Middle East.
Mali firmly condemns acts of repression and the
excessive and indiscriminate use of force by the Israeli
army that has claimed over 437 victims, mostly among
Palestinian civilians. Likewise, we consider Israel’s
frequent recourse to collective punishment and its use
of all types of restrictions against the population of the
territories to be counterproductive. The blockade of the
territories has made the daily life of the Palestinians a
genuine nightmare and has also caused considerable
economic losses.
No legitimate struggle, even against terrorism,
which we condemn terrorism in all its forms, can
justify the imposition of such measures. We urge all of
the parties to demonstrate restraint and moderation, to
refrain from acts of provocation and to work together
for the return of calm.
The present violence can end only with the
signing of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
agreement based on the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the agreements signed by the
parties. We consider that the Security Council has an
essential role to play in this regard.
In accordance with the Charter, the Council has
the obligation to work to establish confidence-building

10

measures between the parties that can put an end to
violence and restore a climate conducive to the
resumption without conditions of negotiations on the
final status of the territories.
In addition, my delegation believes that it is
Israel’s obligation to ensure respect for the holy sites
and to guarantee the protection of the civilian
Palestinian population.
Israel, the occupying Power, must strive to ensure
scrupulous respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law, as well as for the relevant provisions
of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. Once
again, we join Palestine in asking the Security Council
for the speedy establishment of an international
observer mission in the territories entrusted with
ensuring the protection of civilians.
In this spirit, Mali fully supports the démarche of
the non-aligned caucus and other members of the
Council to hold discussions with the parties with a
view to the prompt and effective deployment of
observers in the field. We urge the Israeli Government
to assist the international community in making this
idea a reality, as a confidence-building measure for the
good of both the Palestinians and the Israelis.
The situation is tragic, and we have been talking
about a setback in the peace process at a time when a
peace agreement was within reach. Nevertheless, there
are grounds for hope. This is why my delegation
welcomes the decision taken by the Israeli
Government, announced to us yesterday by the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Israel, to start to lift the internal blockade between
Palestinian cities in order to make the daily life of the
civilian population less difficult. This is a positive
measure that could contribute significantly to
improving the living conditions of the inhabitants of
the territories and mitigate the present level of
violence. Beyond that measure, which we once again
hail, what we are expecting from Israel is the end of the
blockade of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip in order
to allow Palestinians to enter Israel to go to work.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the support
of my delegation for the efforts made by the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative to bring the
parties closer in order to bring about a resumption of
the peace process. We also request the international

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

community to provide the needed humanitarian and
economic assistance to the Palestinian people.
Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this important meeting of the
Security Council to discuss the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. We believe
that this meeting requested by the Arab League is
appropriate and very timely for the following reasons.
First, the peace process between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority, which was halted several months
ago as it moved into the final rounds towards a
negotiated settlement, remains stalled, with no visible
prospect for early resumption.
Secondly, the violence between Palestinians and
Israelis, which started in September last year and
which has already taken a heavy toll of lives on both
sides, particularly among the Palestinians, continues,
albeit at a lesser level but with no end in sight, and
clouds the prospects for negotiations to start again.
Thirdly, the blockade of the Palestinian territories
by Israel is inflicting untold suffering on the
Palestinian people, who not only are deprived of their
freedom of movement but are also unable to earn their
normal livelihood. It also imposes great economic and
financial hardship on the Palestinian Authority by
denying essential revenues to which it is entitled.
Fourthly, in Israel a new Government under the
leadership of Mr. Ariel Sharon was sworn into office
last week following the recent elections, and Israel
should be in a position again to resume negotiations
with the Palestinian Authority.
In the atmosphere of the continuing stalemate,
more than enough violence has occurred, with the loss
of many precious lives. The stalemate must end, and
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority must resume without further delay. We
believe that the international community should do all
it can to encourage the two sides to get back to the task
of negotiating a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian
question. The Security Council in particular must
assume its responsibility in this regard.
The Security Council had the opportunity to hear
Mr. Shimon Peres, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister of Israel, yesterday afternoon, and we were
reassured by his statement that peace is at the centre of
the policies of the new Israeli Government. The
Council also heard yesterday the Ambassador of the

Observer Mission of Palestine, Mr. Nasser Al-Kidwa,
who also reaffirmed the commitment of the Palestinian
Authority to peace in the Middle East. According to
Mr. Peres, it is high emotions rather than politics that
are preventing the peace process from moving forward.
The other reason given in this regard by Mr. Peres
is the continuation of violence. Ambassador Al-Kidwa,
on the other hand, gave the Council a vivid picture of
the frustration of the Palestinian people and their
suffering under Israel’s occupation and blockade.
We would like to say to both the Israelis and the
Palestinians that the two peoples have only one destiny,
and that is peaceful coexistence in mutual trust. There
is no other option, and to search for one is supremely
futile. It has been so in the past; it is so now; and it will
be so in the future. The right of the Palestinian people
to an independent State is unquestionable, and so is the
right of the Israelis to exist as a nation with secure
borders. The rest are matters of detail that the two sides
must work out at the negotiating table in a spirit of
mutual accommodation, on the basis of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Israel has been insisting that all violence must
end before negotiations can resume. In our view, the
best and surest way to end the ongoing cycle of
violence is to deploy a United Nations observer force
in the occupied territories. This was suggested
yesterday to Mr. Shimon Peres by several delegations,
including Mauritius, in the Security Council. We hope
the Israeli Government will respond favourably to this
important proposal. The Security Council will shortly
consider a draft resolution on the Middle East that must
include such a proposal, and my delegation will fully
support the adoption of the draft resolution by the
Council.
Last but not least, I wish to emphasize that the
starting point for the resumption of negotiations
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority should be
where the negotiations stood when the two sides last
met. It took a long time and enormous patience and
skill on both sides for the negotiations to reach that
critical point from the early beginnings of the Oslo
process. The important gains already achieved must be
preserved and should constitute the foundation for
future negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority.
the

Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): The Charter gives
Security Council primary responsibility for

11

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

maintaining international peace and security. By
exercising this global role, the Security Council can
promote the observance of international law, which
guides the conduct of States.
As a small State, Singapore has an interest in
strengthening the role of international law and thus in a
strong and effective Security Council. This includes the
implementation of all — I repeat, all — Security
Council resolutions, including those fulfilling the
Council’s obligation to protect civilians in armed
conflict, as declared in several resolutions and
presidential statements, including resolution 1314
(2000) of 11 August 2000. The Council should live up
to the standards that it has set for itself. Most
importantly, resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as
well as the most recent resolution on this item,
resolution 1322 (2000), must be implemented.
Yesterday, the Security Council had the
opportunity of meeting with the Israeli Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister, Mr. Shimon Peres, and
the Permanent Observer of Palestine in separate private
meetings. We welcome this acknowledgement of the
Security Council’s role. At these meetings, Council
members sent a clear message about their concerns
over the mounting and continuing violence, particularly
Israel’s widespread use of disproportionate force and
the blockade of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip,
which, as several speakers have noted today, have had
profound effects on the Palestinian people. It is
therefore timely for the Security Council to now listen
to the views of the other members of the international
community.
Over the long term, the protection of civilians in
the Gaza Strip and the West Bank can be granted only
if peace negotiations are put back on track. We
welcome the assurances of Deputy Prime Minister
Shimon Peres and the Permanent Observer of Palestine,
Ambassador Nasser Al-Kidwa, that peace remains their
strategic objective. We hope that many of the elements
of previous attempts at peace negotiations can be
picked up from where they were left off.
To make this possible, our immediate priority
must be to stop the violence. Having chosen peace as
their strategic objective, we call on all parties to
renounce violence. The primary responsibility for
stopping the violence and for creating conditions
conducive to peace negotiations being resumed as soon
as possible clearly falls on the parties involved. The

12

Security Council can help them to fulfil this
responsibility by introducing neutral and objective
confidence-building measures.
One of the proposals that the Security Council is
actively discussing is the establishment of a United
Nations observer force. We believe that an impartial
and neutral international presence can serve as a
confidence-building
measure
to
change
the
psychological atmosphere in the occupied territories
and help to neutralize the environment. As Ambassador
Richard Ryan of Ireland noted earlier, we said
yesterday that such a force can play a vital catalytic
role by reducing the level of violence and by changing
the chemistry of the troubled region. We note that the
Ambassador of Colombia also referred to the possible
catalytic role of such a force. We believe that such a
force will complement the role that Secretary-General
Kofi Annan and his representatives on the ground, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Mitchell fact-finding commission established
by the Sharm el-Sheikh agreement can all play in
trying to defuse the immediate crisis.
Singapore would therefore like the Council to
further explore how such a proposal for an observer
force can be operationalized. One way of doing so is to
task the Secretary-General with consulting with all the
parties. Another possibility is for the Security Council
to despatch its own mission to the region. Since the
Security Council has hosted visits by both President
Yasser Arafat and Deputy Prime Minister Shimon Peres
in recent months, it should reciprocate these gestures
by sending its own team to continue these useful and
constructive dialogue.
Now more than ever, we believe that all the
parties involved and the international community
should take bold steps towards putting the Middle East
back on the road of peace. We should build on existing
peace agreements and the truce framework, and not
undermine them. Every accord that we have reached on
the Middle East — the Camp David accords, the
Madrid Conference, the Oslo peace agreements —
represents crucial a step forward. We have some strong
foundations and we should build on them.
Mr. Ahsan (Bangladesh): We, too, are grateful to
you, Sir, for scheduling this important and timely
meeting on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine.

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories and East Jerusalem has been deteriorating
for some time now. Mindless violence continues and
the defenceless Palestinian population bears the brunt,
with hundreds dead, thousands injured and properties
destroyed. My delegation would like to express sincere
condolences to the families of the victims.
Excessive use of force has fuelled the dangerous
escalation of violence. The policy of collective
punishment, inflicted by Israel through the imposition
of a blockade and closures, is crippling the economy.
This has caused intense hardship, unemployment and
deprivation. The net result has been a worrisome crisis
of confidence, leading to what the Secretary-General
has characterized as the unravelling of the progress that
had been made between Israelis and Palestinians in
moving towards a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace.
The Security Council cannot watch this situation
continue, as it only strengthens those who do not want
peace. We believe, first of all, that further escalation of
violence must be prevented. The onus is on those who
insist on using lethal force on civilians. The
commitment to peace has to be demonstrated in
practice by reversing these actions on the ground. As
the situation deteriorates, the Security Council must
re-engage itself and continue to explore a way out of
this crisis, which is truly an international one, as the
Ambassador of the United Kingdom reaffirmed today.
We believe that the proposal to establish an
international observer force is a good basis for the
Council’s deliberations and we fully support it.
In our view, the Council is unanimous on the
need for the immediate and unconditional lifting of the
economic blockade. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral that donor assistance is absolutely critical to
alleviating the hardship of the Palestinian population.
We appreciate the role that the European Union has
played in this regard and encourage it to continue its
assistance.
Nobody is under the illusion that the negotiation
of a final settlement is easy. However, the parties must
be encouraged to continue efforts to achieve their
objective through peaceful negotiation. We also believe
that it is important to preserve the gains made by the
painful efforts of both sides to date and to build upon
that. The initiative of the Deputy Prime Minister of
Israel to come to the Council was appreciated by all

here yesterday. We believe that it is a clear recognition
by Israel of the Council’s role in this issue. That role is
as relevant today as it was at the time of the adoption
of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), which together constitute the framework for a
final settlement.
Bangladesh strongly supports the SecretaryGeneral’s role in facilitating the Sharm el-Sheikh
understanding. We believe that he can also play a
constructive role in helping both sides return to the
negotiating table. The Security Council must work
towards that end.
Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Mr. President, let me
join others in thanking you for convening this public
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. This
has given members and non-members of the Council an
opportunity to review developments over the last six
months.
Today the plight of the Palestinians in the
occupied territories has reached desperate proportions,
further threatening the stability of the whole region and
thereby posing a threat to international peace and
security.
Yesterday the Council held two very important
meetings which provided a useful backdrop to today’s
discussions. First, the Council met with the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
new Government of Israel, Shimon Peres, at his
request. The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs outlined his Government’s perspective
on the problems bedeviling the people of Palestine and
of Israel. He outlined what he saw as the basis for
restarting the peace process between the Palestinians
and the Israelis, and outlined actions contemplated and
to be taken by Israel in this regard.
The Jamaican delegation welcomes the steps
announced by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs to open up avenues of commerce
and to begin to reverse a policy which has revisited
economic devastation on the Palestinians. We expect to
see early results on the ground, reflected in an
improvement in the living conditions of the
Palestinians.
Immediately after the meeting with the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, the
Security Council met with Ambassador Al-Kidwa, the

13

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations.
He shared with us the Palestinians’ perspective on the
prevailing conditions in the Palestinian territories. He
confirmed for us much of what has been reported over
the past few months and gave us reasons why the peace
process has been derailed. My delegation expressed the
hope that yesterday’s meetings would usher in a new
era of relations between the United Nations, the
Palestinians and the Israelis in the search for peace.
While both sides clearly saw the causes and
effects differently, they both made it absolutely clear
that they both wanted peace and that they wanted to
end the cycle of violence and coexist as good
neighbours. However, for many complex and varied
reasons, they have been unable to achieve that peace of
which they spoke, and, despite several hopeful
attempts, the peace which they have sought for many
years has eluded them.
My delegation believes that the Security Council
must offer its help and its support for the peace
process. Jamaica has in the past urged both the
Palestinians and the Israelis to seek peace through an
active negotiating process, a process which requires
them to stay the course, no matter the obstacles that
may confront them. As we have stated on previous
occasions, recognition of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to self-determination must be a
principal element of this process. The right to security
of all countries in the region, including that of Israel,
must also be assured. We reiterate this position today.
Jamaica offers its continued support in efforts to
achieve a just and lasting peace within the framework
of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).
Last October the Security Council adopted
resolution 1322 (2000), which called for the immediate
cessation of violence and for all necessary steps to be
taken to ensure that the cycle of violence is brought to
an end. We urged the parties to refrain from new and
provocative actions and to work towards a situation of
normalcy in a way that promoted the prospects of
peace. We gave full support to the important role of the
Secretary-General in the peace process. We condemned
the acts of violence, especially the excessive use of
force against Palestinians. We called upon Israel to
abide scrupulously by its legal obligations and its
responsibilities under the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949. We stressed the importance of establishing a
mechanism for a speedy and objective inquiry into the

14

violent events. The Mitchell commission was
subsequently established, but so far no results have
been seen of its inquiry. Yesterday, however, Mr. Peres
advised us that the commission had been invited to
visit Israel next week. We look forward to positive
results from that visit.
Last October, the then Prime Minister of Israel
and the President of the Palestinian Authority made
commitments to Secretary-General Kofi Annan to
resolve their differences by peaceful means. We saw
this as a very important development. Those of us who
desire to see peace between the Palestinians and the
Israelis welcomed the brave actions contemplated by
the parties and dared to hope that, at long last, there
was the requisite political will to end the conflict. In
the wake of the Sharm el-Sheikh summit and the
agreement reached, we had hoped that further loss of
life would be avoided. The peoples of Palestine and of
Israel no doubt saw a glimmer of hope in the decisions
taken at that time by their leaders.
Needless to say, my delegation has been very
disappointed by what has taken place since then. The
Sharm el-Sheikh agreement has not been implemented;
we have seen a drift further away from peace; many
lives, particularly Palestinian lives, have been lost; and
economic devastation has descended upon the
Palestinian people. We are deeply concerned about the
dire humanitarian situation in the Palestinian territories
and the reported lack of access by humanitarian
workers to those in need. We believe that all barriers to
humanitarian relief reaching the Palestinian people
must be removed without delay.
In light of this, and in spite of the intractable
nature of the problems facing both sides, we maintain
that, if the political will exists to make bold decisions
for peace and to carry out those decisions, with the
help of the Security Council and the United Nations as
a whole, perhaps we can then move forward to bring
peace to the peoples of the region.
In December, Jamaica supported the sending of
United Nations observers to Palestine, a position which
did not at that time receive the support of the majority
of the members of the Security Council. We believed
then, as we do now, that the deployment of United
Nations observers could act as a deterrent to further
violence and as a confidence-building measure between
the Palestinians and the Israelis.

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

While we delay, the violence rages on, and many
lives continue to be lost. As the Permanent
Representative of Singapore reminded us, the Council
has repeatedly expressed its concern about the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

and indiscriminate use of force against Palestinian
civilians. Any attacks or reprisals against the civilian
population are legally prohibited and inadmissible. Full
respect for the Fourth Geneva Convention should be
ensured.

Other members of the Council have spoken today
of some of the things that the Security Council should
and must do. We are almost in unanimity that action by
the Security Council is urgently needed. While we have
not yet achieved unanimity on what needs to be done
and how, we are working to achieve this. We join
others who support revisiting the issue of the
deployment of United Nations observers in Palestine.
We join other members of the Council in calling for
Israel to act immediately to remove all economic
blockades and closures, and to take decisive action to
restore the economic viability of the Palestinian
territories. We reiterate our call to both sides to bring
an end to the violence and to sit down together, face to
face, and to resume negotiations.

We are of the firm view that Israel has to lift its
economic blockade against Palestinians as soon as
possible, since it has placed the Palestinian Authority
on the verge of economic collapse and has simply
doubled, if not tripled, the number of the Palestinian
protesters. Evidently, the continuation of the settlement
activities on Palestinian territory is not helping to
remedy the situation either.

Over the course of the next few days, the Security
Council will be working on a draft resolution to reflect
the concerns expressed in this meeting and to give
meaning to the aspirations for peace in the Middle
East. We urge all parties to show the maximum
flexibility and to assist us in this endeavour.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Ukraine.
Today’s formal meeting of the Security
Council — the third during the past two days to
address the dangerous crisis in the Middle East — and
the considerable number of speakers participating in
the deliberations testify not only to the gravity of the
situation but also to the active efforts by the Council to
contribute to easing tension and defusing the present
crisis.
My country remains deeply concerned at the
current deterioration in the Middle East, which has
been going on for more than five months. We are
alarmed by daily reports of continued clashes between
Israelis and Palestinians, which have already claimed
the lives of more than 400 people, most of whom are
Palestinians, with thousands wounded. We mourn the
victims of this bloodshed and express our sincere
condolences to their bereaved families.
As has been stated by my delegation on many
previous occasions, Ukraine condemns the excessive

Proceeding from this stand, we are encouraged by
the recent decision of the new Government of Israel to
start lifting the economic closure of the Palestinian
territory, as well as its intentions to stop the settlement
activities in it.
Likewise, my country recognizes the legitimate
right of Israel to live within secure and internationally
recognized borders. Ukraine absolutely rejects any acts
of terrorism, by whomsoever committed, by anyone as
a means of reaching any political goal. In our view, any
violent or provocative actions by radical elements
should be halted resolutely since they lead only to a
further escalation of violence. In this context, the acts
of violence against the Israelis are equally condemned
in my country.
It is our belief that under the current
circumstances there is no alternative for the parties but
to end any acts of violence against each other
immediately and unconditionally, to overcome their
animosity and, for the sake of peace, to come back to
the negotiating table. At this juncture, we reiterate our
appeal to the Israelis and the Palestinians to show
maximum restraint and prudence and to refrain from
any unilateral actions which could further aggravate
the situation or pre-empt the outcome of the final status
talks.
It is our conviction that both parties should
resume their negotiations as soon as possible on the
basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), including the principle of land for peace,
as well as the principles laid down at the Madrid
Conference and in the Oslo Agreement. Undoubtedly,
the understandings reached at Sharm el-Sheikh last
year should be implemented in full; the measures to
restore effective cooperation between the sides in the

15

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

field of security should be undertaken. We stress the
importance of maintaining the direct Israeli-Palestinian
contacts, including at the highest level.

region next week, and we look forward to hearing the
reports on the results of its findings in Israel and
Palestine.

In this regard, we took note with satisfaction of
the news about the recent exchange of messages
between the Palestinian leader and the new Prime
Minister of Israel being done in a fairly constructive
manner. What is important is that in their messages
both leaders affirmed a mutual desire to achieve peace.
It is our hope that these positive signals will undergo
further development.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Ukraine’s
determination to contribute further to the process of
restoring a comprehensive peace in the Middle East,
which, in our view, will come about only with the
realization of the legitimate right of the Palestinian
people to their self-determination and statehood.

We also regard positively the new Government of
Israel’s seeking the establishment of closer dialogue
with the Security Council, as was confirmed yesterday
during the meeting with the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel Mr. Shimon
Peres.
We continue to believe that in the current
circumstances the international presence in the
Palestinian territory may become an important factor
contributing to the speedy restoration of security
conditions and the resumption of talks. In our view, the
idea of the establishment of the United Nations
observer mission, as put forward by France, the United
Kingdom and some others, responds to the interests of
both Palestinians and Israelis and deserves to be
seriously considered by the Council. At the same time,
it is understandable that in practical terms this idea
cannot be implemented without the cooperation of
Israel, which should be encouraged to reconsider its
current negative attitude to it.
Ukraine upholds the position that the Security
Council should maintain its active involvement in the
search for ways to halt the current crisis in the Middle
East. My country will welcome the continuation of the
constructive engagement of the Secretary-General in
the efforts aimed at bringing peace and security to the
region. In particular, we encourage the SecretaryGeneral to pursue his mandate, conferred upon him by
the Council last fall, to negotiate with the parties on the
acceptable modalities of the United Nations observer
mission.
It is also our hope that further activities of the
fact-finding commission, as outlined in Security
Council resolution 1322 (2000), and agreed upon at the
summit meeting at Sharm el-Sheikh, will continue to
play a positive role in bringing the level of violence
down. We welcome the visit by the commission to the

16

I resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Mauritania and Morocco, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Najad
Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Ould
Deddach (Mauritania) and Mr. Snoussi
(Morocco) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Egypt. I invite him to take seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I have every
confidence in your skill and wisdom as you conduct
and steer the deliberations of the Council on this
important subject, and I express the hope that the
Security Council will carry out its role as set out in the
Charter and in the manner that the international
community desires in order to maintain security in the
occupied Palestinian territories.
The essence of the crisis, whose horrific
destructive effects the occupied Palestinian territories
have been experiencing for more than five months, lies
in one main issue: the Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian territories, which is basically the detonator

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

of all the bloody events that the world has been
witnessing, events that have continued unabated since
last September.
Israel can portray the issue in many guises. It can
mix facts and point the finger of blame in all directions
in order to come up with a single conclusion, according
to which the occupied people, the people whose land is
occupied, are equated with the occupying Power, which
imposes on the occupied people a stifling siege aimed
at starving them and bringing them to their knees.
Despite all these rationalizations and misleading facts,
the Council must not stray from the underlying reason
behind the events. That is the reality of the Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian territory.
The facts tell us that the living conditions of the
Palestinian people have not improved and will not
improve, and that they will not enjoy stability until
they are rid of the occupation in all its manifestations
and forms.
Since the meeting of the Security Council to
consider this issue on 22 November last year, there
have been a number of successive political
developments, not the least notable of which was the
change of Government in Israel. Unfortunately, none of
these developments have had the effect that some had
hoped for in terms of reducing the scope, level and size
of the military power and repression used by Israel
against the Palestinian people. We can actually say that
Israel has escalated its brutal treatment of the
Palestinian people qualitatively since the new
Government took office. This Government has chosen
to implement a “suffocating siege” policy in the
occupied territory, replacing what it called a “breathing
siege” policy, which was said to have been in effect
until a few days ago. We find these terms and
descriptions not only disturbing but also, unfortunately,
ludicrous.
For the information of the Council, such a siege
of the occupied Palestinian territory means the
transformation of every Palestinian city and village,
including those under autonomous Palestinian control,
into a large prison for its residents, a prison they are
not allowed either to enter or leave. It also means the
complete disruption of life and the strangulation of the
Palestinians, who, I must say, deal with the whole
situation with an uncommon bravery that earns the
admiration of their Arab brethren and of free peoples
throughout the world.

There is siege and closure, confiscation of land
and demolition of homes, shelling of government and
education facilities, and an organized policy to
assassinate civilians without any regard for the norms
of human rights observed throughout the world and
without recourse to any judicial authority. Israeli
civilian settlers, protected by a powerful military force,
do whatever they wish in the Palestinian territory,
attacking, stealing the Palestinians’ water and burning
their crops, all the while being defended by the Israeli
army, which then proceeds to uproot trees that had
existed for decades before Israel’s establishment, using
all the might of weaponry at its disposal to subjugate
the Palestinians to Israel’s will. It is the power of
occupation.
All this activity transpires under one pretext
Israel never ceases to repeat, presuming that it justifies
all its actions: the pretext of security. I do not believe
that this is anything more than an insult to our
intelligence and to all that this Council stands for in
terms of embodying the principles of law and human
rights. Is it not strange that we are still listening to
these pretexts after 10 years of negotiations without
Israel being able to extend to the Palestinian people the
only real concession required of it, which is to
withdraw from their land, a land that it occupied by
force in 1967?
Genuine security is a legitimate claim for all the
peoples of the region. Nobody denies the right of any
people to enjoy security. However, security cannot be
obtained at the expense of one’s own neighbours, and
one cannot clamour for security while simultaneously
killing the neighbours’ children, demolishing their
homes, strangling them and starving them. There is no
logic to this, nor any justice.
Yesterday, 14 March, amid the current tense
situation and bloody events, the report of the human
rights inquiry commission established pursuant to
Commission on Human Rights resolution S-5/1 of
19 October 2000, on human rights violations in the
occupied territories, was issued (E/CN.4/2001/121).
The report contains a detailed account of the tragic
situation of the Palestinian people living under the
repression of occupation. It outlines a set of important
recommendations and conclusions. We urge the
Council to examine them and to consider carrying them
out. Perhaps the most important of these
recommendations is contained in chapter X, part II of

17

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

the report, and I quote from paragraph 11 of chapter X,
part II:
(spoke in English)
“An adequate and effective international
presence needs to be established to monitor and
regularly report on compliance by all parties with
human rights and humanitarian law standards in
order to ensure full protection of the human rights
of the people of the occupied territories. Such an
international mechanism should be established
immediately and constituted in such a manner as
to reflect a sense of urgency about protecting the
human rights of the Palestinian people.”
(spoke in Arabic)
The conditions in the occupied territories have
deteriorated to an extent that compels the Council to
intervene, with all the authority that it has under the
Charter, to put an end to the arrogance of power with
which the occupation force handles the Palestinians in
the Palestinian territories. Given this, the Council must
consider, without procrastination or delay, establishing
and deploying the international monitoring force
requested by the international community, the
Palestinians and the Arab side several months ago.
We are aware that some countries are encouraging
the parties to resume negotiations. We have no
argument with that, but it is only fair and just that
when the Council asks for the resumption of
negotiations, they must be based on all previous
negotiations and not start in a vacuum. They should
have as a clear objective the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) within a defined and acceptable time frame.
We heard it reported that Israel said in this
Chamber yesterday that it had committed itself to the
principle of land for peace and that it had given land to
some Arab parties and was able to get only a cold
peace in return. Everybody knows who is the subject of
this contention. Egypt’s answer to this is clear and
unequivocal: the land that Egypt regained by wars,
followed by negotiations, is Egyptian territory that was
occupied by Israel. Peace among the two countries now
is a peace governed by signed agreements, and nobody
can doubt the extent to which Egypt is committed to
these agreements, out of its sense of international
responsibility. However, the temperature of the peace
between two neighbouring peoples is based on the

18

desire and will of these two peoples. It is only natural
and logical that the Egyptian people would interact
with the question of their Arab brethren whose land is
occupied, and with the plight of the brotherly
Palestinian people in particular.
When the Israeli approach to dealing with its
neighbours is changed, when a real hand of peace is
extended to them and when the Palestinian people have
been liberated from Israeli occupation, only then can
we open up and deal with the question of how warm or
cold this peace is. At present, such talk is mere
rhetoric. We can only describe this rhetoric as empty; it
cannot change the facts on the ground.
Peace is everyone’s objective. However, in the
case of the Palestinian people the achievement of peace
must be accomplished by Israel’s respect for that
people’s rights to independence and to a dignified free
life.
Before I end this intervention, I should like to
direct my words to Ambassador Yehuda Lancry, the
Ambassador of Israel.
(spoke in English)
Ambassador Yehuda Lancry, Ambassador of
Israel, the problem again is the occupation. Today, I
watched the BBC World at 7 o’clock in the morning.
There were hundreds of Palestinians, women and
children. They were in Ramallah. They were trying to
demonstrate in a very peaceful manner. The response
was bullets. The Israeli army was firing and shooting at
civilians, those who were not even carrying rocks or
stones. You will have peace with the Palestinians, but
you will have that peace when you recognize that they
are not inferiors, that their blood is as sacred as Jewish
blood. You stop shooting at them. Your people are
killing them and they count for nothing. The
Palestinians are human beings and they are the equals
of the Israelis.
The President: I thank the representative of
Egypt for the kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list if the
representative of Jordan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Hadidi (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my pleasure at the outset, Mr. President, to extend our
congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I am

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

confident that your wisdom, expertise and thorough
knowledge will lead us to the desired success. I should
also like to take this opportunity to express our sincere
appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador
Ben Mustapha, the Permanent Representative of
Tunisia, for the marked efficiency with which he
conducted the work of the Security Council during his
presidency.
It gives me pleasure also to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this emergency meeting at
the request of the Arab Group.
My delegation remains gravely concerned due to
the deteriorating situation in the occupied Arab
territories resulting from the continued Israeli
aggression against the Palestinian people and Israel’s
unjustified use of force that has assumed serious
dimensions recently, thus threatening the stability and
security of the region and the future of the peace
process in its entirety.
My delegation reiterates its call to the
international community to carry out its responsibilities
vis-à-vis the suffering of the Palestinian people. We
wish also to reiterate the necessity for concerted
international action to halt acts of aggression against
the Palestinians and to provide international protection
to them through despatching an international observer
force to the occupied territories under the auspices of
the United Nations in accordance with the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 and with a view to
preventing the recurrence of such aggression in the
future.
In spite of the receding intensity of violence, the
situation in the occupied territories is still extremely
grave and tensions continue to rise. Israel must halt its
use of force against the Palestinians and must lift the
stifling economic blockade against Palestinian cities
and villages. It must stop digging trenches around
Palestinian cities and allow for normal communications
between them, pay the financial entitlements of the
Palestinian Authority without delay and return to the
negotiating table with a view to implementing all
agreements that have been concluded, including Sharm
el-Sheikh, to put an end to this conflict.
The recent developments prove once again the
urgent need for the Middle East to reach
comprehensive and lasting peace and for Arab rights to
be restored in their entirety, a matter that will not be

realized without the application of the resolutions of
international legitimacy.
In conclusion, we would like to reassert the need
to focus on the revitalization of dialogue between the
Israeli and the Palestinian parties and to bring the
peace process back to its natural path with a view to
realizing the desired objective, namely the
establishment of a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the region.
His Majesty the King of Jordan, the Jordanian
Government and the Jordanian people reassert their
solidarity with and support for their brotherly
Palestinian people in its endeavour to regain its
legitimate rights and to establish its own independent
State on its territory, with Al-Quds al-Sharif as its
capital. I should also like to express our heartfelt
condolences to the Palestinian people and leadership
for their fallen martyrs.
The President: I thank the representative of
Jordan for the kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Yemen. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like at the outset, Mr. President, to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. We are confident that you will
steer its deliberations to the desired success. I should
also like to express our appreciation to your
predecessor, Ambassador Said Ben Mustapha,
Permanent Representative of Tunisia, for his personal
efforts and for wisely and successfully guiding our
deliberations last month.
I should also like to extend our deep thanks to
you, Mr. President, and to the members of the Security
Council for affording us the opportunity to discuss one
of the oldest issues on the agenda of the United
Nations, an issue that has lasted more than half a
century, namely, the Palestinian question, which still
awaits a just solution.
The current Israeli practices against the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territories are senseless, illogical and unbelievably
harsh, cruel and gory. They have had catastrophic
economic, social and human repercussions on the lives
of civilians.

19

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

Of late, Israel has been dissecting Palestinian
villages and cities, isolating Palestinian territories and
cutting them off from each other and from the outside
world. It has tightened its economic blockade against
civilians and has refused to pay tax revenues due the
Palestinian Authority. At the same time, settlements are
being established, Palestinian homes are being
destroyed and Palestinian families are being displaced.
Excessive force is being used by regular army forces
and trained security forces against children who are
guilty only of refusing the continuing occupation of
their land.
These are revealing indications of indiscriminate
Israeli practices. They require the Council to shoulder
its international responsibilities and take the necessary
steps to urge Israel to respect the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian peoples, in accordance with adopted
international resolutions and with the principle of land
for peace. In this context, we would ask that the
Council accept the following points.
First, and most urgently, the Council should help
put an end to violence against children and defenseless
civilians. Secondly, the economic blockade should be
lifted, barricades should be dismantled and the free
movement of civilians should be guaranteed. Thirdly,
the Palestinian Authority should be paid the tax
revenues due it. These measures are desperately
needed, which is why we ask the Council to exert
pressure on Israel to implement them. They involve the
lives of innocent civilians, whose suffering we witness
daily and whose lives and property are fraught with
danger, displacement and isolation.
On a different level, we request that the Council
also take the following steps. The Council should agree
to establish and deploy, in the occupied territories and
under the aegis of the United Nations, an international
force to protect the Palestinian people. Secondly, the
Council should establish and deploy a fact-finding
mission to look into Israeli practices against civilians
in the occupied Palestinian territories. Palestinians
need the presence of the United Nations; they need to
have someone to report on what is happening in the
occupied territories. This can only be achieved by
dispatching a fact-finding mission to the region.
We in Yemen support the peace process in the
Middle East. We believe it is an inescapable strategic
choice. It is for that reason that we are calling for the

20

resumption of negotiations between the Palestinian and
Israeli parties from the point where they left off.
The President: I thank the representative of
Yemen for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to extend my
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We are confident that your knowledge and
experience will serve you in conducting the work of the
Council in the manner to which we all aspire. I would
also like to express our gratitude to our brother, the
Permanent Representative of sisterly Tunisia, who
conducted the work of the Council last month with
wisdom and competence.
An examination of history will reveal many
documents and testimonies accurately documenting all
the massacres perpetrated by Israel against innocent
Palestinian civilians — in Deir Yassin, Ayn Kibya,
Gaza, Al-Husan, Qualquilya, Kafr Kassim, Khan
Yunis, Rafa, Al-Quds, Ramallah and other cities and
villages of Palestine. Israeli terrorism has even pursued
Palestinians to Sabra and Shatila. The Mossad and its
agents have pursued Palestinian personalities outside
Palestine and have killed a large number of them. By
admission of Israeli officials themselves, it is now
known how those agents worked, and continue to work,
to assassinate Palestinians using numerous terrorist
methods, including bombing with helicopters and
planes.
By deploying occupation forces around densely
populated areas and Palestinian cities and villages, the
Israeli authorities recently divided the West Bank into
43 sections and the Gaza Strip into four sections. This
has led to greater isolation for those cities and villages,
thereby limiting the movement of their citizens and
deepening the suffocating economic blockade. This is
an approach aimed at destroying the Palestinian entity
from within, destroying the Palestinian economy and
infrastructure and sabotaging national interests. This
approach is also aimed at eradicating Palestinian
society, which lives under blockade in geographical
cantons in which Palestinians are separated from each
other, from their brethren in the Arab world and from
the outside world. Those inhumane and unjustified

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

methods presage a dangerous deterioration in the
security situation, add to the current tensions and
demonstrate the true intentions of the new Israeli
Government.

assassinated by Zionist terrorist gangs. The
Commission confirmed the suffering of the Palestinian
people, their pain, their wounds and their continued
tragedy.

Israel describes the intifada as violence. It turns a
blind eye to the fact that it is resistance to occupation,
which is a legitimate right and, indeed, a national duty
that has been exercised by all peoples to rid themselves
of occupation and injustice. Current developments in
occupied Palestine are not violence carried out by those
who oppose peace, as Israel claims. No. They
constitute a popular uprising that rejects surrender, the
usurpation of the rights of Palestinians, the
confiscation of Palestinian territory and the
confinement of Palestinians to isolated areas where
Israeli extremism is dominant and where they cannot
even secure the basic necessities of life.

The Palestinians have lost their territory; their
houses have been demolished and they have
experienced much suffering. Death has become a daily
event for them. The father dies, and the son goes out
the next morning carrying the picture of his martyred
father. Then the son dies, and all of the fathers and
mothers receive the hordes of people who come to pay
their condolences.

The Palestinian uprising is an expression and a
reflection of the impatience of the Palestinians vis-àvis the barrenness of the peace negotiations. The
Palestinians have been offered so far the peace of time
bombs, by which the Israeli side has insisted on
imposing its conditions and adopting the approach of
the victor towards the vanquished. Israel has discussed
simple and commonsensical issues without talking
about the basic issues — issues of destiny — to gain
time and to impose new realities on the ground.
Whatever agreement is reached, Israel tries to
empty it of its content. Israel prevaricates when it
comes to making agreements and delays when it is
asked to implement. The uprising has made the claims
of Israel perfectly clear regarding its desire for peace.
It has become obvious to the international community
that Israel does not desire a peace based on justice and
that it has no intention of recognizing the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people, foremost among which
are the rights of return and self-determination and the
right to establish an independent State, with Arab
Jerusalem as its capital. Israel has showed no sincere
and serious desire to establish a climate of confidence
regionally and to coexist with its neighbours in security
and peace.
The Commission on Human Rights sent a factfinding mission led by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Mrs. Mary Robinson, in spite of all
Israeli’s attempts to mislead the Commission and its
attempts to obstruct her movements by firing on her car
to remind her of the fate of Count Bernadotte, who was

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia feels that Israel is
the only party responsible for all these acts of
aggression committed against the Palestinians.
Therefore, we denounce and deplore all Israeli
measures which run counter to all humane principles
and all norms of the revealed religions and
international law. We call upon the international
community to prevail upon Israel to stop its continued
aggression against Palestine and the Arabs.
The international community entrusted the
Security Council with the task of maintaining
international peace and security. The developments in
occupied Palestine right now mean that the Security
Council must assume its responsibility. It must adopt
the necessary measures to protect the Palestinian
people — to protect innocent children from the bullets
of the occupiers, to protect the young people whose
dreams die before they are even born and to protect
mothers with tears in their eyes while they hold their
dead sons and pray to God to rid them of the injustice
of the occupiers.
The Council must adopt measures to protect the
fathers and the elderly who have lost their sons and
their grandsons to the occupation. It must do this to
affirm the international responsibility of the United
Nations vis-à-vis the question of Palestine, until it has
been resolved in all its aspects. It must do this in
implementation of the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, which applies to all territories
occupied by Israel. It must do this in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1322 (2000) and with the
General Assembly resolution adopted during its
emergency special session.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia supports the
Palestinian request that the Security Council assume its

21

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

responsibility and implement its commitments to send
an international observer force to the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, to protect
those who are still alive among the Palestinian civilian
population. These are innocent people who only aim to
recover their rights and to live like everybody else —
like all nations, in peace, security and freedom.
Peace cannot be made through the hubris of the
generals and their use of tanks and planes. It can be
achieved only by accepting the terms of rights and by
forcing the aggressor to stop its aggression and to end
its occupation. Stability in the area is linked to the
achievement of a comprehensive and just peace. The
peace negotiations were based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace. Just as peace cannot be
dealt with piecemeal, the land cannot be partitioned
either. In order for a just and comprehensive peace to
be established, all Arab territories occupied since 1967
must be returned so that stability, security,
understanding, coexistence and cooperation can be
achieved.
The President: I thank the representative of
Saudi Arabia for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Malaysia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. Let me also join others in
thanking you for your prompt response to the request,
including from my delegation on behalf of the Islamic
Group at the United Nations, for an urgent meeting of
the Council to consider the grave situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem.
Like other members of the international community,
Malaysia continues to follow closely the grave
developments there with the greatest of concern, in the
fervent hope that the continuing violence will subside,
thereby sparing the Palestinian people further needless
deaths and injuries.
My delegation listened very carefully and with
deep empathy to the statement made by the Permanent
Observer of Palestine, to whom I am most grateful. I
am also grateful to those speakers before me who have
exposed the hostile and uncompromising policies
maintained by successive Israeli Governments while

22

they glibly talked about the need to have peaceful
relations with their Palestinian and Arab neighbours.
Since 18 December 2000, when the Security
Council failed to adopt a draft resolution that would
have led to the establishment of a United Nations force
comprising military and police observers to be
dispatched throughout the territories occupied by Israel
since 1967, nearly 100 more Palestinians have been
killed and thousands injured. By some accounts, to date
nearly 400 Palestinians have lost their lives in the
continuing violence on the ground, mainly as a direct
result of the excessive use of force by Israeli security
forces. We believe that the additional loss of lives and
injuries sustained by the Palestinians could have been
prevented
had
the
Council
discharged
its
responsibilities and acted decisively on that day to
establish the proposed United Nations observer or
monitoring force.
It was for this purpose that my Minister of
Foreign Affairs travelled to New York, along with
several of his colleagues from the Organization of the
Islamic Conference (OIC), under the leadership of the
Foreign Minister of Qatar, representing the
Chairmanship of the OIC. My Minister and his
colleagues addressed this Council and made a strong
plea for the establishment of a United Nations
protections force. They had hoped that their pleas
would convince the Council to make the right decision.
Regrettably, this was not the case and the draft
resolution was voted down by a very slim margin.
Those members of the Council that abstained in
the voting on the draft resolution last December argued
that more time was needed to allow Israel and Palestine
to arrive at an agreement between themselves over
larger issues, which might include the establishment of
such an observer force. My delegation argued that, by
doing so, the Council would be subjecting the
establishment of the United Nations force to the
vagaries of a tortuous and uncertain peace process. We
did not believe then, nor do we believe now, that the
fate of such an important — indeed, indispensable —
United Nations force should be subjected to these
uncertainties. We believed instead that the
establishment of a United Nations force would have
calmed the situation and certainly would have
prevented the needless deaths and injuries sustained by
Palestinian civilians these last several months. It would
have sent a powerful message to Israel of the serious
concern of the Council and the international

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

community over its use of excessive force in handling
the situation. It would also have demonstrated, in a
tangible way, the Council’s concern and sympathy for
the dire plight of the Palestinian civilians, the victims
of the current situation. It would be most unfortunate
indeed if, in spite of these past tragic events, the
Council were to continue to do nothing and to bear
witness to more deaths and injuries in the coming
months.
Malaysia joins the rest of the international
community in its indignation over Israel’s continued
reliance on the use of massive and unmitigated forceful
response to individual outbreaks of Palestinian protest
throughout the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem. Protracted closures of the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem;
tight restrictions on the movement of people and
goods; the withholding of customs and tax incomes
from the Palestinian Authority that rightfully belong to
it; and other measures of collective punishment have
had a disastrous effect on the Palestinian economy.
These draconian and inhumane measures have made
life for the Palestinians a daily struggle for sheer
survival. They have, inevitably, increased tension,
provoked further violence and led to a further crisis of
trust and confidence between the two sides, thereby
making it even more difficult for the peace process to
be put back on track.
My delegation recalls that some members of the
Council made the point then that the issue of the
United Nations monitoring force was still on the table
and could be revisited at a later date. We therefore call
on the Council to reconsider the proposal and to act
now, and decisively, to stop the killing of Palestinian
civilians in the occupied Territories. It cannot afford to
continue to sit on the sidelines and do nothing on the
argument that it is for the two sides to resolve their
problem, knowing full well that this is not likely to
happen anytime soon, especially in the wake of the
recent elections in Israel and the formation of a new
Government headed by Mr. Ariel Sharon. Clearly, the
onus lies with Mr. Sharon, who, as we all know,
precipitated the crisis in the first place.
This urgent meeting of the Council should send a
clear signal of the expectation of the Council and the
international community of an immediate end of the
violence, and the early despatch of a United Nations
observer force to the occupied territories would be a
concrete step in that direction. We do not subscribe to

the argument made in this Chamber today that Council
action on this proposal would interfere in the peace
process. Arguments for non-action by the Council are
as unconvincing and self-serving today as they were in
the past. Surely, they cannot hope to convince anyone
but the speakers themselves.
We believe, on the contrary, that the easing of
tensions following the establishment of a United
Nations observer force would contribute substantively
to the peace process. It would create a climate that
would be conducive to dialogue and negotiations.
Continued tension through non-action by the Council
would only exacerbate the situation and ensure the
continuing spiral of violence.
This Council, which is quick to intervene in other
conflict situations in order to protect civilians caught in
armed conflict, cannot have a different set of standards
in respect of the protection of Palestinian civilians. We
believe that the establishment of a United Nations
observer or monitoring force will be a concrete step in
providing protection for them. The very credibility of
the Council is at stake if nothing is done to deal with
the situation immediately. Non-action by the Council,
as advocated in some quarters, would be to consign the
Palestinian issue and, in particular, the current grave
situation in the occupied territories to continued
neglect and indifference and to further cynical
manipulation of the issue by Israel. My delegation is
therefore encouraged to observe today the positive
attitudes of most members of the Council on this
important proposal.
May I conclude by expressing my delegation’s
deep and sincere appreciation for the diplomatic efforts
undertaken by the United Nations Special Coordinator
in the Occupied Territories. We thank him for his
tireless efforts made towards what is likely to be a
protracted process. We also support the efforts of the
Secretary-General and continue to believe that such
efforts can be pursued in parallel with those of the
Council.
The President: I thank the representative of
Malaysia for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Bahrain. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over the Council this

23

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

month. We greatly appreciate the efforts of the
Permanent Representative of Tunisia during his
presidency of the Council last month.
The Security Council is meeting today in the light
of the extremely difficult conditions prevailing in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem.
Children, youth and women are being killed daily.
Grave violations of human rights are being committed.
Occupied Palestinian cities are being subjected to a
stifling blockade in order to starve their populations
and to deny them basic sustenance. Israel is flouting
the simplest and most basic international norms and
laws.
Current events in the occupied Palestinian
territories remind us of episodes from the First and
Second World Wars, particularly those involving
civilians and cities. When we consider the incredible
advances in human and natural sciences and in
technology since those days, we can barely
comprehend what is happening to Palestinian civilians
at the hands of the Israelis, similar as it is to the
treatment received by the vanquished at the hands of
the victors in those earlier conflicts. The basic
difference is that today it is a case of occupied and
occupier.
This Council has been called upon more than
once since the current series of grave Israeli violations
of Palestinian human rights began. The international
community has given Israel more than one opportunity
to change its policies of oppression, but to no avail. We
must therefore redouble our efforts to halt this grave
deterioration and its serious implications for
international peace and security in the region. We call
on the Security Council to assume its role and
responsibility in the maintenance of international peace
and security and to bring pressure to bear on Israel, the
occupying Power, to end its aggressive practices
against the Palestinian people.
The Palestinian people are in dire need of support
and protection from Israeli brutality, which does not
differentiate between children, young men, women and
elderly people. In this regard, my delegation would like
to express its support for the proposal to deploy an
international protection force in the occupied
territories, pursuant to the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Israel must cooperate with such a force.
The Palestinian question cannot be resolved if we
do not pay sufficient attention to its root causes and

24

their effects. We are not here simply to take note of
Israeli violations of human rights, the suffocating
blockade of Palestinian cities and other practices
carried out by the Israeli occupying forces. We are here
to deal with Israel’s occupation of Palestine. The
Security Council cannot stand idly by in the light of
what is happening to Palestinian civilians and
innocents.
Since the Security Council continues to hold
special sessions aimed at protecting civilians and
children in armed conflicts, and since it continues to
send international observers to provide protection to
such people, why then should it exclude the
Palestinians from such international protection? What
happens to the Palestinian people will be on the
conscience of the international community — a
conscience that is represented by the Council, which
must assume its responsibilities and play its rightful
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security. Therefore a vote should be held on the
proposal made to the Council to provide international
protection to the Palestinians.
The President: I thank the representative of
Bahrain for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Six
months have elapsed since the Middle East was once
again brutally thrust into the spotlight, struck by the
endemic violence to which it seems doomed, following
the unanimously condemned act of provocation by the
man who ordered the Sabra and Shatila massacres, who
led the disastrous campaign in Lebanon and who —
irony of ironies — is now presiding over his country’s
fate.
That act of provocation, which triggered the
tragedy that the Palestinian population is currently
experiencing on a daily basis, clearly aimed to
sabotage the peace process and to destroy, once and for
all, any chance of a just and lasting settlement of the
Palestinian question.
Today, it seems to everyone — most of all to the
protagonists themselves —
that the peace process
is a thing of the past, and, given the changes that have
taken place in Israel and the subsequent intensification
of repressive measures against the population of the

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

occupied territories, it appears unlikely to resume any
time soon.
Indeed, not a day goes by without innocent young
Palestinians being struck down — innocents who are
armed only with their stubborn faith in an imminent
victory against heavily armed soldiers who are
determined to use force without any hesitation or
restraint.
Every day, with untold brutality, this repression
strikes a population that is already hard-hit and on the
verge of suffocation, subjected as it is to summary
executions; arbitrary arrests; the destruction of houses,
roads and infrastructure; collective punishments;
curfews; and the blockade of towns such as Ramallah,
Tulkarem, Qalquilya, Bethlehem and Hebron.
The damage that has been caused by this all-out
war waged by Israel against the Palestinian people is
considerable. Hundreds are dead and thousands injured.
The standard of living has dropped dramatically, since
almost a million Palestinians — or a third of the
population — have fallen below the threshold of
absolute poverty since last September. Hundreds of
schools have been closed because they can no longer
operate, and there is a serious dearth of food and
medication in many Palestinian towns, which are cut
off from the rest of the world, and humanitarian
assistance and basic emergency services can no longer
reach them.
Furthermore, in flagrant violation of its
obligations and in spite of the repeated appeals of the
international community, Israel is continuing to
withhold from the Palestinian Authority hundreds of
millions of dollars in tax revenue that the Authority is
owed.
In the light of this tragic situation, and given
Israel’s unrelenting attitude towards a defenceless
population, the Palestinian Authority, backed by the
Non-Aligned Movement, asked the Security Council
several months ago to take steps to ensure the
protection of that population and to put an end to the
repression to which it is subject.
In spite of the great flexibility shown by the
representatives of Arab States and non-aligned
countries during the negotiations on the draft
resolution, the Security Council chose last December
not to act but to let the situation on the ground
deteriorate, possibly until the point of no return.

The peace negotiations that were then under way
between Palestinians and Israelis, under the auspices of
the United States — which certain members of the
Council said that they did not want to jeopardize
through an untimely intervention by the United Nations
in the field, in order to justify their opposition to the
deployment of unarmed observers — have since then
failed utterly, as have, because of the intransigence of
the Israeli authorities, all of the efforts aimed at
restoring calm and security.
The Council has taken an unacceptably passive
stance vis-à-vis a Member State that for decades has
been occupying with total impunity the territory of
neighbouring States; which holds under its control an
entire people, who are denied their most basic rights;
and which refuses to implement the resolutions of the
very Organization that created it and to fulfil its
international obligations. How then can we not talk
about a double standard and not condemn this
injustice?
At this particularly difficult juncture, which could
worsen further because of the repression, the
intimidation and the systematic use of force, which
seems to be the new course of action for the current
Israeli administration, there is still time for the Security
Council to assume its responsibility and fully to
discharge its role and mandate vis-à-vis the Palestinian
people and in respect of international legality.
First, it must urgently put an end to the policy of
repression and of the systematic use of force, and in
particular the use of real bullets against Palestinian
demonstrators. It must also decide to promptly deploy
United Nations observers in the Palestinian territories
and in Jerusalem in order to protect the civilian
population. It must also demand that Israel withdraw
its forces from Palestinian towns and localities where
they are deployed and put an end to the blockade of
these towns. Lastly, it must order Israel, as the
administering Power, to respect the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the ensure the security and protection
of Palestinian civilians.
These are demands of Algeria, which, like other
Arab countries, believes in a just and lasting solution to
the conflict in the Middle East based on the principle of
land for peace agreed upon in Madrid. This means the
total withdrawal of Israeli forces from the Arab
territories occupied in 1967 and the reinstatement of
the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people,

25

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

including their right to the establishment of an
independent State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital.
I am convinced that these are also the
expectations of the international community as a
whole, which the Council must take into account and
satisfy as early as possible.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Japan. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Satoh (Japan): First, I want to welcome you
back to New York, Mr. President. My delegation
expresses its appreciation to you for providing us with
this opportunity to discuss the grave situation we face
today in the Middle East.
The current violence is already resulting in the
tragic loss of more lives and material destruction, and
we are concerned that the escalation of violence may
bring about a disastrous result in the whole region.
Moreover, the continued violence is damaging the
political atmosphere for peace, which is a prerequisite
for resuming substantive talks. We therefore urge all
the parties concerned to make determined efforts to put
an end to the current violence. We also call on all
parties to refrain from any action that could further
complicate the situation. Most importantly, they must
observe the “blue line” identified by the United
Nations last May.
As we all know, a negotiated peace is the only
realistic option. We therefore urge the parties
concerned yet anew to make every effort to resume
their negotiations, especially the final status
negotiation between Israel and the Palestinians.
In this context, we are encouraged by the fact that
in its basic policy guideline, the new Israeli
Government explicitly expressed its determination to
pursue final peace agreements with the Palestinians and
Syria, based on Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), and a peace treaty with
Lebanon. It is also encouraging that Foreign Minister
Shimon Peres came to discuss the issues with the
Council yesterday.
Yet we have to point out that too strict a linkage
between the cessation of violence and the resumption
of negotiation could play into the hands of those
elements who do not wish to seek a peaceful settlement

26

and the coexistence of the State of Israel with an
independent Palestinian State.
We believe that in the light of the heightened
enmities, to resume dialogue is an essential first step in
rebuilding confidence among the parties concerned. We
therefore call on them to make every effort to do so as
soon as possible.
The serious deterioration of the Palestinian
economy is also a matter of grave concern to us. The
livelihoods of the Palestinian people and the financial
basis of the Palestinian Authority are being
undermined. This will, no doubt, have a profoundly
negative effect on the peace process. We therefore urge
the Israeli Government to do its utmost to enable the
Palestinians to resume their normal economic
activities.
It is also critically important that the international
community help alleviate the suffering of the
Palestinians. Japan, for its part, has extended
contributions to the Palestinians amounting to $12
million since the outbreak of the clashes.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
that Japan will remain determined to make every
possible effort to help achieve the cessation of violence
and the resumption of the peace process.
The President: I thank the representative of
Japan for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Babaa (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
congratulate you at the outset, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We also wish to extend a word of
congratulations to you on the assumption of a new post
in your country and to wish you every success. We are
confident that, thanks to your great wisdom and skill,
the Council deliberations this month will be successful.
I also wish to express our deep appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Tunisia, my brother
Mr. Said Ben Mustapha, for his impressive and
judicious stewardship of the Council during the past
eventful month.
The question of Palestine, its causes and
outcome, are well known to the Council members and
to the world. There is no need to recall that the Jewish

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

problem was a European problem throughout history. It
was never an Arab or an Islamic problem. The manner
in which that problem was brought to the Arab region,
to be disposed of, resulted in the uprooting and
displacement of the Palestinian people from their
homeland.
There is no need to recall the United Nations
resolutions that still need to be implemented and that
the Palestinian problem cannot be resolved without the
return of the Palestinian people to their homeland and
the establishment of their independent and sovereign
State on their national territory. The Palestinian people
have faced oppression and displacement for more than
eight decades, and it continues to endure the brutality
and horror of occupation. Now, they face the tanks of
the occupying Power and its missiles and airplanes.
Unarmed, they face that Power in defence of their
rights, land, dignity, holy sites, history and future.
We know very little about what happens in the
Palestinian territories, because the army of occupation
tries to impede coverage of events there. The
Committee for the Protection of American Journalists
has recently addressed a letter to the occupying Power,
expressing its concern about the safety of media
representatives in the occupied territories. It expressed
in a letter published by The New York Times its deep
concern about the brutality committed by the Israeli
army against journalists, adding that 12 journalists
have been wounded by Israeli army bullets and beaten
by internal security forces. Settlers still attack
journalists, especially from Reuters and Agence France
Presse, with impunity. In fact, some Israeli newspapers
have started to talk about collective punishment and the
tragedies endured daily by the Palestinians. Yesterday,
Ha’aretz, the Israeli newspaper, published an article by
the International Committee of the Red Cross
condemning the collective punishment carried out by
the army of occupation against the Palestinian
population. This punishment is in violation of
international and humanitarian laws, which require an
occupying country to ensure normal living conditions
for the occupied population. The newspaper said that
the Israeli practices have become untenable and
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity. It
further said not only that the daily killings occur as a
result
of
confrontations
between
Palestinian
demonstrators and the army of occupation, but also that
Palestinians are killed every day in their beds, on the

doorsteps of their homes or on their way to their house,
work or farm.
Every day we see reports of the killing of a
mother or a child or an elderly man in cold blood by
Zionist snipers. These practices are similar to Nazi
practices. They take the form of confiscation of
Palestinian lands, house demolitions, the uprooting of
trees and restriction of the movement of Palestinians
living near settlements. Highways and bypass roads are
built to serve, according to the Red Cross, Israeli
settlements.
I would also like to cite something from
yesterday’s edition of the Israeli newspaper, Yediot
Aharonot:
“For some five months now, in the
territories” — that is, the occupied Palestinian
territories — “there has been a slow but
systematic and calculated process of annihilation
of the Palestinian people. Soldiers who have been
trained meticulously to target human beings aim
their guns at eyes and knees to injure but not to
kill, and they cannot discriminate between a
demonstrator and a passer-by. At least 12,000
Palestinian civilians have been injured, become
blind or incapacitated, and many have suffered
the amputation of their arms. These injured will
die slowly, away from the cameras. Some will die
because they cannot find a hospital to treat them;
others will not be able to survive hunger and the
destruction of the infrastructure inflicted upon
them.”
If the Zionist occupation forces claim to be
defending themselves, and that they do not kill in cold
blood, why do they refuse to receive international
inquiry commissions, and why do they not cooperate
with such commissions? The Palestinians are expected
to accept the peace of slaves and to live in less than 15
per cent of their historical homeland. They are
expected to be confined to their homes and to observe
curfews while settlers frolic and uproot their trees and
confiscate their land under the protection of the
occupation forces, as is now happening in Hebron.
The Council should not expect any response from
the Zionist occupation army or any halting of their
Nazi-like practices in occupied Palestinian territories,
because the leaders of Tel Aviv are, in the majority,
war criminals. This is a well-known fact. Indeed, there
are calls within Israel itself to put General Mofaz, the

27

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

Israeli Army Chief of Staff, on trial as a war criminal,
because he leads daily criminal practices as his forces
carry out assassinations of Palestinians and destroy
thousands of acres of farmland in the Palestinian
territories. Other practices include preventing
Palestinians from leaving their villages for work, or to
run errands, purchase food and medicine or visit a
doctor, because of the closing of exit points with rocks
and trenches.
The hands of General Sharon are stained with the
blood of Arabs and Palestinians, and he is proud of
that. Now he is in a powerful position at the head of the
Tel Aviv regime, resuming his mandate of imposing
faits accompli and scorched-earth policies. A professor
of sociology and political science at Johns Hopkins
University published an article in The Chicago Tribune
last month in which he analysed Sharon and described
him as a war criminal. He cited many criminal acts and
massacres that prove beyond any doubt that Sharon is a
war criminal. The author also cited bloody crimes and
massacres that irrefutably prove, even to his
supporters, that Sharon is a war criminal. The author
also referred to bloody events planned and executed by
Sharon against the Palestinians, such as the massacres
of Kibya, Sabra and Shatila, in addition to his
desecration of Al-Aqsa Mosque in occupied Jerusalem.
What is paradoxical is that at the time the
international community practices double standards,
the world remained silent when the butcher Sharon was
elected as chief of the bloody military institution in Tel
Aviv under the pretext that the elections took place in a
free and democratic atmosphere. But in the case of the
election of a right-wing politician in a European
country where democracy prevailed, there was an
outcry and a condemnation of it in the United States
and in Europe. Diplomatic and trade relations with that
country were threatened to be severed.
The sight of boys and young men who bravely
face one of the mightiest military machines in the
world, one supported by many hegemony-minded
countries, affirms one thing: the Palestinian people
insist on pursuing their resistance to an alien, settler,
colonialist system that is unique in history. The
Palestinians confirm that the usurpers and invaders will
not enjoy their lives because of the usurpation of their
land. They will not forget or forgive the usurpers for
their horrific crimes against them.

As it is debating the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, the Council should not forget
that the Palestinian people have lived under the longest
term of military occupation in modern history, except
for the Japanese occupation of Korea, and the Council
should not forget its resolutions in order to redress the
injustices suffered by the Palestinians and to uphold
their legitimate and inalienable rights. It must not
forget how the Zionists continue to violate the Geneva
Conventions and to carry out systematic ethnic
cleansing, and it must remember the massacres
committed in Deir Yassin, Sabra and Shatila and the
massacres that are taking place in broad daylight.
In conclusion, we call upon the Security Council
to fulfil its responsibility towards maintaining
international peace and security along the following
lines. First, the Council must take the proper measures
to provide full protection for the Palestinian people
under international law and the Geneva Conventions.
Secondly, the Council must agree to form an observer
force under the aegis of the United Nations and deploy
that force in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem, in order to provide adequate
protection. Thirdly, there must be condemnation of the
Nazi-like practices committed by the Zionist
occupation forces in the form of blockades, starvation,
land confiscation, destruction of farmland and coldblooded assassination through the use of internationally
prohibited armaments.
Failure by the Council to take a decision now,
under the pretext that it should provide the butcher
Sharon an opportunity for discussion with the
Secretary-General or delay in taking the proper
decision, as one super-Power is doing at present, would
mean that the Council is sending a message of
encouragement to the occupation forces to continue
their Nazi-like practices against Palestinians and is
encouraging them to pursue their policies of
occupation, annexation and confiscation of land,
blockade and starvation and perpetuation of suffering.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Qatar, whom I invite to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Khal (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, despite the very tragic conditions under

28

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

which this meeting is being held, I would like to begin
my statement by offering my congratulations to you for
presiding over the work of the Council this month. I am
fully confident that your wisdom and experience will
crown the work of the Council with the desired
success. My delegation would like to express its
appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador Said
Ben Mustapha, the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Tunisia to the United Nations, on the
effectiveness and efficiency with which he managed
the Council’s work during his presidency. I would also
like to extend my thanks to you for holding this
meeting at the request of the Permanent Representative
of the United Arab Emirates to the United Nations as
Chairman of the Arab Group this month.
We have come once again to your Council, Mr.
President, to review the serious developments that are
occurring in the occupied Arab lands and that to date
have resulted in the killing of more than 350 innocent
civilians, including women and children. Many
thousands of others have been wounded because they
are demanding the right to live in dignity.
Over the last few months the Council has
hesitated to take decisive action concerning these
developments in the occupied Arab and Palestinian
territories, despite the many interventions by peaceloving States, the last of which was a visit by the
ministerial delegation of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference led by the Qatari Minister for
Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Sheikh Hamad bin
Jassem bin Jabr Al-Thani. That visit set a precedent
that some considered to be an embodiment of the
seriousness with which the situation in the region is
being dealt with. All this hesitation and pussy-footing
had an adverse impact and led to an escalation of the
events and to an increase in the number of those killed
and injured, and to an increase in unemployment on the
Palestinian side due to the policies of isolation and
siege and deliberate killing exercised by the occupying
Israeli authorities.
The State of Qatar calls upon the Member States
in the Security Council that abstained on the draft
resolution submitted by the States members of the nonaligned group in the Security Council to review their
previous positions.
The Israeli Government has shown its true face
since the Israeli forces, beginning 11 March 2001, have
implemented a serious aggressive plan against the

Palestinian people that includes taking provocative
measures on the ground, namely the dismantling of the
West Bank into 43 parts and dividing the Gaza Strip
into four parts or cantons. This has been accomplished
through the deployment of military forces and tanks,
digging trenches and setting up dirt barriers around
population centres in Palestinian cities and villages in
order to restrict the movement of citizens and thus to
entrench the suffocating economic siege. All this is
being done to subjugate the Palestinian people and to
prevent them from earning a livelihood. This step on
the part of the Israelis is a complementary measure to
what they took in other areas with the aim of isolating
the Palestinians within the occupied Arab territories
from the outside world, as well as destroying the
Palestinian economy. The policy of siege and
suffocation and setting strict restrictions on the
movement of people and goods has not only effected
the Palestinian economy as a whole but has also
individual Palestinian families, since students cannot
get to their schools and labourers cannot get to their
places of work. One can imagine the reaction when
children are without schools and heads of families
without work.
The tragic situation in the Palestinian territory at
the moment forces the Security Council — in
accordance with its mandate and responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security under
Articles 24 and 37 of the Charter, and taking into
account the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 on the
protection of civilians in occupied territories — to
assume its responsibilities. First, it needs to provide
adequate protection for the Palestinian people, which is
exposed to the most brutal forms of repression and
aggression as practised by the Israeli occupying forces,
until it can exercise its full rights in accordance with
the resolutions of international legitimacy without the
pretext of compliance by the two parties to set up such
a force, since Palestine is under the power of the
occupying authority. It is not just that the Palestinians
be informed that the United Nations cannot provide
protection for them because those who are occupying
their territory do not accept the provision of such
protection. Secondly, the Council must put the
necessary pressure on the present Israeli Government
to force it to comply with the agreements that have
been reached in the previous stages of the peace
process, as well as to respect what has been achieved in
the previous negotiations and to resume those
negotiations where they had stopped.

29

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

The State of Qatar believes that a comprehensive
and permanent peace in the Israeli-Arab conflict will
not be achieved unless Israel complies with all the
Security Council resolutions, particularly 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), and the principle of land for peace,
thus enabling the Palestinian people to restore their
legitimate rights. Foremost among these rights are the
rights to return, self-determination and to establish
their independent State on their national soil with
Al-Quds al-Sharif as its capital, complete Israeli
withdrawal from the Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June
1967 as well as complete Israeli withdrawal from
Lebanese territory to the internationally recognized
borders, including the Shab’aa Farms, in accordance
with Security Council resolutions 425 (1978) and 426
(1978), and releasing all prisoners of war in Israeli
prisons.
In conclusion, it must be understood that the
Palestinians are not the cause of the security problems
that Israel is facing. Israeli insistence on occupying
Palestinian territory and its continuous aggression
against the Palestinian people is the real cause of these
problems. Eliminating Israeli security problems will
not be achieved unless we put an end to the occupation
and dismantle the settlements. Priority should be given
to putting an end to the repression of the Palestinians,
and measures for confidence-building should form the
foundation that will enable the peoples of the area to
live in permanent peace and security. The bloodletting
that we witness daily must lead to a just settlement
through negotiation based on the principle of land for
peace, on international legitimacy and on the
resolutions of the Security Council, and not on the use
of force.
The President: I thank the representative of
Qatar for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative Sweden. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Schori (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union — Bulgaria, Czech Republic,
Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia — and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta
and Turkey align themselves with this statement.
The prospect of peace must return to the Middle
East. There is no alternative to a political solution. The

30

European Union reiterates today its deep concern at the
chain of violent events during the last months and
holds that it is the responsibility of the Israeli as well
as the Palestinian authorities to do their utmost to
prevent actions resulting in new victims. We call on
both parties to act with maximum restraint and to do
their utmost to prevent terrorist acts and the growth of
sentiments of revenge.
New talks on security must get underway. The
European Union appeals to the Government of Israel
and to the Palestinian Authority to re-engage
immediately in security cooperation in order to reverse
the spiral of violence.
The humanitarian situation in the Palestinian
territories is of great concern. The current economic
crisis is unacceptable and threatens the stability of the
region and the prospects for peace. Both parties have a
duty to minimize tensions between them. Improving
the economic situation in the occupied territories is an
important element in that effort. On 26 February the
European Union decided to make the funds in its
existing Cash Facility — €60 million — available as
grants to the Palestinian Authority. The funds will be
disbursed in the context of a concerted international
effort and on the condition that the Palestinian
Authority draw up a revised budget as a basis for
international support and take more effective measures
against corruption and towards more transparency. The
European Union urges other donors to increase their
contributions to help meet the severe challenges facing
the Palestinian economy.
In view of its devastating effects on the
Palestinian economy, and therefore on political
stability, the European Union stresses the importance
of immediately ending the withholding of revenue
payments due to the Palestinian Authority. Israel
should transfer at once those tax revenues to the
Palestinian Authority. The European Union also
reiterates the importance of ending the blockades in the
Palestinian areas so that the acute economic and
humanitarian crises can be brought to an end. Israel
must allow and facilitate access for humanitarian
personnel and goods to Palestinian territories.
The European Union notes the recent easing of
the closures on Hebron, Bethlehem, Tulkarem and
Qualquilya, and believes that more needs to be done to
lift the closures in the Palestinian territories. During a
recent visit to the region, a European Union delegation

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

led by the Swedish Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Ms. Anna Lindh, expressed to Prime Minister Sharon
and Minister for Foreign Affairs Peres, as well as to
President Arafat, the European Union’s willingness to
help move the peace process forward. It was underlined
that no opportunity for a peaceful settlement should be
missed, despite the present crisis in the region. The
European Union also raised the issue of the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Palestinian
territories, and of possible assistance by the
international community. In addition, the issues of
closures and transfers of tax revenues were raised by
the European Union.
Prime Minister Sharon expressed understanding
for the European Union’s concerns over the various
practices of collective punishment. The European
Union reads this as a promising first step.
On the Israeli-Palestinian track, the European
Union understands that much ground has been covered
in open and frank negotiations. The European Union is
convinced that the progress made on all major issues
during the last negotiations should form the basis for
future talks on permanent status. The Union also looks
forward to a prompt resumption of the negotiations
between Israel, on the one hand, and Syria and
Lebanon, on the other.
The European Union reaffirms its view that the
basis for negotiations and for a just and lasting pace
must be Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions. It must also
include the principle of the inadmissibility of
acquisition of territory by war, the need for every State
in the area to be able to live in security, and the
principle of land for peace. The European Union calls
upon the parties to reaffirm their commitments to the
basic principles established within the framework of
Madrid, Oslo and subsequent agreements, in
accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions.
The European Union deplores all acts of violence.
In this context, the European Union reiterates its
strongly held opinion that Israel’s policy on extrajudicial killings is unacceptable and contrary to the rule
of law, and it urges Israel to cease this practice and
thus respect international law. Extrajudicial killings are
an obstacle to peace and could provoke further
violence.

The European Union recalls its recent declaration
in response to the two executions carried out by the
Palestinian Authority on 13 January, encouraging
President Arafat to consider a moratorium on the death
penalty and reiterating its view that the abolition of the
death penalty worldwide would contribute to the
enhancement of human dignity.
For months we have seen Palestinian and Israeli
casualties. The situation is intolerable, and both parties
must shoulder their responsibilities and bring the
senseless violence and human suffering to a halt, and
thus open up perspectives and give hope to Palestinians
and Israelis for a better life in dignity and security. The
lack of progress in the peace process, including on the
settlements issue, lies at the heart of the Palestinian
population’s frustration.
The international community, including the
United Nations and its Secretary-General, can play an
important role in assisting the parties. The European
Union supports the idea that, as requested by Security
Council members in November of last year, the
Secretary-General should explore with the parties
arrangements for an observer mission.
The European Union reiterates its willingness to
contribute to advancing the Middle East peace process.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of the Sudan. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere
congratulations to you and to your friendly country,
Sir, on Ukraine’s assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the current month. I would also like to
extend my congratulations to your predecessor,
Ambassador
Saïd
Ben
Mustapha,
Permanent
Representative of Tunisia, and to the members of his
delegation for their superb stewardship of the Council
last month. I would also like to pay tribute to the new
members of the Council.
In beginning my remarks, I would like to
associate the Sudan’s position of support with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
Many months after the last open meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, which took place last year, the

31

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

situation in occupied Palestine continues to worsen.
This is due to the fact that the occupying Power
continues to employ excessive use of military force
against innocent, unarmed Palestinians. The occupying
Power also continues to carry out its criminal plan to
tighten the blockade against Palestinian towns and
villages so as to strangle the Palestinian economy and
to subjugate and starve the Palestinian people. All
those efforts are first and foremost meant to isolate the
Palestinian people within the occupied territories and
to cut them off from the outside world, to destroy the
Palestinian economy and to undermine the
infrastructures of Palestine. This is in addition to the
declared measures aimed at changing the demographic
and geographic composition of the Palestinian
territories through the building of settlements, and
through measures taken in the Holy City of Jerusalem
with a view to creating new realities on the ground that
will be difficult to reverse in the future.
The primary responsibility for the rising death
toll among the innocent civilian Palestinian population
in occupied Palestine falls squarely on the Security
Council, which last December failed to adopt a draft
resolution calling for protecting the Palestinian
people — and especially women and children — from
the daily acts of aggression committed by the Israeli
occupation forces. The Council put forward untenable
justifications that cast doubt on its credibility before
world public opinion and that in fact confirmed the
Council’s practice of double standards and its lack of
even-handedness. The Council gave the entire world
the impression that Israel was exempt from the
provisions and rules governing international peace and
security that, under the Charter of the United Nations,
are supposed to be upheld by the Security Council.
The daily criminal acts of aggression committed
by Israel against the Palestinian people, in addition to
its violations of resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council and of international
humanitarian law, especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, put this Council to a real and
major test. We therefore expect the Council to rise to
its level of responsibility by reconsidering its previous
position and moving forward in order to adopt effective
measures that would ensure an end to violence and to
the use of random force by the Israeli occupation
authorities against innocent Palestinian civilians and to

32

mandate the composition of an international force to
protect them.
Any failure by the Council to establish a
protection force to protect the Palestinians against daily
repressive measures by the occupying Power and to
monitor the situation in occupied Palestine would be
tantamount to backtracking by the Council from its
obligations as set forth in the Charter and would also
be tantamount to a protection of the aggressor and an
encouragement to that aggressor to further pursue the
daily acts of killing and torture against the Palestinian
people.
In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm what we
have said before this Council on previous occasions —
that the long-sought peace in the Middle East will not
be achieved as long as Israel persists in its expansionist
policies, its acts of oppression and aggression and its
efforts to Judaize Jerusalem. The only viable way to
bring about peace throughout the Middle East is to end
the Israeli occupation through a real commitment by
Israel to the land-for-peace formula. Israel must fully
comply with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), which constitute the foundation of the
peace process in the Middle East. For its part, Israel
has indeed moved backwards in this process by
disavowing its commitments and promises, in the
belief that it can achieve its full security at the expense
of the security of other parties.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Sudan for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of South Africa. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Nacerodien (South Africa): I would like to
congratulate Ukraine on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March 2001. On behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement,
I would like to express our sincere appreciation to the
President for convening this important discussion in
the Council. It is essential that we as the United
Nations take action to address the pressing situation in
Palestine.
Just last month, the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Terje
Roed Larsen, issued a report on the impact of the
repressive measures on the Palestinian people.
According to Mr. Roed Larsen, the Palestinian

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

economy has suffered gross domestic product losses of
over $900 million since the onset of the crisis and
labour income losses of over $240 million. Based on
World Bank data, the report estimates that 32 per cent
of the population is now living in poverty — a 50 per
cent increase since the onset of the crisis.
Closures, blockades and restrictions on the
movement of goods, persons and resources imposed by
Israel have resulted in the economic suffocation of the
Palestinian people. By any standards these figures
clearly show the devastating impact that the closures
have on the Palestinian economy, fuelling and
fomenting dangerously high levels of frustration and
violence.
The international community, much less the
Security Council, cannot remain silent whilst a
militarily
superior
occupying
force
violates
international humanitarian law. How many more
innocent lives must be lost before we take action?
The Non-Aligned Movement repeats the call on
the Security Council to pass a resolution mandating the
immediate deployment of a force to protect Palestinian
civilians against the impact of the military campaign of
the Israeli armed forces. The United Nations, and in
particular the Security Council as the custodian of
international peace and security, must adopt measures
to bring an immediate end to the suffering of the
Palestinian people.
The recent closure of Palestinian towns by the
Israeli Defence Force, in particular the ongoing
blockade of Ramallah, has further undermined the
already precarious humanitarian situation in the
occupied territories. Palestinian civilians are not only
being prevented from reaching their places of work in
Israel, but they are also being denied access to essential
food and medicine supplies.
Such a heavy-handed and disproportionate
response by Israel constitutes an affront to the most
basic rights of the Palestinian people. These actions
contravene Security Council resolution 1322 (2000),
which calls upon Israel to meticulously abide by its
legal obligations and responsibilities under the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. As members of this
Council well know, the Fourth Geneva Convention
expressly prohibits the collective punishment of a
civilian population. The Non-Aligned Movement
therefore reiterates its call on Israel to act with restraint
and to meticulously abide by its legal obligations with

respect to the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
The Conference of High Contracting Parties of
the Fourth Geneva Convention held in Geneva in July
1999 stated its readiness to reconvene should the need
arise. The High Contracting Parties had, in common
article 1, agreed to “undertake to respect and ensure
respect for the present Convention in all
circumstances”. Clearly the time has come for the High
Contracting Parties to meet urgently on the situation in
Palestine.
The Non-Aligned Movement has long affirmed
that the question of Palestine constitutes the nucleus of
the Middle East conflict. The achievement of the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and to an independent State with East
Jerusalem as its capital is pivotal to the achievement of
a sustained and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.
The Movement believes that peaceful negotiation
is the only means of ensuring lasting peace, security
and stability in the region. We urge the parties to take
the required steps to ensure the cessation of hostilities,
to restore calm and to adopt measures to re-establish
mutual trust. It is only then that an atmosphere
conducive to the resumption of negotiations can be
created.
We firmly believe that the condition of land for
peace is essential if meaningful progress in the peace
process is to be attained. For a durable, just and
comprehensive peace, negotiation towards final status
issues has to be in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions and international legitimacy.
Once more the Non-Aligned Movement wishes to
repeat our firm belief that it remains the permanent
responsibility of the United Nations to stay fully
engaged in the Palestinian question until a definitive
solution is achieved.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Kuwait. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to extend to you, Sir, our
thanks and appreciation for your positive response to
the request of the Arab Group to convene this meeting
to discuss the deteriorating situation of our Palestinian
brothers in the occupied Palestinian territories. I wish

33

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

also to extend to you and to the Government of Ukraine
our special congratulations on your presidency of this
Council. We are confident that you will guide the work
of the Council in an able manner.
I wish also to register our appreciation for the
outstanding efforts of your predecessor, my brother
from Tunisia, in managing the affairs of the Council
last month in a manner that reflected his great and
renowned experience in the international arena.
Our participation today in the discussion of the
illegal Israeli practices against the Palestinian civilians
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, affirms the dangers and consequences of the
provocative behaviour of Ariel Sharon, the Prime
Minister of Israel, on 28 September, when he paid a
notorious provocative visit to Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
That visit laid a heavy political burden on Israel, but is
by no means heavier than the bitterness and pain of the
brotherly Palestinians. It was an arrogant act that
revealed hatred for all elements of the peace and
stability to which we in the Arab States aspire.
Kuwait strongly deplores Israeli practices against
Palestinian civilians and the methods of repression
deliberately employed by occupying soldiers against
defenceless innocent people fighting for their freedom
from the occupation authorities. Our concern is
increased by the fact that the Israeli Government is
using all forms of repression and violence against
Palestinian civilians, approximately 400 of whom have
been killed to date. Following these deliberate killings,
including of defenceless children, since 7 March Israel
has imposed a policy of blockade on the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem. This has
further aggravated the living conditions of Palestinian
people in every walk of life to a level that is
unacceptable to any human being.
All this undoubtedly represents a violation of
United Nations resolutions and the principles of
international law, particularly the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 and the obligations emanating
therefrom under the two Protocols Additional of 1977.
In this context, we call for a consideration of ways to
guarantee the full implementation of that Convention in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem.
The suffering of the Palestinian people in the
occupied territories requires the firm resolve of the
international community to give no credence to the

34

allegations of the Israeli Government that it is acting to
alleviate the consequences of the blockade on the
Palestinian people. The Security Council is fully
responsible for ensuring the security and safety of the
Palestinian civilians and for safeguarding their dignity
and right to live free from the repression of the
occupying Power. Thus, we extend our absolute
support for the Palestinian request that a United
Nations force be established to protect Palestinian
civilians in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem. We trust that the establishment of
such a force will reveal the truth and will curb the
brutal Israeli practices perpetrated daily against the
Palestinian civilians.
In Kuwait, we do not understand why the Israeli
Government is afraid of the establishment of a
protection force, especially since Israel claims that it is
not responsible for the violence occurring there. If it is
sincere, it is illogical that it should oppose the
establishment of such a force. We also believe that the
creation of a force to guarantee the protection of the
Palestinians would contribute to stability and restore
the situation as it was in the past. Moreover, the report
of the fact-finding mission established under a
resolution of the Commission on Human Rights
stresses the need to establish an international
mechanism to protect Palestinian civilians.
In Kuwait, we support all peaceful initiatives
designed to find a just solution to the Palestinian
question in accordance with resolutions of international
legitimacy, particularly Security Council resolution 242
(1967). We maintain our firm stance in solidarity with
the just requests and claims of the Palestinians for their
legitimate political rights and to establish their
independent State on their national soil, with Jerusalem
as its capital. We wish to emphasize that, if peace is to
be just and comprehensive, it should be based on
international resolutions, particularly Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well as the
principle of land for peace. This should lead to Israel’s
withdrawal from all the Arab territories it occupied in
1967, including the Syrian Golan, and to its complete
withdrawal from southern Lebanon.
The President: I thank the representative of
Kuwait for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Iraq. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Al-Douri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, allow me to extend to you my
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month and to wish you every
success. I should like, through you, to thank the
Ambassador of Tunisia, Saïd Ben Mustapha, for a job
well done as President of the Council last month, and
also to extend my thanks to you for your quick
response to the request to consider this important and
serious issue, which deals with the very essence of the
work of the Council — the maintenance of
international peace and security.
My delegation, despite the fact that we are very
doubtful as to the possibility of finding a just solution
to this very serious problem, hopes that today’s
discussions of the issue will lead to an end to the
continuous and unjust aggression to which the unarmed
brotherly Arab Palestinian people are facing on their
land and in their homes.
We have previously dealt with this issue — not so
long ago. The Council held formal and informal
consultations, but, regrettably, we did not reach any
results. This is because of the insistence of one
country — the United States of America — on
maintaining the status quo, under many flimsy pretexts
and excuses.
That State provides the occupying Zionist entity
with the means of force that enable it to exercise daily
its aggressive policies against the Palestinian people. It
also continues to direct threats against many other Arab
countries.
The failure of the Council to deter the aggressor
was, and still is, one of the principal reasons for the
continuation of the Palestinian bloodshed and the
increase in the number of martyrs, among them
Palestinian youths and children. All of this takes place
in full view of the international community, which
seems incapable of taking any measures to halt this
aggression and to put an end to the occupation.
Is it not strange that a notorious terrorist with a
long history of bloodshed, who is directly responsible
for shedding Palestinian blood, should preside over the
Zionist entity? Indeed, this has led to the unmasking of
the ugly face of Zionism. This person, who carried out
the Sabra and Shatila massacres, is the same person
who desecrated the Temple Mount on 28 September,
leading to the wave of violence against the
Palestinians, which has not yet stopped.

This terrorist started his work, as an official in the
Zionist entity, by escalating the aggression through the
taking of measures to dissect the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip. He has exercised his hobbies in a most
arrogant manner: political assassinations, the
imposition of sieges and the blocking of access to food
and medicine by Palestinian villages and cities, thus
violating the principles of the Geneva Conventions and
of international humanitarian law.
This outrageous situation and these irresponsible,
criminal measures make it imperative for the Security
Council to assume its responsibilities under the Charter
and to take decisive measures aimed at halting this
unceasing aggression against the unarmed Palestinian
people, who have nothing but stones.
My delegation has clarified its position with
respect to this issue on more than one occasion. In the
Security Council meeting held on 4 October 2000, we
clearly pointed out that the question is not how to force
the Palestinians into an unbalanced round of
negotiations with the occupying Power, because the
negotiations will definitely not restore their rights.
But one must consider the essence of the problem
in order to find the appropriate solutions. The problem
began when a British citizen by the name of Balfour
promised, in 1917, another British citizen, by the name
of Rothschild, that he would set up a national
homeland for him and for other extremists in Palestine.
Thus the prince gave to others what he did not own.
The question essentially concerns the military
occupation of Palestinian land by a flood of
adventurers from Europe and other parts of the world,
under the pretext that it was an unpopulated land. At
issue are the continuous and repetitive acts of
aggression carried out by this usurping entity against
the Arab States and its occupation of the Palestinian
territory since 1948, in addition to its occupation of the
Syrian Golan and Lebanese territory.
In summary, we are dealing with the tragedy of a
people under occupation, subjected to the worst forms
of repression, brutality and displacement. The question
is the suffering of more than 4 million Palestinian
refugees, who were forced to leave their land, in
contravention of the principles of international law,
which guarantee their full right to return to their
homeland.

35

S/PV.4295 (Resumption 1)

The Zionist, racist creed, which is expansionist,
arrogant and hateful, is the reason behind all the
tragedies that have befallen the Palestinian people,
including the desecration of holy sites that more than a
billion Muslims, and Christians as well, hold sacred.
In short, this is the essence of the Palestinian
question, and these are its principal components. So if
we want a just, comprehensive and lasting peace, we
should consider all these elements, because together
they represent the essence of the tragedy of the
Palestinian people. If we fail to do so, the Zionist
aggression will continue, and the Security Council will
continue to be incapable of assuming its

36

responsibilities vis-à-vis this serious situation, which
threatens, and will continue to threaten, international
peace and security.
The President: I thank the representative of Iraq
for the kind words he addressed to me.
There are a number of speakers remaining on my
list. In view of the lateness of the hour, and with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, I intend to
suspend the meeting now. The meeting is suspended
until early next week. The time will be announced in
the Journal.
The meeting was suspended at 7 p.m.
