TWENTY-FIFTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 30 JANUARY

NEW

1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1529) . . . . . :: . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . ,

Page

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . .
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 26 January 1970 addressed to the President of the Security
Council from the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Ceylon, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus,
Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Nepal, the Niger, Nigeria,
Pakistan, the People’s Republic of the Congo, the Philippines, Rwanda,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria,
Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the United Arab Republic, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and
Zambia (S/9616 and Add.l-3) . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SJPV.1529

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TWENTY-NINTH

Held in New York on Friday,

30 January

President: Mr. Nsanze TERENCE (Burundi),

MEETING

1970, at 10.30 am.

/1327th meeting/, I shall invite the representative of
Turkey, the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, Mr. Cuhruk, to take a seat at the Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. h? Cuhrttk
(Turkey),
President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, took a place at the Security Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 529)

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I have
just received a letter from the representative of India in
which he requests to be allowed to participate in the
Council’s debate on the question before it. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees that the
representative of India, Mr. Teja, should be invited to
participate in the debate without the right to vote, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and the
practice of the Council.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 26 January 1970 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Ceylon, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
Nepal, the Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, the People’s Republic of the Congo, the Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, the
Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
the United Arab Republic, the United Republic of
Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and
Zambia (S/9616 and Add.l-3).

At the invitation of the President, Mr, J. S. Tejcz (India)
took a place at the Security Council table.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French): The
Security Council will now continue its consideration of the
question before it. I should like to draw members’ attention
to document S/9616/Add.3, which increases to fifty-seven
the number of signatories of the letter of 26 January 1970,
by adding the name of Cameroon. That document hasjust.
been distributed. In addition, members of the Council have
before them the revised five-Power draft resolution

Adoption of the agenda

[Sf9620/Rev.

The agenda was adopted.

I].

4. Mr. KULAGA (Poland): In my very first words as
representative of a new member of the Security Council I
should like to express my sincere appreciation of the kind
words of welcome that you, Mr. President, and the
representatives round this table have addressed to Poland,
the country I represent, and to me as representative of
Poland.

The situation in Namibia
Letter dated 26 January 1970 addressed to the President of
the Security Council from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Ceylon, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea,
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Nepal,
the Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, the People’s Republic of the
Congo, the Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria,
Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the United
Arab Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania, the
Upper Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Z#mbia (S/9616
and Add.1.3)

5. I could not fail to avail myself of this first official
opportunity of offeiing you, Mr. President, my delegation’s
heartiest congratulations on your assumption, in the most
spectacular manner, of the presidency of this Council. We
are fortunate that so distinguished a representative of
Africa should preside over the debates of the Security
Council as it enters the seventies, by taking up an
outstanding grave problem of colonialism in Africa.
6. It may perhaps seem immodest for me to join in the
vote of thanks to Ambassador Mwaanga of Zambia for his
dedicated conduct of the Council’s proceedings in December 1969. I do so, however, most sincerely-if only from

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from F’rench): In
accordance with the previous decision of the Council
1

problem have been delineated with the greatest clarity. The
political and legal framework for the United Nations action
on Namibia has been precisely drawn. Its cornerstoNne is
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), that is, the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples. Its foundation is contained in
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) terminating the
Mandate of the Republic of South Africa over South West
Africa, now known as Namibia. Along with many resolutions of the General Assembly, we find in resolutiorrs 264
(1969) and 269 (1969) of the Security Council, first, a
reaffirmation of the right of the people of Namibia to
freedom and independence and of the legitimacy of their
national liberation struggle; secondly, we find a restateiment
of the illegality of the presence of the South African
administration
in Namibia and thirdly, a call for an
immediate withdrawal of South Africa’s authorities from
Namibia. Now, the ways and means to be applied in order
to fill in that legal and political framework are stated fin the
provisions of the United Nations Charter, in its Articles 41
and 42, in particular, and in the prerogatives of the Security
Council.

the position
of an outside, though keen, observer of the
proceedings of the Security Council at that time. It is with
the Same sincerity that I join in the eXpreSSiOnS
of
appreciation to the outgoing members of the Security
Council: Hungary, Algeria, Pakistan, Senegal and Paraguay.
7. Poland has the honour of serving on the security
Council, as a non-permanent member, for the third time.
For us it is a matter of gratification to be able to participate
in the Council’s work. But, even more, we regard our
membership of the Council as an honour and a responsibility. We come here fully conscious of that responsibility
to m&e 0~ contribution to the Council’s fulfilment Of its
primary
task: the maintenance of international peace and
security, To that cause the Polish People’s Republic has
always
endeavoured to contribute. Peace and security,
peaceful co-operation among States, support for the great
struggle of colonial peoples for independence and equality
have always been among the basic tenets of our foreign
policy. They derive from our socialist ideology, from our
historical experience, from our ordeal in the last world war,
from the need to develop our country. Peace and security
in Europe have been our most immediate concern, a goal
for the attainment of which we have spared neither effort
nor initiative. We have been doing that in the full
realization that peace and security in Europe are a factor
essential to international peace and security. We have been
doing that concurrently with our efforts in other fields of
international relations.

12. As to the will of the overwhelming majority of
international
public opinion there is no doubt t:hat it
demands most categorically that action be taken tie give
effect to the Security Council’s resolutions. Fifty-seven
signatures under the request for the convening of the
Council are an eloquent testimony to that-but the Republic of South Africa remains unmoved.

8. It is in that spirit that Poland occupies its seat on the
Security Council, with the same determination to contribute to the utmost of its possibilities to the solution of the
many important problems that confront the Council. It is
in that spirit that I sincerely reciprocate the statements by
my colleagues round this table expressing their readiness to
co-operate towards finding the solution of those problems.

13. Its voluminous reply to resolution 269 (1969) may try
to dilute the negative answer of South Africa in a maze of
“legal” arguments, but the essence of that reply is still a
practical, curt, “no”, to the categorical injunctions of the
Security Council contained in its resolution 269 (1969),
just as it had been to General Assembly resolution 2145
(XXI) and subsequent resolutions on that question. .And it
was not only words that South Africa used to negate the
authority of the United Nations highest organs in contravention of the Charter, and specifically of its Article 25.
South Africa has been following and intensifying its policy
of persecution of Namibians, of terror directed against the
freedom movements, of fragmentation of the country
under the unbelievable pretext of “promoting self-determination of its peoples”-in order to exploit it economically and subjugate it politically, to extend and consolidate
there the rule of apartheid.

9. Fifty-seven States Members of the United Nations have
requested that the problem of Namibia should be included
in our agenda. This indeed is a measure of the concern felt
by the overwhelming majority in the United Nations at the
situation in Namibia, of the indignation at the behaviour of
the Republic of South Africa, of the resolve to demand
action for the implementation of the United Nations
resolutions concerning Namibia, of the expectations that
the most competent organ in this respect, the Security
Council, will decide on effective ways and measures to
make such action materialize.
10. Over the twenty years or so during which the United
Nations has had to deal with the problem of Namibia,,
Poland has many a time expressed its support for the cause
of the liberation of the people of Namibia, in accordance
with their inalienable right to freedom and independence.
That stand has been consistent with the fundamental
Position of the Polish People’s Republic of unstinting
suPPort for the national liberation struggle of peoples under
colonial domination. We are glad today to be able to give
expression to that constante of our foreign policy in the
forum of the Security Council.

14. What the Council is facing is not a mere act of Ipassive
non-compliance with its decision by a State Member of the
United Nations. It is a case of an aggressive action of ,a State
that is aimed at consolidating its annexation of another
country. It is a case of an aggressive encroachment on the
authority of the United Nations which has assumed direct
responsibility for that country with the aim of bringing it
to independence. It is a case of an attempt not ady to
preserve but to expand and consolidate colonial and racist
domination in a large part of Africa. It is, therefore, a most
flagrant case of total defiance of the United Nations by the
Government of the Republic of South Africa.

lI* In the course of the deliberations in the United
Nations On the problem of Namibia all the elements
of that

15. The larger political role of the Republic of South
Africa as the mainstay of colonialism and react.ion in
2

southern Africa and as an active supporter of the illegal
Smith regime in Southern Rhodesia and of Portuguese
colonialists in Angola and Mozambique is a matter of
record in this Council, So is the growing military potential
and aggressive posture of South Africa vis-a-vis African
freedom movements and progressive independent countries
of the region.

economic, financial and military potential of South Africa,
that is, the material backbone of South Africa’s aggressive
and defiant posture towards the United Nations.
23. It is therefore evident that South Africa could ‘have
drawn only one conclusion from that involvement. South
Africa did draw that conclusion and continues to draw it.

16. This political and ideological challenge to the United
Nations posed by South Africa is, of course, a function of
its racist ideology, but it is made possible by its economic
and military potential which is the material backbone of its
aggressive and defiant posture. As for that potential, it has
not grown in a vacuum.

24. We have not brought out all these elements for the
sake of repetition or of enlivening a maiden speech, We
have done so in order to point out the imperative need for
translating moral condemnations of South Africa’s policies
into practical steps designed to make South Africa change
and abandon those policies. Moral condemnation without a
willingness to follow it by action is not enough-I would
say not nearly enough. Moral condemnation together with
economic trade and military co-operation with South
Africa is much worse.

17. The last decade has undoubtedly been one of great
progress in the field of decolonization. It has also been
marked by a growing determination finally to put an end to
colonialism. In that process as applied to Namibia three
important dates stand out: 1960, 1966 and 1969.

25. The present deliberations of the Council should,
therefore, in the opinion of the Polish delegation, proceed
in but one direction-that
of reaching prompt decisions on
ways and measures to ensure the implementation of the
Council’s previous resolutions, to make South Africa
withdraw from Namibia, to ensure to the people of
Namibia its right to shape its destiny in accordance with its
will.

18. Of course, 1960 was the year of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples. That very year, the amount of foreign capital
invested in South Africa was $3,685 million. That figure is
! taken from a study on the impact of General Assembly
resolution 1761 (XVII) on South African trade and
investments, which was distributed as a United Nations
document.’

26. We have now in front of us a draft resolution
which has been undergoing several
changes. We note, first, that this draft is admittedly-and
I
quote the words of Ambassador Jakobson of Finland-“limited
in scope and purpose” and, further, of an
Ynterim” nature [1527th meeting, para. 451. We note,
secondly, that the amendments introduced by Ambassador
Jakobson yesterday have brought improvements to the
original text, a text which raised a number of doubts for
my delegation, upon which, however, I see no need to dwell
now. I am referring to the amendments to the fourth
preambular paragraph and to paragraph 6 in particular;
since I am speaking of paragraph 6, I should like to express
the opinion of my delegation that the ad hoc sub-committee provided for in that paragraph should, in our
opinion, consist of all the members of the Security Council.
Thirdly, we note that the draft resolution does not have
any bearing on the larger framework of economic and other
interests in South Africa whose importance and role for the
question of Namibia in particular I have underlined, and
which is dealt with in a number of standing resolutions of
the General Assembly, iu particular resolution 2307 (XXII).
Fourthly, paragraph 9 should not-and I understand it does
not-preclude us from taking up the question of Namibia if
other circumstances should make it necessary.
(S/9620fRev. I/

19. The year 1966 was marked primarily by the adoption
by the General Assembly of resolution 2145 (XXI) which
terminated South Africa’s Mandate over South West Africa.
That resolution constituted a great qualitative step forward
in the application of the Declaration to the Territory of
South West Africa. It came at a time when demands for an
end to the involvement of the Western-mostly British,
American and West German-economic, financial, military
and other interests in colonial countries and South Africa
were being formulated and those interests qualified as
impeding the implementation of the 1960 Declaration.
20. That same year witnessed a surge of foreign capital
investment in South Africa up to the amount of $5,313
million, which is an increase of approximately 50 per cent
compared with 1960.
21. The year 1969 brought, in political terms, another
important step in the efforts towards the liberation of
Namibia in Security Council resolutions 264 (1969) and
269 (1969). Simultaneously, as was pointed out in the
discussion in the Security Council when the question of
Namibia was last taken up, foreign capital investment in
South Africa had already jumped to $6,000 million.

27. Starting from this attitude of principle and with the
specific remarks on the draft resolution which I have just
presented, my delegation would be ready to support the
draft resolution.

22. Those parallel processes are very indicative. On the
one hand, we see an up-trend both qualitative and
quantitative in the expression of the will of anti-colonial
forces to implement basic United Nations principles in
bringing about the independence of Namibia; and on the
other, an ominous escalation in the involvement of foreign
capital in South Africa, a capital which reinforces the
1 Document A/AC.llS/L.267

28. Mr. WARNER

(United Kingdom): At this first debate
of the year 1970, it is impossible not to feel regret at the
absence of our former comrades, the representatives of
Algeria, Hungary, Pakistan, Paraguay and Senegal. Their
contribution to the work of this Council was great, and we

of 13 August 1969.

3

who remain must miss their friendly presence and their
fertile minds.

33. I now come to paragraph 6 of the draft resolution. My
Government would welcome any study of the legal,
economic and other implications of the presence of the
South African authorities in Namibia and recommendations
for effective and practical steps such as appeared to be
contemplated at an earlier stage in our debate. We would
co-operate in any such work. We would provide information. But we do not know whether the committee which is
now proposed in the revised draft is intended to undertake
such work, or whether, as some other speakers have perhaps
seemed to suggest, it is limited to making recommendations
for Chapter VII action. We do not know what will be the
composition of the committee, I cannot therefore at this
stage say precisely what will be the attitude of my
Government towards it. We will, however, carefully study
the proposal as soon as its scope is somewhat clearer.

29. However, like other speakers in this debate before me,
to welcome the five new members, the
representatives of Burundi, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone
and Syria, who have joined the Security Council this year.
Like a successful transfusion of new blood, they are already
actively sustaining our body politic. We congratulate you,
Sir, especially on your succession to the presidency at the
beginning of your time with us. We already know you to be
a most eloquent speaker and a most active doer, and we
look forward to co-operating with you.
I should like

30. I am glad also to associate myself with the tributes
that have been made by all to the expert and expeditious
way in which Ambassador Mwaanga conducted our proceedings in December, It is particularly appropriate to
praise Ambassador Mwaanga’s past achievements today
because of his imaginative and patient efforts in connexion
with our present debate. I should like to say how much my
delegation has welcomed the consultations that he and
other co-sponsors have held with us before these meetings.

34. Finally, I should like to reply to something which has
been said in the course of our debate. I have had the
genuine pleasure of paying tribute to Ambassador Mwaanga
and I am therefore most reluctant to differ in any way with
him, but I thought that in his statement two days ago
[!.527th meeting/ he implied two things: first, that the
United Kingdom was still giving military and arms support
to the Government of South Africa, and secondly that
there was a possibility that my Government might cease to
apply the embargo on the sale of arms to that country. This
is perhaps not exactly what he said, but it might be difficult
for anyone reading his remarks to avoid that conclusion. I
should therefore like to reaffirm to the Council that there
has been no change in my Government’s policy of applying
an arms embargo in line with Security Council resolution
191 (1964). Furthermore, I am authorized to say that my
Government contemplates no change in this polic’y.

31. As regards the subject of today’s meeting, I believe
that the position of my Government is sufficiently well
known to make it unnecessary for me to repeat it in detail.
Briefly, it is that we have always thought and said that the
people of South West Africa should enjoy real self-determination and independence. We have frequently said that
the Government of South Africa has forfeited the right to
administer the Mandate over the Territory. We have
expressed publicly our repugnance at aspects of South
African administration, such as the Terrorism Act, and we
have made clear to the South African Government our
concern about the trials of South West Africans that have
taken place under that legislation. At the same time
however we have consistently drawn attention to the
practical considerations that we believe have to be faced
and to the need for the United Nations to act only within
its capabilities. However much we deplore it, South Africa
is in fact controlling the Territory of South West Africa. We
have made our rejection of this state of affairs clear to the
South African Government. The action which we can take,
however, is limited. We have made no secret of our own
inability to contemplate action which would rapidly turn
into complete economic warfare against South Africa. We
have explained why we have felt that the adoption of
resolutions which are ineffective or inoperable cannot serve
the interests of the people of the Territory or of the United
Nations; and for all these reasons we have abstained on a
number of resolutions, notably General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966 and Security Council
resolutions 264 (1969) and 269 (1969).

35. It therefore goes without saying-and I now refer to
what was said at yesterday’s debate [1528th nzeetingj-that
further military ships, cruisers and aircraft have not been
bought in my country by South Africa since the embargo
was imposed. I hope that no member of the Clouncil will
have gamed the impression from the provisional1 verbatim
record of yesterday’s debate that The Times of London said
any such thing. It did not do so,
36. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Erench): In
accordance with the provisional rules of procedlure of the
Security Council, when a point of order is raised I must call
on the speaker raising it, and I therefore call on the
representative of the Soviet Union.
37. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): In connexion with the United
Kingdom representative’s remark, I would like to draw the
attention of members of the Security Council to an extract
from The Times of London, which I have in front of me
here and which reads as follows-I shall read it in English so
that the United Kingdom representative will find it clearer
and easier to understand:

32. It will therefore come as no surprise to the members
of this Council that we cannot on this occasion give our
support to the draft resolution before us [S/9620JRev.I’]
since the basis of that draft iies of course in those earlier
resolutions on which we have already abstained in the past.
Moreover, in some respects, notably paragraph 5, the draft
resolution seems to us to ignore some of the circumstances
to which I have already referred. My delegation will
therefore abstain in voting on the draft resolution before
us.

the embargo does not actually put a stlop to arms
traffic between South Africa and Britain”.2
“

.

.

.

2 Quoted in English by the speaker.

4

These are the facts; and this is precisely what I pointed out
ul my statement. The article goes on to say:

been presided over by distinguished sons of that continent.
My delegation associates itself with the many tributes to
your immediate predecessor in the Chair, Ambassador
Mwaanga, for the skill and effectiveness with which he
guided the Council’s deliberations last month.

“She has bought ships, armoured cars, and both Mirage
and Mystere fighters from France. She is building the
Belgian rifle under licence. The latest addition to the
South African arms industry is the Impala jet fighter, of
which initially 400 will be built. American light aircraft,
which could be useful for counter-insurgency, are being
assembled there under licence, and in all South Africa has
acquired licences to build 140 different types of ammunition and bombs from overseas”.2
[ The spwker

45. I should aho like to take this opportunity of expressing my delegation’s welcome to my other new colleagues who, like yourself, Mr. President, have brought to
the Council a fresh mind backed by considerable experience
and they will surely contribute much towards the work of
the Council in no less distinguished a manner than the
outgoing members who have just completed their term of
service.

continued in English.]

such are the facts, and I am very much surprised that the
British representative denies those facts.

46. Permit me now to address myself briefly to the draft
resolution before the Council [S/9620/Rev.l].
The position of my delegation on the question of Namibia has been
clear and consistent. As far back as 1946, when the General
Assembly held its first session in New York, speaking on
behalf of my Government in the Fourth Committee [9th
meeting of Sub-Committee 21, I stated in no uncertain
terms that South West Africa as a Mandated Territory
should be placed under international supervision. The views
I then expressed were reaffirmed by my delegation through
the years in the General Assembly.

(The speaker resumed in Russian.]

38. I have another extract from the same newspaper,
concerning the agreement between the United Kingdom
and South Africa. It reads as follows:
“The agreement guarantees Britain the unfettered use
of naval facilities in South Africa in the event of a war in
which Britain was involved. Britain’s allies would receive
the same facilities whether or not South Africa was a
co-belligerent”.2

47. It was on the basis of our firm conviction, and in the
light of the advisory opinions and judgements rendered by
the International Court of Justice that my delegation, along
with an overwhelming majority of Member States, voted for
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) terminating South
Africa’s Mandate over South West Africa and bringing the
Territory under the direct responsibility of the United
Nations. The Security Council has since, in successive
resolutions, formally endorsed the action of the General
Assembly and called upon the Government of South Africa
to withdraw immediately from Namibia.

These are facts taken from the pages of The Times.
39. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call
on the representative of the United Kingdom on a point of
order.
40. Mr. WARNER (United Kingdom): I am most grateful
to you, Mr. President. I am also grateful to Mr. Malik for
supporting
the point which I made in my statement. The
passages which he read us bear no resemblance to, or have a
very different character from, what I find on page 47 of the
provisional
verbatim record of the 1528th meeting. That
was the point I wished to make.
41. The PRESIDENT
on the representative

48. It is a cause of profound regret that the United
Nations has been prevented from exercising its functions in
Namibia, in spite of the efforts of the United Nations
Council for Namibia under the able chairmanship of the
representative of Turkey. I think that there is no significant
difference of opinion that the adamantly unto-operative
attitude on the part of South Africa warrants strong
censure by the world community, but differences do arise
as to how the Security Council can best discharge the
responsibility it has assumed for the people of Namibia.

(interpretation from French): I call
of the Soviet Union on a point of

order.
42. Mr.
(translated

MALIK

(Union

from

Russian):

of Soviet Socialist Republics)
It is well known that every
delegation has the right to submit corrections and drafting
changes to the provisional record which is prepared
imediately
after the meeting; and we shall do this.

49. It is all too clear that any coercive measure will have
little effect without the active and full support of all
Member States, particularly those countries which are in a
special position to influence the course of events in South
Africa.

43. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): We
now continue our debate and in accordance with the list of
speakers I call upon the representative of Nationalist China.
44.

50. In the search for a solution to the problem of
Namibia, further study and exploration may be useful. My
delegation, therefore, welcomes the proposal to set up an
ad hoc committee which will examine the legal, economic
and other aspects of the problem and will submit its
recommendations for such effective and practical steps as
may be taken towards its solution. We shall accordingly
vote for the draft resolution.

Mr. LIU (China): Mr. President, I should like first of

agj to extend to you the congratulations and good wishes of

my delegation both on your election to the Council and on
your assumption of the presidency. The growing @ortance of Africa in world affairs is demonstrated by the fact
that the Security Council in two successive months has
5

55. Because of that inborn feeling to which I referred
earlier, we could hardly cease to share the concern and
indignation of the African peoples at the situation prevailing in Namibia, a situation which we have denounced in this
Chamber and in the United Nations Council for Namibia,
fully aware of our historical background and responsibilities
as a member of the international community.

5 1. MI-. VALLEJO
ARBELAEZ
(Colombia) (interpret&
tionpom Spanish): Mr. President, I should like first of all

to extend to you the CongratuIations of my delegation on
your assuming the presidency of the Security Council. At
the same time, we should like most warmly to congratulate
the representative ‘of Zambia, Ambassador Mwaanga, for
the way in which he conducted the Security Council
debates during the month of December. Furthermore, I
should like to express our cordial appreciation and thanks
to the delegations of Algeria, Hungary, Pakistan, Paraguay
and Senegal, the non-permanent members of the Security
Council whose terms ended on 31 December 1969, for the
friendly way in which we were able to carry out our joint
endeavours. By the same token, I wish most cordially to
offer our welcome to the delegations of Burundi, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone and Syria on their joining the
Security Council.

56. In conclusion, my delegation wishes to state that it
will support the draft resolution submitted to the Security
Council, because we wish to leave no stone unturned, to
bring to bear all the elements of judgement and to carry out
all efforts that might directly or indirectly leadi to a
settlement of the situation in Namibia.
57. Mr. BERARD (France) (interpretation from FKwA):
I already had the opportunity at our last meet.ing in
December 1969 [152Gth meeting]. to tell the rep!,esentatives of Algeria, Hungary, Pakistan, Paraguay and Senegal
how deeply and sincerely we regretted to see them leaving
our Council, where they had worked most effectively. I also
had the opportunity to express to our outgoing President,
the representative of Zambia, Ambassador Mwaanga, our
appreciation for the way in which he guided our deliberations during the month of December.

52. I wish to add that, as a member of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, Colombia can attest to the fact that
the members of that body have constantly carried out with
dedication and concern many undertakings related to the
implementation of the resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council with respect to Namibia. The
successive Presidents of that body have unceasingly stressed
the importance of that problem and the generally unfavourable results of United Nations actions on the matter have in
no way dampened their ardour. Each of the members has
acted identically. I feel it necessary to state this as
explicitly as possible, since it is only just to do so.

58. I should like in turn to express to the new meln.bers of
our Council and their countries our deep satisfacllion at
seeing them brought into our work. Burundi could not have
chosen a man more aware of the work of the United
Nations and better able to preside over our meetings than
you, Mr. President. We are very pleased that our work
during the month of January has been under your guidance,

53. The fact that such meagre results have been achieved
after prolonged efforts might lead to discouraging conclusions. The representative of Spain referred in his statement
[152&h meeting] to the fact that the question of Namibia,
or South West Africa as it was known at one time, had been
the subject of concern to the United Nations since the very
outset of the Organization. In the time that has elapsed,
many resolutions have been adopted and the results
achieved have not measured up to the efforts devoted to
solving the problem. But can we say, as a result, that those
efforts were sterile? Certainly not. A collective awareness
has expressed itself, a legal fact has been set forth and an
unjust situation has been unanimously condemned. Those
facts .cannot be turned back nor are they devoid of
consequences. We can say that not much more time will
pass before law will prevail over arbitrary acts and regain its
sway.

59. The representative of Nicaragua, Ambassador Sevilla
Sacasa, the other day gave us a remarkable demonstration
of Latin eloquence. We are grateful to him and we know
how much his delegation will help us in our work. The
representative of Poland knows of the close links which for
centuries have associated his country with mine. Ma:y I add
that he and I in our childhood had the same educat.ion? I
am therefore convinced that the co-operation between him
and his country and all the members of the S’ecurity
Council will be especially close. Sierra Leone has sent us, in
the person of Professor Nicol, a man whose qualities and
merit are exceptional. Finally, the representative of Syria,
Mr. Tomeh, has been a colleague and friend for many years,
and I am particularly happy to see him across the table
from me today.
60. During our meeting in August last [1495th m,wing]
my delegation recalled that it viewed the policies followed
by the Pretoria Government in South West Africa with the
same severity as the representatives of the countries of that
continent. It stated, however, that it reached different
conclusions about the measures to be taken to came the
authorities of South Africa to ceaseignoring the obligations
undertaken in the Mandate Agreement of 17 December
1920e3

54. The countries of Latin America, including Colombia,
emerged into independent life at the end of a colonial
process that lasted for three centuries. That fact impresses a
special feature on our conduct, which is one of inborn
anti-colonialism. Our experience was not new-born during
the last decades nor in the century through which we are
living. Over 150 years ago and we must stress this-that
process culminated and in that long lapse of time not only
have our convictions become deeply rooted, consolidated
and a part of our national essence, but we have also
accomplished a most admirable result: our relationship with
the one-time metropolitan
country has become more
thorough, more significant and deeper than might have
been possible in the past.

61. Since last summer, unfortunately, information received from the Territory has revealed that the Administer3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Supplement No. I2A, annex A.

6

lng Authority has not changed its policy. A few days after
the Security Council vote, the Windhoek Court did not
hesitate to condemn five inhabitants of South West Africa
to life imprisonment under the deplorable Terrorism Act of
1967.

tions and therefore cannot be supported by my delegation,
we welcome with sympathy the spirit of moderation which
we believe we detect in it. We should like to find in that
spirit, as well as in our debates, reason for strengthening our
conviction that the United Nations, through a realistic
appraisal of the situation, can contribute effectively to the
solution of the very difficult problem of which we are
seized,

62. Finally, the letter addressed to the Secretary-General
on 26 September 1969 [S/9463, annex I, of 3 October
19691 states that the policy of creating autonomous areas
will be continued despite the condemnations of that policy.

70. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I have
just received a letter from the representative of Pakistan in
which he requests to be allowed to participate in the
Council’s debate on the question under consideration. If I
hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
that the representative of Pakistan should be invited to take
part in the debate without the right to vote, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the practice of
the Council.

63. Thus, as was stated in the General Assembly by my
Foreign Minister, Mr. Schumann, the regime of racial
segregation so rightly condemned in this Assembly is being
extended to a territory of international status.4
64. Confronted with a policy which deliberately ignored
the obligations of the Mandate, the United Nations has over
a period of years adopted successive resolutions, but it is to
be feared that they have not fully achieved their objective.
One may even wonder whether the positions taken by the
General Assembly and the Security Council have not served
as a pretext for the Government of South Africa to justify
or try to justify as well as it can the regressive legislation it
has applied since 1967.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Shahi
(Pakistan),took a placeat the Security Council table.

71. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next speaker on the list is the representative of India, on
whom I now call.

65. Furthermore, those resolutions may have finally
shaken the confidence placed by the inhabitants of the
Territory in our Organization and may have engendered in
many of them a certain pessimism with regard to the
activities of international institutions.

72. Mr. TEJA (India): Mr. President, permit me first of all
to thank you and the other members of the Security
Council for the opportunity of expressing my delegation’s
views on the question under discussion. I should also like to
record our gratification that a distinguished son of Africa
occupies the high office of President of the Council for this
month. We are confident that under your wise and dynamic
guidance this Council will take effective action and fulfil its
duty towards all the oppressed peoples of Africa.

66. As my delegation has already had occasion to state,
one may thus wonder whether, if we persist along this road,
we do not run the risk of placing ourselves progressively in
a situation without solution.

73. We have asked to be allowed to participate in this
debate because of our firm conviction that the United
Nations must discharge its responsibility in securing freedom and independence for Namibia. It is because of our
abiding concern for the freedom of the people of Namibia
that over the past twenty-four years my country has taken
an active part in the United Nations discussions on this
issue.

67. The favourable manner in which the Lusaka Manifesto
on Southern Africa’ was received at the last session of the
General Assembly, with an almost unanimous vote, showed
that, in order to restore in the south of Africa racial
equality and respect for human dignity and to conclude the
process of decolonization, the Member States and particularly those of the African continent were prepared to seek
new solutions. Could such solutions not come precisely
from the work of the ad hoc sub-committee whose creation
is envisaged in the draft resolution [SJ9620/Rev.l] before
us? That is certainly not impossible, and the wish of the
sponsors*of the draft to guide the work of this future body
towards effectiveness seems encouraging in .this connexion.

74. The Security Council is meeting at a time when there
is a great deal of pessimism and even cynicism about the
role that the United Nations can play in solving the many
long-standing problems of the southern half of Africa. It
has been said that our Organization should not take any
hasty actions which might close the door to a peaceful
solution or expose its own weaknesses.Consequently, the
argument runs, the only practical step that the United
Nations can take is to mobilize public opinion which some
day, it is hoped, may induce a change of heart in the racist
and colonialist regimes. We reject that philosophy of
resignation and permissiveness, which is precisely what the
regime in South Africa would most like to see in the United
Nations.

68. It is also to be hoped that the South African
Government, taking full advantage of the time available
before the end of the proposed studies will give tangible
evidence of the desire, expressed in its report of September
I969 [see S/9463], to serve the interests of the populations
and to lead them to “political sovereignty”.
69. Although the text before us is placed in a legal
framework about which we have always expressed reserva4 Ibid., Twenty-fourth

Session, Plenary Meetings, 1763rd meeting,

5 Ibid., Twenty-fourth

Session, Annexes, agendaitem 106, docu-

para. 72.

ment A/1754.

75. There is no doubt in our mind that the will of the
international community on the issue of Namibia has been
clearly and repeatedly expressed, both in the United
Nations and elsewhere. It was this determination that led
7

Charter as to follow the logic of the Council’s own
decisions within the totality of the Charter.

the General Assembly in 1966 (resolution 2145 (XXI)/
to revoke Pretoria’s Mandate over South West Africa and to
decide to administer the Territory directly, through the
United Nations Council for Namibia. The Assembly later
formally set a date for the independence of the Territory.
Last year the Security Council in its resolution 264 (1969)
specifically reaffirmed and recognized the Assembly’s termination of the Mandate and the assumption of direct
responsibility for Namibia until its independence. Even
more significantly, the Security Council decided that in the
event of South Africa’s non-compliance it would meet
immediately
to determine on the necessary steps or
measures to be taken under the relevant provisions of the
Charter. It is thus quite clear to us that both principal
organs of the United Nations are committed to take further
action to implement their decisions on Namibia.

78. In March 1969, when the Security Council recog,nized
its special responsibility towards the Territory and the
people of Namibia, it recorded its intention of taking steps
to fulfil that responsibility. The Council affirmed the
inalienable right of the people of Namibia to freedom and
independence and recognized the Assembly’s decisions and
recommendations. Further, the Council made the pronouncement that the presence of South Africa in Na.mibia
was illegal and contrary to the Charter and detrimental to
the interests of the population. Finally, the Council called
upon South Africa to vacate its administration from the
Territory immediately, In short, resolution 264 (1969) of
20 March 1969 committed the Security Council to give
further substance to the Assembly’s decision to assume
direct responsibility for Namibia until independence;. The
United Nations has thus a perfectly legal and valid basis for
further action. South Africa’s refusal to comply with those
decisions is not only an insult and challenge to the Security
Council but an act of aggression on a Territory where it has
no locus stundi whatsoever. By its refusal to fu1.fi.l its
obligations under Article 25 of the Charter, South .Africa
has also forfeited all rights and privileges of membership of
this Organization.

76. Today, when the Security Council meets under the
shadow of South Africa’s continued defiance, it is pertinent
to ask ourselves a question that has so often been raised in the
Afro-Asian world: why has the United Nations so far failed
in its declared duty and responsibility towards the people
of Namibia? Is it the indifference of the international
community to the plight of a small people living under the
subjugation of a powerful, ruthless and technologically
advanced regime, or is it the defiance of South Africa alone
that is to blame for that failure? Or is it the overt and
covert support of South Africa’s powerful friends and allies
in the Western world? Surely, the community of nations is
not indifferent and devoid of concern towards the future of
Namibia, for the vast majority of Member States of the
United Nations do support the idea of effective action
against South Africa, However, the history of this problem
shows that but for the political encouragement and active
economic and financial succour of South Africa’s major
trading partners and suppliers of armaments, that country
would not have been able to defy the United Nations for so
many years and with such impunity. Indeed, that fact is
also generally recognized. It is a matter of record that the
General Assembly has called for the imposition of sanctions
against South Africa, including an embargo on the supply
of arms to that country. Further, in its resolution 269
(1969) of 12 August 1969 the Security Council called upon
all States to refrain from all dealings with the Pretoria
regime purporting to act on behalf of Namibia, However, it
is no secret that certain Members of our Organization have
not seen fit to comply with these decisions of the Assembly
and the Council. On the contrary, some of them have even
intensified economic and financial relations with South
Africa, thereby encouraging that country to persist in
flouting its obligations under the Charter, The pursuit of
narrow, short-term and selfish gains has thus undermined
the prestige and authority of our Organization and exposed
it to contempt and ridicule.

79. I shall not deal today with the oppressive conditions
inside Namibia which have been described in detail by other
speakers around this table, nor shall I take the Council’s
time in listing South Africa’s violations of the Charter and
of the specific resolutions of the principal organs Iof the
United Nations. That catalogue is too long and, in any case,
it is a frustrating experience to recite it. I need only say
that as far as Namibia is concerned South Africa has
persistently refused to honour its obligations in every
respect. It has rejected the United Nations demand to
withdraw its authority from the Territory. It has ignored
the Assembly’s call to discontinue and desist from oppressive measures against the people. It has shown utter
contempt and disregard for the territorial integrity of
Namibia. It has persisted in applying the odious policies of
apartheid to the Territory of Namibia.
80. At the last series of meetings of the Security Clouncil
on this subject in August 1969 my delegation emphasized
that the time had now come to take more effective iaction.
As indicated in the statement of the representative of India,
Ambassador Sen, on 4 August 1969 [1493rd meeting], our
proposals were aimed at loosening the Pretoria regime’s
economic and political stranglehold on the Territory of
Namibia, Since then many ideas and suggestions have
already been put forward, and my delegation would
particularly like to see the Security Council take action
along some of the following lines.

77. The Security Council finds itself at a particularly
decisive and historic moment today. The need for meaningful action by the United Nations is widely recognized and
has been amply reaffirmed on many previous occasions, At
this particular moment, therefore, the Security Council
faces the issue of what to do next to implement this will of
the United Nations. In our opinion the question is not so
much to decide whether to apply this or that Article of the

81. First, the Security Council has to decide that Member
States should take effective steps to prevent the flow of
arms and other military hardware to South Africa dlirectly
or through third countries. Secondly, all States must take
suitable measures to stop fresh investment in Namibia by
their nationals or private companies registered under their
laws, as long as South Africa continues its illegal occupation
of Namibia. Thirdly, all States must be asked to ensure that
8

their companies and nationals operating in Namibia pay the
taxes and levies for such operations not to the South
African regime but to the United Nations Council for
Namibia. Fourthly, the Council should request Member
States to discontinue recognition of travel documents
issued by the South African Government in so far as they
pertain to the citizens of Namibia and take positive steps to
extend recognition to travel and visa documents issued on
behalf of the United Nations. Fifthly, United Nations
Members should be asked to give full legal effect to the
United Nations termination of South Africa’s Mandate by
all possible means.

87. I must also add that we do have slight objections,
particularly to what is said in paragraph 2 of the draft
resolution, in which the Council pronounces itself on the
validity of the measures adopted by South Africa since the
termination of the mandate, covering both political and
merely administrative acts. The consequence of the illegal
activities of South Africa, in the opinion of my delegation,
should be determined in the light of both domestic and
international law, by the courts of Namibia once the rule of
law has been re-established there, or by judges or arbiters
selected by the parties affected by the illegal acts of South
Africa. However, we shall not object to these aspects of the
form of the draft resolution since we agree with its
substance, and, furthermore, since, as drafted, it seems to
command the support of the majority of this Council.

82. These interim measures should be applied immediately
by the Security Council. My delegation is fully conscious,
however, that more energetic action under Chapter VII will
be necessary to bring about the full implementation of the
United
Nations mandate to secure the freedom and
independence of the people of Namibia. My delegation is
convinced that only speedy and effective action can avert
the breach of peace in southern Africa,

88. Therefore, Nicaragua will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
89. Mr. PHILLIPS (United States): In his statement to this
Council, last night the representative of the Soviet Union,
Ambassador MaIik, devoted considerable time to what I can
only describe as propaganda and slander. Indeed, that
seemed to be the principal contribution that he made in his
intervention to our debate on the serious issue which is now
before this Council. I cannot help feeling that that is an
unfortunate reflection of harsh, old-fashioned cold-war
psychology which one would have hoped the Soviet
representative had outgrown.

83. Many years ago on the eve of the Second World
War-I believe it was in 1938-Jawaharlal Nehru, speaking
of fascism, said:
‘&Freedom, like peace and war, is indivisible. If the
aggressors of today have to be checked, the aggressorsof
yesterday have also to be called to account. Because we
have sought to cover up past evil, though it still persists,
we have been powerless to check the new evil of today.”

90. As for the draft resolution before the Council, which
has been submitted by the delegations of Burundi, Finland,
Nepal, Sierra Leone and Zambia, the Soviet representative
dismissed it airily in two sentences, stating that it was now
in the process of being drafted. Now that type of approach
does not help the Council to make progress on the
important issue before us.

Those prophetic words apply with equal force to the
neo-fascism of South Africa,
84. The forces of oppression, domination, hate and
bigotry, unleashed by South Africa and enthusiastically
supported by Portugal and the illegal minority regime of
Southern Rhodesia, can be adequately dealt with if all
Member States present here exhibit the same will and firm
determination.
On this threshhold of the seventies we dare
to hope that the Organization will fulfil the expectations
that were reposed in it twenty-five years ago.

91. I should like to reply briefly to some of the slander
directed by the Soviet representative to the United States.
Ambassador Malik alleged that my country is supplying
arms and military equipment to the Government of South
Africa. That is a complete fabrication and utterly without
foundation. Let me here and now solemnly affirm that
since 1963 the United States has prohibited the sale and
shipment to South Africa of arms, ammunition, military
vehicles and equipment or materials for their manufacture
and maintenance.

85. Mr. ORTEGA ,URBINA (Nicaragua) (interpretation
from Spanish): Before briefly explaining the vote of my
delegation, I should like to express our appreciation to the
representatives who, in their statements, have voiced
appreciation and recognition of the outstanding personality
of the Head of my delegation, Ambassador Sevilla Sacasa.

92. I should also like to take this occasion to reaffirm that
the United States has faithfully kept and intends to continue
to keep its commitment banning the sale to South Africa of
all forms of military equipment.

86. My delegation has very carefully and with a favourable
eye studied the draft resolution at present before the
Council which was presented formally and in very precise
terms by the representative of Finland. I am happy to
announce that we agree with the purport of that draft
resolution [S/9620/Rev. I/. We do believe it appropriate to
obtain more information on the consequences and the
effects that may be visited on third parties by the acts of
the Government in South Africa in illegally assuming
representation of the people of Namibia after termination
of the Mandate over the Territory and also on the adequate
means of ensuring fulfilment of the terms of General
Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) and resolutions 264
(1969) and 269 (1969) of this Council.

93. Now, of course, it is true that the United States could
have helped its balance of payments substantially by selling
arms to South Africa, as indeed others have done-others, I
might add, represented in this chamber, whom the Soviet
Union conveniently failed to mention.
94. I do not wish to tax the patience of the Council by
prolonging such an exchange of political polemics as was
initiated by the Soviet representative. I did feel it was
necessary, however, to set the record straight about United
9

103. It is true that this draft resolution is an interim one.
Yet, unless we exert our energies with a team spirit during
the forthcoming months, the next step, which we mu.st take
soon after the report of the committee has been prepared,
may be hard to realize. For our part, therefore, we
guarantee our maximum co-operation with all in this
worthy endeavour.

States policy with respect to the arms embargo against the
Government of South Africa.
95. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call
now on the representative of the Soviet Union, presumably
on a point of order. Or does he wish to exercise his right of
reply?

104. Paragraph 9 of the draft resolution, in the opinion of
the co-sponsors, does not exclude a Council meeting on
Namibia should the situation demand it. My country is
irrevocably committed to the struggle of the people of
Namibia and all other peoples struggling for freedom and
independence. It is for this reason that we shall continue to
render moral and material assistance in accordance with the
decisions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council.

96. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I should like to reserve my right
to reply, at the end of the discussion, to the statement by
the United States representative.
97. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): Mr. President, thank you
for giving me the floor. I had actually asked for the floor to
speak at the end of the debate, before the vote, but since in
your wisdom you found it necessary that I should take the
floor at this stage, I am most grateful to you.

105. I thought that these few clarifications on thLedraft
resolution, on behalf of the sponsors, might be useful in
shedding some light.

98. I hesitate to take the floor again at this late hour, but
if I do so it is only to acknowledge, with warm appreciation, the many tributes paid to me by all my distinguished
colleagues for my presidency of the Security Council during
the month of December 1969.

106. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from
now call on the representative of Pakistan.

Frewzh):

1

107. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, the Pakistan
delegation is grateful to you and to the other mem.bers of
the Security Council for allowing us to participate without
vote in the Council’s deliberations on the question of
Namibia, We sought this participation on the grounds of my
Government’s deep and active concern with this question
since the time it came in its present form before the United
Nations.

99. As I said before, it was through ihe co-operation of alI
the members of the Council that I was able to make the
humble contribution for which my colleagues have paid a
tribute to me. In recognition of the value of co-operation,
my Government has approached all international questions
with an open mind, if not in terms of ultimate objectives,
certainly in the search for solutions to problems.
100. It is in that spirit that we approached this question.
For in a matter of this nature steam-rolling will yield no
results. Our basic aim is to re-engage the minds and
time-proven capabilities of all the members of this Council
so that together we may find a peaceful solution to the
problem of Namibia.

108. Our concern is twofold. First, in the very nature of
things, Pakistan cannot but wholeheartedly support the
accession to independence of the people of Namibia on the
basis of their right to self-determination. I might recall that
in 1966 Pakistan was among the earliest proponents of the
termination of South Africa’s Mandate over the T’erritory
of Namibia. We took this firm position because of our
sincere belief that the refusal of South Africa to discharge
every one of the responsibilities attendant on the Alandate
made the continuance of that Mandate intolerable, Since
1967 Pakistan has had the privilege of serving on the United
Nations Council for Namibia. During our tenure of membership of the Security Council, in 1968 and 1969, we had
the satisfaction of co-sponsoring resolutions 246 (1968) of
14 March 1968, 264 (1969) of 20 March 1969 and 269
(1969) of 12 August 1969. The latter two resolutions are
the texts on the basis of which the Security Council is now
called upon to take further action.

101. It is our fervent hope that all the members will
co-operate, in amity and not in acrimony, in the search for
justice and equity for the people of Namibia towards whom
we hold a special responsibility. That responsibility cannot
be discharged properly if we wrangle among ourselves. We
have serious and urgent work to do and we must get down
to it.
102. I wish to re-emphasize, if this is necessary, that the
draft resolution that we have proposed [Sj9620fRev.l]
is
strictly of an interim nature. It is intended to enable the
Council to prepare for more substantive proposals, as was
stated by Ambassador Jakobson of Finland, who said on 28
January 1970:

109. SecondIy, Pakistan is specially interested in this
problem because it is one of the three or four major
international questions which pose a direct challenge to the
authority of the Security Council and.to the effectiveness
of the United Nations. As a Member State vitally {affected
by the successor failure of the Security Council in fulfilling
its commitments and in securing the implementation of its
resolutions, Pakistan cannot but be dismayed at the
spectacle of the Council reaching a dead end in regard to
action on situations which violate the Charter and endanger
peace. Nothing is so detrimental to the Council’s authority

“The draft resolution now before the Security Council
is obviously limited in scope and purpose. It should be
regarded as an interim resolution, the purpose of which is
to help the Council make more substantive decisions in
the months to come. It is, in our view, a useful and
practical step in the process of United Nations action for
the purpose of discharging its responsibility towards the
people of Namibia” [I527th meeting, para. 4.51.
10

,

as the pervasive air of futility, the persistent hesitancy in
following up resolutions adopted after due deliberation.
Nothing weakens the prestige of the Council so much as the
general feeling that agreements are sometimes reached on
texts with wholly different assumptions in mind. As much
as any local situation, however threatening, as much as any
international
conflict, however dangerous, it is this recurrent impasse about the actions of the Security Council
which may undermine international peace.

sions of the resolution, the Security Council [would]
meet immediately to determine upon necessary steps or
measures in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations”.
112. It must be recalled that that resolution was adopted
by a vote of thirteen in favour and none against, with two
abstentions. In other words, two of the four permanent
members voted for it while two others abstained on it
without opposing it.

110. If Pakistan appears before the Security Council
today, it is because we feel that the time has come for this
atmosphere of impasse to be dispelled. There is need now
for the Security Council to demonstrate a greater purposefulness and consistency in regard to the grave and deteriorating situation in Namibia. Since we have had the experience
of dealing with this situation in the Security Council, we do
not for a moment ignore the political realities which
inevitably influence the Council’s attitude. We know that
while unanimity
is easily obtainable on a theoretical
formulation,
differences arise over the concrete action that
needs to be taken. Why do differences often inhibit action?
The reason is not that different members have inherently
different notions of practicability. The reason is the lack of
a common political will to implement the resolutions of the
Security Council. We trust that during the current deliberations the Council, in loyalty to its purposes and functions
under the Charter, will close its ranks. We trust that it will
show that it is willing to use its resources to bring about the
implementation
of the resolutions it has solemnly adopted,

113. Resolution 269 (1969) was mainly a reaffirmation of
resolution 264 (1969). The supplementary element in
resolution 269 (1969) was the setting of a deadline for the
withdrawal of South Africa’s presence from Namibia. Those
who think that that element was controversial need to be
reminded that the injunction contained in the earlier
resolution was also for the withdrawal of the South African
administration from the Territory “immediately”.
114. In response to the Security Council resolutions the
Foreign Minister of South Africa has clearly stated in his
letter of 26 September 1969 addressed to the Secretary-General-and I quote from its concluding paragraph:
“On no account will we abandon the peopIes of South
West Africa who for half a century have placed their trust
in us to lead them on the path of progress, peace and
stability” [see S/9463, annex I].

111. I do not intend to take the time of the Security
Council in repeating the arguments which were advanced in
support of resolutions 264 (1969) and 269 (1969). At this
stage my delegation’s basic submission to the Security
Council is that the Council should now adopt a resolution
which logically fallows from those resolutions and does not
represent a detour, far less a departure, from the direction
taken in them. The position is that in resolution 264 (1969)
of 20 March 1969 the Security Council, in paragraph 1,
recognized:
“ . . . that the United Nations General Assembly terminated the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia and
assumed direct responsibility for the Territory until its
independence”,

115. In other words, on no account will South Africa
comply with Security Council resolutions 264 (1969) and
269 (1969). A rejection by a Member State of a clear call
made by the Council could not be more unequivocal than
the one conveyed in this communication of the Pretoria
regime.
116. It follows that the task before the Security Council is
to identify the measures which can now be taken to bring
the maximum possible pressure to bear on Pretoria to
relinquish its illegal hold on the Territory of Namibia. The
issue before the Council is not what measures are within its
competence. It is not whether measures under Chapter VII
of the Charter are legally appropriate. It is clear that even
those issues have already been settled by earlier resolutions.
The two issues now are: fast, what measures would be
adequate for removing South Africa’s presence from
Namibia and, secondly, which of those measures are
realistically feasible?

and in paragraph 2 the Security Council declared that:
‘L . . . the continued presence of South Africa in Namibia
is illegal and contrary to the principles of the Charter and
the previous decisions of the United Nations and is
detrimental
to the interests of the population of the
Territory and those of the international community”.

117. Here we come to the crux of the problem. It is dear
that the Asian-African Members are unanimous in their
sincere belief that nothing short of measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter will be adequate and that such measures
are eminently practicable, but the second part of this
proposition is not accepted by some of the permanent
members of the Security Council. I would therefore submit
that those permanent members should indicate now what
action they consider feasible to bring about the implementation of resolution 264 (1969) of the Security Council. In
doing so they have to convince the vitally concerned
Asian-African Member States that such action will also be
adequate.

Further, in paragraph 3 the Council called upon the
Government of South Africa “to withdraw immediately its
administration
from the Territory”. Moreover, the Council
invited all States to exert their influence in order to obtain
compliance by the Government of South Africa with the
provisions of the resolution, and in paragraph 8 decided
that:
L‘ . . . in the event of failure on the part of the
Government of South Africa to comply with the provi11

delegation cannot believe that in view of their pivotal
position in the world, in view of their awareness of the
almost world-wide and acute concern with ending South
Africa’s odious colonial hold over Namibia, the perma:nent
members would not wish to fulfil their Charter obligat.ions
in this situation.

118. 1t is not realistic to think that this practical problem
can be conclusively solved during the current deliberations
of the Security Council. We appreciate that there are
aspects of the problem which do not lend themselves to
public debate. At the same time, it would be intolerable if
those deliberations led to a position which in any way
detracted from the force of resolutions 264 (1969) and 269
(1969) or served to consign them to oblivion.

125. I must confess that my delegation had some serious
misgivings about draft resolution S/9620, which was presented to the Council on Wednesday [1527th meeting],
even though it was emphasized by its sponsors that it was
of a strictly interim nature. However, I am happy to say
that most of those misgivings have been allayed by the
revisions to the text made in the Council yesterday. The
revised version [S/9620/Rev.I]
to the best of our judgement accords with the views that I have expressed, We hope
that it will be adopted unanimously by the Security
Council.

119. In view of those considerations the Pakistan delegation believes that priority should now be given to developing a suitable procedure for placing the problem of
removing South Africa’s presence from Namibia under the
constant review of the Security Council. The question has
now reached a stage in which it should no longer be
necessary for the Asian-African Members to request its
consideration by the Council. The Council’s commitment
made in paragraph 8 of resolution 264 (1969) and paragraph 6 of resolution 269 (1969) was meant to be of a
self-executing nature with respect to at least the determination of the necessary steps for the fulfilment of that
commitment.

126. In conclusion, may I express to you, Mr. President,
and to the members of the Security Council, the sincere
thanks of my delegation for the kind references madie to
the role of Pakistan and of ths other outgoing members of
the Security Council during their term of membership? I
express to the new members of the Security Council our
profound esteem and to you, Sir, as President of the
Security Council, our plenary trust and confidence in :your
leadership.

120. The programme of action visualized by my delegation would be such as would help the members of the
Security Council, especially its permanent members, first,
to identify the steps which would not only be feasible but
also effective for bringing about compliance by South
Africa with the resolutions of the Security Council and
secondly, to arrive at firm conclusions as early as possible
with regard to a sequence of such steps and thus to enable
the Council to fulfil its pledge made in resolutions 264
(1969) and 269 (1969).

127. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): The Security Council in its
quest for solutions to difficult problems and, conseque.ntly,
in its quest for peace in the world at large should have a
comprehensive view of all the factors that enter into a
problem. We are discussing the problem of Namibia and the
obduracy of the racist regime of South Africa. Among the
issues that have arisen which are of the utmost danger and
have far-reaching corrsequences is that of the flow of arms
into South Africa and the manufacture of arms in South
Africa. The representative of Zambia raised that aspect,
among other dangerous aspects of the problem, in the lucid,
brilliant and straightforward statement which he made two
days ago. I am referring to the flow of capital and arms into
South Africa, which has led to the increasing obduracy of
that racist regime. The question of arms manufactured in
and imported into South Africa has been further discussed
yesterday and today. In his statement the representative of
India also referred to this problem as, if I remember
correctly, “the flow of arms . . . to South Africa directly or
through third countries”. It is in that context that. my
delegation wishes to bring some further clarification to the
problem.

121. In suggesting a procedure of that nature my delegation begs the Council to adopt a strictly businesslike
approach to the problem. I repeat what I said before, that
is, that the Council has already disposed of the legal issues
involved in this question. No new studies are needed
beyond the ones which have already been made. The time
has now come for suitable action.
122. The Asian-African Member States have proposed
action under Chapter VII and have declared that they are
prepared to take such action to the limit of their capacity.
But giv’en the economic and power realities, action by the
Asian-African Member States alone can hardly make any
change in the situation. Therefore, the responsibility is also
on the other Member States, particularly the permanent
members of the Security Council, to come forward with
concrete proposals of their own.
123, If they are not prepared for measures under Chapter
VII to be taken immediately,
they still owe it to the
Security Council, and indeed to themselves, to spell out
what alternative steps they are prepared to take which, in
their considered judgement, would be effective in bringing
about South Africa’s immediate withdrawal from Namibia.

129. The Jewish Telegraphic Agency on 20 January 1970
reported the following from London:

124. The procedure that we are suggesting is that the
permanent members should consult each other and report
their agreed conclusions to the Security Council, Under the
Charter it is they who bear the special responsibility where
action has to be taken by the Security Council, My

“The South African Government has begun to organize
the export of tanks to Israel marking ‘a new stage of their
co-operation’. The South African tank is a sixty-five-ton
giant ‘armed with a heavy gun and designed according to
the model of the British new tank’. This is an appiarent

128. I repeat that in the context of world peace it is the
obligation of the Security Council not to leave a stone
unturned in order to reveal the truth.

12

reference to Britain’s new Chieftain tank which Israel has
been trying to buy from Great Britain.”

economic conference, and their determination to create
practical economic ties between Israel and South Africa,
would contribute greatly towards a closer understanding
between the peoples of the two countries.

130. I must explain that the reports of the Jewish
Telegraphic Agency are published in New York by the
Jewish Agency, which is, in accordance with the status law
of the Knesset of Israel, a legal and a functioning part of
the Government of Israel, but operating in the United
States with the approval, consent and encouragement of the
United States Government.

“In this connexion, he welcomed the appointment by
Israel of a special Consul for Trade in South Africa, Mr.
Amitai Ben Yosef.”
134. It is also borne out by The Economist of London of
3 August 1968, which contains a report very similar to
what I have just read. I will confine myself to the last
paragraph of the article in that very reliable publication. It
states:

131. The Jewish Telegraphic Agency on 21 January 1970,
under the heading, “No comment on charge that Israel is
receiving arms from South Africa”, stated:
“The Israeli Foreign Ministry had no comment today
a charge that South Africa was shipping arms to Israel
s 8 ** The charge, which appeared Sunday, stated that the
South African Government was planning the export of
giant sixty-five-ton tanks to Israel.”

“ . . . Mr. Vorster himself had warned President Kaunda
even more bluntly that, if Zambia continued sheltering
guerrillas, ‘We will hit you so hard that you will never
forget it.’ The minister of transport, Mr. Ben Schoeman,
has also weighed in with an oblique warning that South
Africa may carry the fight into Zambia. South Africa was
deeply impressed by the Israeli example, and the feeling is
growing that the forces of the white south could deliver a
quick knock-out blow against the guerrilla camps-an air
raid perhaps-and get away with it. No doubt a lot of dust
would be kicked up at the United Nations, but would
anybody actually do anything about it? ”

on

132. This criminal relationship is both old and new. In the
Tricontinental Bulletin of June 1968 we read the following:
“The first news of a projected plan to enable Israel to
intervene in South Africa against the oppressed and
exploited African people has now come to light. We have
on several occasions made specific reference to the
aggressive imperialist-inspired
actions of Israel. Now,
although South Africa is already producing jet fighterbombers at the Atlas Aircraft Corporation plant near
Johannesburg, Israel has entered the field as a prospective
supplier of aircraft to be used against [African] militants,

135. Besides the United States-which has, in its recognition of a statement by the Under Secretary of State, Mr.
Sisco, not denied the facts with regard to its volunteers of
military rank-South Africa has given permission to South
African pilots of the Jewish faith to join the Israeli Air
Force whenever the need arises. I am stating all this in the
context of the need to make the Security Council fully
aware of all the aspects of the problem under discussion,
because it is our duty to fight racism and we must know
how far-reaching the tentacles of this octopus might be.

“It is reported in the South African press that the
deputy director-general and the chief engineer of Israeli
Aircraft Industries, the biggest aircraft production organization in the Middle East, were among a group of sixty
prominent Israelis who visited South Africa recently as
guests of El Al, the Israeli airline.”

136. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): As
there are no further speakers on my list in regard to the
substance of the question, it is the turn of the delegation of
BURUNDI briefly to state its views on the question before
the Council.

133. That information is borne out by two reliable United
Kingdom sources. First, the Jewish Chronicle, which is
published in London, states in its issue of 31 May 1969:
“TWO members of the Knesset, Mr. S. Tamir and Mr. E.
Shostak, at present on a visit to South Africa, are an
embarrassment to the South African Zionist Federation.”

137. In preparing this statement in my capacity as a
member of the Council, I have singled out the main points
that have to be taken into account, as bearing on peace in
the world and in southern Africa in particular. As I do not
wish to tax your patience, I shall not dwell at great length
on the arguments that have been developed in the General
Assembly or in the Security Council in support of the right
of peoples-and in this case of the Namibian people-to
independence. The speakers who have preceded me have,
with sufficient talent and firmness, expressed their profound convictions as well as their faith in the inalienable
and absolute right to self-determination.

The article goes on to say that the purpose of the visit of
those two members of the Israeli Knesset was connected
with efforts being made by a political group in Israel calling
itself the “Free Centre” to establish an “Israel-South Africa
League”. The article goes on to say:
“Earlier in his interview, Mr. Maisels said that the South
African businessmen who attended the economic conference held in Jerusalem in April have followed through
with a swift practical reaction.

138. In keeping with the Charter of the United Nations
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
delegation of Burundi associates itself with the injunction
already expressed in this forum on many occasions insisting
that the Namibian people must without delay have restored
to it the rights that are recognized to all men. The United

“They have decided to set up a business organization to
promote two-way trade between Israel and South Africa.
“Mr. Maisels said that the participation of the extremely influential
South African delegation in the
13

represents and of the criminality of white men in South
Africa-if not of all white men at least those who preach
this pernicious doctrine in that part of the world.

Nations, which subscribes to the legal and natural principle
that all men are equal, cannot, without abandoning its most
imperative duty, be satisfied with an intolerable silence at a
time when a people, whatever its colour, is deprived of the
most elementary human, economic and political rights.

144, Consequently, all the Members of this institution, all
the Powers-and particularly the great Powers-can only
join their voices to those of the countries, including my
own, that condemn the policy followed by South Africaboth the racial designs and the colonial objectives of that
policy. Those Powers cannot but pronounce a single
verdict: to mete out to South Africa the treatment it
deserves.

139. Since we, Members of this noble Organization, are
convinced that justice requires mutual respect from all men
and that the Namibians belong to that category of wotihy
men, regardless of what the colonialist and racist Government of Pretoria may think, is it not imperative for the
Members of the United Nations to rise as a single man to
restore the rights of our Namibian brothers and restore to
them the status of men, a status of which they were
unjustly deprived in the name of a most dubious morality
invoked to justify coIonization?

145. During its twenty-five years of existence the IJnited
Nations has endured failures inflicted on it by some of its
Members, those who have made themselves conspicuous by
their irreverence towards the Charter, and even by their
profanation of it. Within the category of those who profane
the Charter and its sacred character one finds South Africa,
Portugal and the rebel Government of Southern Rhodesia,
who have been unyielding enemies of the Security Council
and the United Nations in general.

140. You, with faith in the fundamental rights of man, in
equality, in fraternity, you who have subscribed to the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, you who still
attach value to the Charter that governs our Organization,
you have the obligation to order South Africa to abandon
illegality and put an end to a policy which in these days is a
disgrace to mankind. To condemn the policy of Pretoria,
Salisbury and Lisbon is to challenge the very myth that led
to the disintegration of the continent and to its partition
among the great Powers after the Berlin and Versailles
Conferences.

146. The impunity which they have enjoyed in spite of
their constant contempt for the Security Counc’il has
contributed to stripping the Council of its powers and of
placing it at the mercy of its detractors. Instead of arming
themselves powerfully against those who are determined
constantly to flout the authority of the United Nations,
some members of the Council seem to view complacently
the repeated rebuffs of the worshippers of apartheid in
southern Africa and the rabid colonialists of Portugal. But
tolerance, indifference and complicity are nothing but a
blessing granted to the insurgents who rob the Council of
its role, its prerogatives and its responsibilities.

141. The very principle of colonization having been
shaken and its basis challenged since it constitutes a
violation of the foundations of our society, is it not time to
ask the representatives of those unrepentant colonialist and
racist rigimes, one after the other, why they stubbornly
persist in this attitude of exploitation, subjugation and
humiliation?
Is it not appropriate in that regard to quote
something said by Pascal: he who tries to act like an angel
succeeds only, in the final analysis, in acting like a beast. Is
it not obvious that that applies perfectly to the case before
us?

147. Whereas the great Powers were thought to be better
able to influence, to exercise pressure on Pretoria, Salisbury
and Lisbon to lead them to obey the resolutions of the
United Nations, they were overcome by the temptation to
follow in the footsteps of the rebels. Indeed, to judge from
some official attitudes, the position of those Powers can
only lead to a belief in a ‘certain disavowal by them of the
decisions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, thus giving support to the three rebel capitals. It
goes without saying that they thus not only add grist to the
mill of the insurgents but also, and above all, they risk
aggravating the situation and hastening the decline in the
effectiveness of our Organization.

142. Assuming that there still exists among us an outdated
belief in racial superiority, I should like to ask the Security
Council to authorize the representative of South Africa-he
is not here at the moment and if I remember correctly, his
name is Mr. Botha-to come to the Security Council. We
who believe in the superiority of man, regardless of his
colour, his ideological beliefs and his faith or lack of faith
in mankind, we who believe that one man, be he white or
black, is equal to any man, we should have liked the
representative of South Africa to be present so as to come
to this table and prove to us the human faculties possessed
by the Whites of South Africa that are not possessed by the
Blacks. We should have liked him to be here to tell us what
organs the white South African has that the black man
lacks. We should have wished him to show us what
scientific bases there can be for this accident of colour to
give the white man of South Africa supremacy over the
black man.

148. The trend in the Council to shirk its responsibilities-one
that formerly appeared to be mere negligence-seems now to be turning into a real political
doctrine that could well be the doctrine of the ostrich,
which at the approach of danger buries its head in the sand
so that it will not see the danger that threatens it.
149. Through a new resolution on Namibia the Se:curity
Council intends to remove any ambiguity and to take up
the challenge so as to resume the exercise of its rights and
rehabilitate itself by rehabilitating mankind.

143. Those are the questions that we should have liked to
put to him and that we shall ask in other circumstances. His
refusal to submit his defence, like his absence, is nothing
but an admission of his guilt, of the guilt of the regime he

150. Since the Lusaka Manifesto on Southern Africa,
which the Organization of African Unity endorseId, has
14

been rejected by the rebels of Pretoria, Salisbury and
Lisbon, despite its moderate and peaceful terms, those
oppressed peoples will have no alternative left but to turn
to weightier means. Those weightier means are the recourse
to violence to which they are pushed by the defiance and
contempt of the usurpers of power in South Africa,
Namibia, Angola, Mozambique, Guinea (Bissau) and Rhodesia.

to which I refer is paragraph 5. I would call attention to
the fact that the criterion established in that paragraph is
consistent with paragraph 2, which has the effect of
reaffirming the illegality of South Africa’s continued
occupation of Namibia. Such a criterion would obviously
not exclude such acts as protests to the South African
Government concerning its actions in the Territory, nor
would we take it to preclude actions aimed at the
protection of citizens of United Nations Members or the
rights of Narnibians themselves which may be necessitated
by the continued illegal coa:rol exercised by South Africa.

15 1. My delegation would like this fact to be fully
understood. In voicing it we believe that we echo and
interpret the general feeling of the African continent.
Contrary to certain interpretations, the African Governments do not want to shed blood, but when there is no
other alternative, despite the opportunities that the Organization of African Unity has given the aforementioned
usurper Governments, we trust that the nations, great,
middIe-sized and small, that have any dealings with the
Governments that still control that part of Africa and
which do not wish to listen to reason, will understand that
that solution-and
I am speaking of violence-is only a
makeshift solution. It must be clearly understood because,
when peoples seek to free themselves, they can use the
most adequate means, even armed war. Let those Powers
that support South Africa, let the collaborators of South
Africa or the partners of that regime understand that they
must refrain from calling Africans brutal or savage and
realize that they will have been obliged to turn to this last
resort. But we Africans attach a special price to mankind
and therefore our acts must not be misinterpreted since
they will represent a solution to which the Africans will
have been driven reluctantly. Indeed, in many circumstances it has been shown that we have an abiding respect
for human life.

156. With that understanding, it is the intention of my
delegation to vote in favour of draft resolution
S/9620/Rev.l.
157. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
have no more names on my list of speakers. If no
representative wishes to speak, we shall now proceed to the
vote.
158. Mr. MALIK

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): I asked to speak in exercise of

my right of reply at the end of the discussion; and I meant
before the vote, not after it.
159. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fi-om French): The
representative of the Soviet Union will perhaps forgive me.
I had understood that he had requested to speak after the
vote. However, he has a perfect right to speak before the
vote and after the vote, too, if he so wishes. I am sorry, I
was misinformed. I was certainly not averse to calling on
him. I call on him now.
of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I would like to make the
position clear. I asked to speak in exercise of my right of
reply, in order to answer the comments which the United
States representative has made here on the statement by
the Soviet delegation.

152. In conclusion, I should like to thank all members of
the Council, particularly those who have addressed compliments and congratulations to the Government and people I
represent. I am particularly happy to thank the representative of the Soviet Union for the special value he attached to
the policy and the importance of the Government of
Burundi and also the voice of our Government as represented here by the delegation of Burundi. We also express
our thanks to the representatives of Zambia, Syria and
Poland and to all those who have addressed heartfelt
congratulations
and promises of close, fruitful and beneficial co-operation.to the delegation of Burundi. We believe
that to those who spoke from the heart one cannot apply
the Spanish saying: “The new pitcher contains good
water”-everything
new, everything beautiful.

160. Mr. MALIK

(Union

(translated

Russian):

from

161. With regard to the Soviet delegation’s position on
the draft resolution [S/9620/Rev.l],
I had earlier asked to
speak, after the voting, in explanation of my vote. At the
moment therefore, if you have no objection, Mr. President,
I shall take advantage of your kind invitation for me to
speak in exercise of my right of reply.
162. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
certainly see no objection to that and I am sure that the
misunderstanding will be overlooked by the representative
of the Soviet Union since it was inadvertently committed.

153. I thank members for their patience, particularly at
this very late hour at which I have had to speak to the
Council and abbreviate my statement.

of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Mr. President, perhaps my
request to you was not altogether clear; and, if so, I
apologise.

154. Speaking as PRESIDENT of the Council, before
proceeding to the vote, I call upon the representative of the
United States, Ambassador Phillips, who wishes to make a
statement.

163. Mr. MALIK

(Union

(translated

Russian):

from

164. I listened with great interest and not a little surprise
to the short but extraordinarily nervous statement by the
representative of the United States. He followed the old
tradition, custom and practice which the representatives of
the United States regularly used to adopt in the Security
Council twenty years ago during the coldest years of the

155. Mr. PHILLIPS (United States of America): I merely
wish to avail myself of this opportunity before we do vote
to make a brief explanation of vote with respect to one
paragraph of the draft resolution before us. The paragraph
15

“cold war”, and he used the words “slander” and “propaganda”.
165, I am very familiar with this practice of the United
States representatives, because twenty years ago I was
sitting at this very table as representative of the USSR.
Every observation by the Soviet delegation which was not
to the liking of the United States delegation was always
characterized by the singIe word “slander”. However, Mr.
Representative of the United States, the times have
changed, the peoples have grown up, Africa and Asia have
started to move, and the world is now richer by more than
fifty new sovereign independent States. Everything has
changed, and one only wishes that the United States
representatives would change as well. In our day and age,
loud cries of “slander” and “propaganda” will not convince
anyone. What is needed are facts and well-founded arguments.
166. What was it in my statement that the United States
representative did not like? The fact that I made some
references to Lenin? The fact that I drew attention to
Lenin’s great liberating mission in the history of mankind?
But these are facts, recognized even by the enemies of
Lenin; and the United States representative will not
therefore be able to refute them here, however hard he
tries.
167. I may remind this distinguished gathering once again
that Lenin was a passionate advocate of the equality of
peoples-large and small, white and black-a matter to
which the President of the Security Council so eloquently
referred in his statement here as representative of Burundi.
Lenin was constantly appealing For respect for the national
rights and interests and special characteristics of each
people, large and small. Lenin said:
“Only exclusive attention to the interests of various
nations can remove grounds for conflicts, can remove
mutual mistrust, can remove the fear of any intrigues and
create that confidence . . . without which there absolutely
cannot be peaceful relations between peoples or anything
like a successful development of everything that is of
value in present-day civilization”.6
168. These are the words of Lenin. Is this propaganda?
respecting the rights of large and
small peoples in the same degree, it is impossible to live in
the modern world; and it is time that the United States
representative also understood this. If this is propaganda for
him, for USit is the sacred truth, for us it is the State policy
of the Soviet Union-deepest
respect for the rights and
interests and special characteristics of large and small
peoples.
NO, it is reality. Without

169. In my statement I propagandized the words of the
Head of the United States Mission, Mr. Yost, for whom I
have the deepest respect. Mr. Yost said that the presence of
South Africa in Namibia is illegal. Is this propaganda by
me? I was merely propagandizing what Mr. Yost had said. I
only asked him, having said “A”, to say also ‘cBy’-so that
by our joint efforts and with the participation of aI1 the
6 See V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, vol. 33, p. 386.

permanent members of the Security Council we could
adopt a strong and effective resolution providing for
appropriate effective measures with a view to pu.tting an
end to the presence of South Africa in Namibia and
liberating the Namibian people which is suffering under the
tyrannical domination of the South African racists. Is this
propaganda, Mr. United States Representative? This is the
noble propaganda of anti-imperialism, anti-colonialism and
anti-rrpartheid. I am proud to be making propagandla of this
kind here, as the Soviet representative. I am proud that my
allies today are fifty-seven Permanent Representatives of
the countries of Africa and Asia in the United Nations,
Their letter is in front of each of you on the table. They
have addressed to the Security Council an urgent request
for a discussion on the liberation of Namibia. Thus, they
too are making propaganda against imperialism,, racism,
apartheid, and colonialism. I am glad to be making this kind
of propaganda together with them.
170. These are the facts, these are the arguments. With the
word “propaganda”, which the United States representative
has used here, he has not convinced anyone of anything. On
the contrary, he has merely shown that he is not with the
fifty-seven representatives and he is not with me-he is
somewhere on some other plane.
171. In my statement I quoted from a South African
newspaper. Obviously, in my reply to the statement by the
United States representative, I shall have to read out this
quotation in English-that is, in the language which is easier
for him to understand-as I did in my reply to the United
Kingdom representative. I have here in front of me the
South African newspaper The Rand Daily Mail, of Tuesday,
4 November 1969. The headline reads: “U.S. Navy is ready
to lift South African ports ban”.’ What does the paper
say? Here is another headline: “U.S. arms sale to Republic
under fire”.7 The correspondent i’s Raymondi Heard:
“Washington-South
African and American officials say
there is ‘nothing speactacular’ about new Pentagon figures
saying that South Africa is America’s second-best arms
customer in Africa, notwithstanding the arms em.bargo.“’
172. This reference to figures issued by the Pent.agon and
published in a South African paper-is this slander by me?
If it is slander, tell the South African representat.ive. He is
here, he is sitting in this room. I can see him, Let him tell
the editors of this paper that their paper is engaging in
anti-United States slander. Please. You can perfectly well
do this. But what has this got to do with me? I was only
referring, I think, to a fairly well-informed source.
173. The paper goes on:
“According to a listing of military export sales provided
by the Defense Department”-that
is, the United States
Defense Department-“South
Africa received 24.85
million rands worth of hardware in the fiscal years
1962-1968. In the fiscal year 1969, it got military
equipment worth 2.17 million rands.“7
174. These are the facts. What slander is there here? What
grounds are there for making such a statement and asserting
7 Quoted in English by the speaker.

that the Soviet delegation is engaging in slander? This is
not characteristic of the Soviet delegation. Throughout the
whole period of existence of the United Nations, the Soviet
delegation has been basing all its statements on facts and
scientific arguments, and not on fabrications, If such
practices are characteristic of someone else, let the United
States representative address his words to those who do h
fact resort to these practices.
175.

doubt that he has made many more speeches,but I believe
that the speech for which he will best be remembered, and
what wasprobably the greatest contribution he made to the
effective action of this Council, was his boycott of the
meetings of this Council in June 1950.
183. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Repubfics)
(translated from Russian): Mr, President, I think it would

be unworthy of the Soviet delegation to reply to these
really slanderous statements by the United States representative, which are fabricc;cflQ1
from beginning to end.

Such are the facts, and such are the arguments.

176. Mr. PHILLIPS (United States of America): It is not
my desire, as I said a few moments ago, to prolong the
discussion. It is already late and it is getting close to our
lunch hour. But Ambassador Malik seems to like this kind
of debate and I do feel an obligation to reply very briefly,

184. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now vote on draft resolution
S/9620/Rev.l.
A vote was taken by show of hands,

177. Of course, unlike the Press in the Soviet Union, the
Press of the United States is not the official organ of the
United States Government. I am perfectly aware of the fact
that the Soviet delegation is fond of clipping American
newspapers, and I dare say that it has a very ample file,

In favour: Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United States of America,
Zambia.

178.

Against : None.

Mr. MALIK

(Danslated

from

(Union
Russian):

of Soviet Socialist Republics)
It is a South African, not an

American newspaper.

Abstaining: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.

179, Mr. PHILLIPS (United States of America): Ameri.
can, South African and, 1 gather, British, I would only
repeat what I have said with respect to the specific
allegations of the Soviet representative, namely, that the
United States has lived up to the embargo imposed on the
Government of South Africa in 1963, and at the time that
that embargo was imposed the representative of the United
States then in the Security Council made clear-and the
records will show it-that this would not preclude the
fulfilment
of orders made prior to the imposition of the
embargo. In case the Soviet representative is interested, the
figures he cites-and I will not vouch for their accuracy-do
refer to spare parts, to equipment of a nonmilitary nature.
That is clear for the record, and if he is interested I shall be
happy to provide him with details at an appropriate time.

The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions. a

185. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call
on the representative of the Soviet Union who indicated
earlier that he wished to explain his vote.
186. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): The deiegation of the Soviet

Union

voted

for the revised draft resolution
because this resolution, in its spirit and
orientation, does as a whole reflect the desire and the wish
of the overwhelming majority of States Members of the
United Nations-and particularly the States of Africa and
Asia-to bring about the liberation of Namibia from the
tyrannical domination of the South African racists and
colonizers. At the same time, the Soviet delegation considers it necessaryto stressthat this resolution is inadequate
in its nature and as regards the content of the measures it
envisages for the achievement of this objective. We regard it
as a purely interim or-one might even say-procedural
resolution. It is obvious that it cannot in itself lead to a
solution of the problem under discussion.
rS/9620/Rev.l/

180. I was interested to hear the quotations from Lenin. I
was not aware that I had made remarks which would bring
forth such an outpouring of quotations. I was waiting to
hear one quotation which I myself recalled with some
interest, and it was one attributed to Lenin to the effect
that “Promises are like pie-crusts-made to be broken”.
Somehow it seems to characterize the policies of the
Government of the Soviet Union over past years.

187. As many delegations have emphasized during the
discussion, it is already high time to settle this important
question in its substance. The Security Council could have
contributed substantially and effectively to such a solution
to this problem if there had been unanimity among all
members of the Security Council, particularly among the
permanent members of the Security Council-a unanimity
which could have been expressed in the form Of Specific
demands for the complete cessation of all economic, trade,
transport and other relations with South Africa. The

181, When I hear stated in apparent seriousness the
allegation of warm concern for the equal rights of all
peoples, and when I compare this with the actions of the
Soviet Union-actions
which are not ancient history,
actions involving the brutal subjugation of peoples, friendly
peoples, peoples whose only fault was to be in disagreement
with the Government concerned-I wonder about the
adequacy of this explanation of Soviet policy.
182. Finally, I must admit quite freely that the representative of the Soviet Union, Ambassador Mahk has had far
more experience in this Council than I’have. There is no

8 Seeresolution 276 (1970).
17

capacity as President of the Council for this month, I hope
that the Council will allow me to express my sincere
gratitude for the atmosphere of co-operation which, from
the beginning to the end, has characterized the work done
under my presidency. A common concern has appeared
with respect to this problem because it is in fact linked to
other questions, as I have had occasion to state in my two
interventions, namely, racial and colonial questions.

resolution which has just been adopted contains merely an
appeal to States to refrain only from certain forms of
relationships. In the opinion of the Soviet delegation, the
sub-committee whose establishment is provided for in the
resolution which has just been adopted should therefore
study very carefully not only the material on the discussion
on this question in the Security Council-that is to say, the
records of the Council-but
also the very detailed and
circumstantial material on the discussion of the question of
Namibia during the General Assembly’s session. There it is
possible to find very many valuable ideas and proposals
expressed in the course of this discussion both by the
delegations of the countries of Africa, Asia and Latin
America and by the delegations of the countries of the
socialist commonwealth. It will be useful for this subcommittee to study ail these ideas and proposals, and draft
an effective programme of measures for submission to the
Security Council.

192. We are especially grateful to the members who do
not usually vote in favour of draft resolutions of this nature
for having joined the sponsors of the draft resolution and
the other members of the Council who stood on the side of
reason and justice. I hope that those members who
associated themselves with us today will show the same
courage, an at least equal determination and a spirit of just
as close co-operation in seeking, together with us, and
finding a final solution of this complex problem which is
important for all mankind.

188. With regard to the provision in the resolution
concerning the establishment of a sub-committee, the
Soviet delegation believes that it might have been possible
to do without a sub-committee of this kind. In other
circumstances, if the attitude of certain delegations had
been different, the Security Council might have been able
to adopt an effective resolution, in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter VII, Article 41, of the Charter of the
United Nations, which would genuinely have contributed to
the attainment of the objective for which we are met here
today,

193. I also wish to thank the Afro-Asian delegations in
general, and the African delegations in particular, which,
while not members of the Security Council, have been
constantly present here, even when we have met at such.
late hours as at present. We should like to appeal to them to
continue to demonstrate this same spirit in the future when
similar problems are debated in the Security Council,
because this is proof of the genuine interest they all have in
this question which is of such deep concern to us.
194. Before concluding, I should like, in view of the
enthusiasm and energy that have characterized our work
and which seem to me to deserve some consideration, to
propose, in accordance with paragraph 6 of the resolution
just adopted, that private consultations between the President and the other members of the Council be held this
afternoon. May I, with the agreement of the Council,
propose that these consultations begin at 4 p.m. in the
office of the President of the Council?

189. However, in view of the wishes of the sponsors of the
draft and the fifty-seven States which requested the
Security Council to discuss this question on an urgent basis,
the Soviet delegation has decided at the present stage not
only to refrain from objecting to this proposal but in fact
to support it, particularly since the intention is to establish
a sub-committee to carry out this important task-to carry
out the important mission which has been entrusted to
it-within a strictly limited period of time, before 30 April
1970. In this connexion, the Soviet delegation wishes to
state its profound conviction that the membership of the
sub-committee should include all members of the Security
Council. This is the first point, It would also be advisable to
settle this matter without delay, before the end of January
under the presidency of our distinguished President, the
representative of Burundi. This is the second point.

19.5. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): I do not wish to reopen
any subjects for discussion, but I respectfully suggest that
the consultations be held at 4.30 p.m., in view of the
lateness of the hour.
196. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
Council has heard the suggestion of the representative of
Zambia. If there is no objection, I shall take it that th.e
Council agrees that the consultations take place this
afternoon at 4.30 p.m.

190, For all these reasons, and having regard to the fact
that the resolution adopted by the Council will keep the
question of Namibia before the Security Council, the Soviet
delegation voted for this resolution, considering it as a step
on the way to the adoption by the Council of more
effective and genuinely productive measures to turn South
Africa out of Namibia and liberate the Namibian people.
This is the objective and the ardent wish of all the States
and peoples of Asia and Africa, judging by the request:
which they addressed to the Security Council and judging
also from the statements made by the representative of the
States of these two continents during the discussion of this
question.

197. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I wanted to say that I would lik:e
you to consider that consultations have already taken place
with the Soviet delegation, and that the Soviet delegation
has expressed its view that all members of the Security
Council should take part in the work of this sub-committele.
(translated from Russian):

198, The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
thank the representative of the Soviet Union. However,
despite the views already expressed by the representative of
the Soviet Union, the President would wish him to be good
enough to participate in the consultations also, since the

191, The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
There are no more names on the list of speakers. In my
18

views he has expressed and the consultations to be held are
r-rot incompatible, in my view.

prejudice to the views already expressed by the representative of the Soviet Union.

199. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
/translated from Russian): We shall try to reach agreement.

201. As no other speaker has asked for the floor on the
question of Namibia, we may consider that the debate on
this item is concluded and the Council will continue to be
seized of the question.

200. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Then I shall stand by my proposal that the consultations be
held with all the members of the Security Council without

The meeting rose at 2.15 p.m

19
