TWENTY-EIGHTH

NEW

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l

Statement

by the President

Adoption

of the agenda

733)

,. . . .. , . . . . . .. , . . . ., . .. . . . . . , .

. . . . . , ,. , .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . .. . . . .. . .
. ,. . . . . ,. . , . .. , . . . . . ., . . . . .. . .. . . . . . , .

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 33 I (1973);
under Security
Council
resolution
(b) Report
of the Secretary-General
331 (1973) (S/10929)
. , . . . *. . . . . . . . . . . . , . *. . . I . I . . *. . . . . .

spv.1133

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly

Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a ,system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND THIRTY-THIRD

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 20 July 1973, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland)

/1717th-I 726th meetings], it was agreed to extend invitations to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote to the representatives of the following 19 Member
States, which I shall list in the order in which their requests
were received: Egypt, Israel, Jordan, United Republic of
Tanzania, Chad, Syrian Arab Republic, Nigeria, Algeria,
Morocco, United Arab Emirates, Somalia, Guyana, Mauritania. Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, Iran and
Bahrain. We are now resuming consideration of the question after a suspension of the debate and these invitations
remain valid.

hescnt:
The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Inclonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1733)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a] Security Council resolution 331 (1973);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under Security
Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/10929).

4. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, my predecessor followed a procedure which I
woulcl
propose to copy, that is, he invited the representatives of Egypt, Israel and Jordan to take places at the
Council table and invited the rentaining representatives to
take the places reserved for them at the sides of the Council
Chamber on the understanding that they would be invited
to be seated at the Council table when it was their turn to
address the Council.

The mcetirlg IVUScalled to order at I I a.m.
Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT: Before inviting the attention of the
Council to our agenda, I should like to make a brief
personal statement,
2.

Although

5. If I hear no objection, I shall proceed to extend the
appropriate invitations in tlte manner I have just outlined.

I am gray-headed and stricken in years and

have been around the Council for some time--and indeed I

At the invitation of the President,Mr. M. H. El-Zayyat
(Egypt), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr, A. E% Sharaf
(Jordan) took placesat the Security Council table; and
Mr. H. G. Ouungmotching(Chad), Mr. H. Keluni (Syrian
&lb Republic:),Mr. E. 0. Ogbu(Nigeria),Mr. H. Nur Elnzi
(Somalia), and Mr. Y. Mahmnssani(Lebanon) took the
plcwesrcscrveclfor them at the sideof the Councilchamber.

was President on two previous occasions-this is the first
time that I have actually had the honour of presiding over a
cormal meeting and the opportunity of actually wielding
the gavel. I hope therefore that members will treat me with
tllc indulgence that they traditionally grant to a newconter.
And 1 feel particularly vulnerable when I compare my lack
of experience with the vast experience of my predecessor in
June,
Ambassador Malik. My Deputy, Mr Jamieson, in the
course of the meetings of the Council earlier this week, paid
my delegation’s tribute to him for the skilful manner in
which he had conducted the affairs of the Council last
month. I am glad to be able to add my own expression of
the respect that I have developed for him over the last three
years.

6. The PRESIDENT: It will be recalledtltat at the 1726th
meetingof the Security Councilon 14 June, the President
of the Council read a statement indicating that some
tentative suggestions
had beenmadeto him concerningthe
desirability of suspending
[or a reasonablyshortperiodthe
formal Security Council meetingsdealingwith the examination of the situation in the Middle East and that a
commonview hademergedthat sucha suspension
would be
usefulin affording time for further ponderingon the results
of the discussionaswell as for further unofficial consultations among the membersof the Security Councilasto
the Council’s next steps.In accordancewith the general
understandingthat the Council would resumeits examination of the situation in the Middle East around the
middle of July, I have convoked this meeting today
following continued consultationsamongmembersof the
Council and with representatives
of the partiesparticularly
concerned.

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 331 (1973);
fb) Report of the Secretary-General under Security Council resolution 331 (I 973) (S/10929)
3. The PRESIDENT: In the course of the Council’s
cclnsideration last month of the question on our agenda
1

8. The first name inscribed on the list of speakers for this
resumed discussion of the matter before the Council is the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, on whom I call.

to maintain international peace and security and, to that
end, to take effective collective measures for the prevention
and removal of threats to the peace and for the suppression
of acts of violence. Member States have a collective
responsibility in this endeavour, for aggression against one
State is aggression against the international order, and
repelling the aggressor and bringing him back witbin the
realm of international authority is the common concern
and the collective responsibility of all the Members of the
international community.

9. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): Mr. President, we take it as a
sign of the great importance that your Government and you
yourself attach to this resumed debate that you are with US
today, having disturbed your much-deserved rest to come
back to preside over this Council’s deliberations. It is also
fitting, I think, that when you leave the United Nations
after such distinguished service you will do so after having
been President of its highest organ at a moment of real
historical significance.

16. Members of the United Nations have assumed, under
Article 25 of the Charter, the obligation to carry out the
decisions of the Security Council. In order to ensure
prompt and effective action by the United Nations, its
Members conferred on the Security Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security in accordance with Article 24. They agreed that
“in carrying out its duties under this responsibility the
Security Council acts on their behalf.”

10. I would be remiss if I did not convey to Mr. Jamieson,
through you, Mr. President, our appreciation of the work
he did in your absence in the first part of this debate and
during the time in which he was charged, together with the
President for the month of June and the Secretary-General,
with preparing for these resumed meetings. He has gained
the appreciation and thanks of my delegation, and of other
delegations, I am sure,

17. The Charter empowers the Security Council with the
authority to take the measures necessary for the implemen.
tation of its resolutions. They include the suspension of
membership, expulsion, diplomatic and economic sanctions
and coercive military action against the aggressor or
law-breaker.

7. In the first part of the debate, last month, the parties,
all the members of the Council and the other participants
expressed their views on the important matter before us. 1
think the views of all of us are now well known. 1 hope
therefore that we can now concentrate on what the
outcome of the debate should be.

18. Six years have elapsed since this Council discussed the
Israeli attack on Egypt, Jordan and Syria-and Israel is still
in occupation of the territories of those three Member.
States. The Israeli military has meanwhile been applying a
policy of colonisation of the occupied territories through
the establishment of settlements populated by liew immigrants, with the avowed aim of creating new facts in the
area, without an effective deterrent. Israel has undermined
all the. efforts of the international community and those of
the United Nations, including the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

11. It is also appropriate for me to convey through you, to
Ambassador Malik, who was President for the month of
June, our thanks and congratulations for the remarkable
manner indeed in which he conducted the affairs of the
Council during that month.
12. I am also sorry to see that the Secretary-General has
had to alter his plans for visits which I know he was eager
to make and Members were eager for him to make. I am
sure that all concerned know that his presence in this debate,
as well as that of his Special Representative, Ambassador
Gunnar Jarring, is really indispensable.

19. Israel has in fact officially declared its determination
to expand beyond the lines and borders existing prior to its
attack of 5 June 1967.

13. I should also like to thank the 14 members of the
Council who saw to it that this debate should take place
today, and to express regret and great sorrow that the
United States of America thought this debate should not be
resumed; indeed it was the only member which took that
position,

20. It is now up to this Council to try to put an end to the
flagrant violation of the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of those three Member States. If
the Security Council fails to act or is indeed prevented from
acting in this most serious situation, the responsible
members of the Council will in fact be rr!-,etting Israel in its
policy of territorial expansion through tllc use of force.

14. It would perhaps be an understatement if I said that
the situation which faces us ail in this room is serious. Its
gravity lies in the challenge facing the United Nations and
its principles. The collective responsibility of Members of
the community of nations for the preservation of peace and
the suppression of acts of violence and aggression represents
the greatest achievement of the Charter of the United
Nations, the weakening of which shall surely undermine the
very foundation of the contemporary international order.

21. The discussion which took place in the Council
last
month revealed general agreement on i1 number of key
points,suchasthe following.
22. First, the Council has the primary responsibility, of
takingaction in the presentsituation in order to achievethe
just peaceit seeksin our area.

15. In prohibiting the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity of States the Charter crowned mankind’s struggle to establish an international order of peace
and justice. The primary purpose of the United Nations is

23. Second,in performing its duties 1~)achieve pcocc iI1
the Middle East the Security Council is bound, naturally,
by the basicprinciplesof the United NaWinsCharter.
2

24. Third, the acquisition of territory by force is totally
inadmissible under the United Nations Charter, regardless
of the size of the territory. The representative of France
gave expression to this important principle when he
referred to the continued Israeli occupation of territory
belonging to the three Arab States as:
‘I . . . obviously [constituting] a standing violation of the
principles recognized by the community of nations, and
in particular the principle of the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force.” [1724th meeting,
pwa. 52.1
25. Fourth, respect for the legitimate rights of all peoples,
including the Palestinian people, constitutes in this case an
indispensable element in the achievement of a just and
lasting peace in the area.
26. Those are basic elements which emerged from the
debate last month. They were further corroborated by the
President of the Security Council in his answers to the
questions I had put to him on 11 June /1721st meeting/,
Ambassador Malik stated (I 725th meeting/ that under the
Charter the Security Council and the General Assembly of
the United Nations consider the principle of the nonacquisition of territory by force and the principle of the
territorial integrity of States to be commonly acknowledged norms of international law, violations of which are
inadmissible in any circumstances whatsoever, and which
are applicable in all cases, including this case of the
situation in the Middle East.
27. Ambassador Malik further stated that, according to
the Charter of the United Nations and decisions of United
Nations organs, every people without exception has the
right to self-determination. Such a right is confirmed in
concrete form in decisions of the United Nations, inter alia
with regard to the Arab people of Palestine.
28. The outcome of the Security Council’s June debate
Fully supports the position which Egypt has consistently
maintained. There was no support whatsoever and there
could not have been any support for the expansionist
policy advocated by Israel in the Council. Israel stated the
following in the Council on 8 June: “No principle and no
rule can prejudice the right to self-preservation and
defence” [I 719th meeting, para. 39J.
29. Arguments similar to those advanced by Israel have
been used in the past by aggressors to justify their wars of
conquests and aggrandizement. Under the Charter, no State
has the right to use security and defence pretexts or
considerations to try to justify the acquisition of territories
of others or the dispersal of another people. Israel has no
special rights or privileges which make it above any law.
30. Such policies have led in the past to two world wars
and to the collapse of the League of Nations system.
Quoting his Prime Minister, the representative of Australia
stated the following on 14 June before the Council:
“There is no more certain way to ensure the continued
ineffectiveness of the United Nations than that the
smaller nations , , , should despair absolutely of that one

world body of which they form a majority. The greatest
victims of the breakdown through despair of the League
of Nations were the Jewish people. No nation would have
more to lose than Israel by a breakdown of the United
Nations.” [ 1725 th meeting, para. 48.1
31. It is inconceivable that the representative of Israel, a
State Member of the United Nations, should come to this
table to advocate a doctrine which the Charter of the
United Nations has indeed abolished.
32. What we are witnessing in fact is an attempt to
practise an outmoded and outdated colonial policy relying
on sheer force in challenge to the present international legal
order. By conquering territories, by establishing settlements
and outposts, by refusing to recognize the sanctity of
international borders and by constantly pushing further
into these territories, Israel is indeed pursuing a colonial
design in the Middle East patterned on the adventures of
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Israel in fact still
believes in the right of conquest. Israel in fact still believes
that a State’s security can be achieved only by its soldiers’
brandishing the most modern of arms and stationed on the
heights of the conquered lands of their enemies.
33. Only this week the Chief of the Israeli military was
urging the creation of more and more Israeli colonies in the
Arab territories under its occupation. His ideas are not
novel. They indeed reflected sadly those of the fifteenth
century. Machiavelli had this to say in The Prince:
“The other and better course is to send colonies to one
or two places, which may be as keys to that State for it is
necessary either to do this or else to keep there a great
number of cavalry and infantry. A Prince does not spend
much on colonies, for with little or no expense he can
send them out and keep them there, and he offends a
minority only of the citizens from whom he takes lands
and houses to give them to the new inhabitants; and those
whom he offends, remaining poor and scattered, are never
able to injure him.”
34. In an era which has seen the decline of colonialism and
the birth of new, advanced thoughts and political thinking,
Israel is trying indeed to erect itself as the colonial Power of
the twentieth century.
35. The brutality and immorality of the pre-Charter world
threatens to gain the upper hand again in our world through
the opportunism of the few and the inertia of the rest. We
expect the Council today to resolve that the principles of
the Charter shall be preserved.
36. Our main obligation now is to seek to and indeed to
put an end to the illegal occupation that has lasted for over
six years, Without the dislodging of this military occupation, there is and there will be no peace in the Middle East.
37. Israel seeks clearly to close all avenues available to us
except one: that of surrender, labelled negotiations under
occupation. By insisting on negotiations with the Arab
countries while their territories are under occupation Israel
is seeking to coerce them into conceding to it parts of their
homelands, By undermining all peace initiatives, including

assistance enabling it to maintain its policy of occupaliol
and coercion.

those of the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, Israel is determined to reach this objective. It
seeks to maintain the occupation of the Arab territories as a
means to impose on us the surrender and acceptance of
Israeli expansionism, either by forced and imposed so-called
agreement or by allowing the present unbearable situation
to continue indefinitely.

44. Together with the Arab people whose territories art
occupied we share a common responsibility. The struggle
for the liberation of these territories is not only our SBCILY
right but equally our sacred duty. Indeed, we owe it no
only to ourselves or to our respective peoples but also to 21
other small countries, in Asia, Africa and Latin America, tc
struggle so that aggression will not be a rewarding policy.

38. Israel frustrates the peaceful settlement adopted by
the Security Council because it is based on the principles of
the Charter and not on the weight of conquest and
occupation. The fact that the Security Council has been
unable to take any measures to enforce its resolutions has
encouraged and enabled Israel to reject all the international
efforts exerted to achieve justice and peace.

45. Our commitment to stand by the people of Paleslinl
will not be shaken by Israel’s policy of force or intinli
dation. We shall continue to support their national struggll
to live in dignity and honour in accordance with thci
inalienablerights.

39. After six years of frustrated efforts the Council met
on 6 June last to examine the Middle East situation fully.
And as you said, Mr. President, a thorough debate took
place. In that debate Africa fully participated through a
mission of several Ministers for Foreign Affairs. The
non-aligned countries equally expressed themselves through
the representative of Guyana. The Council had before it the
report of the Secretary-General /S/10929] and his Special
Representative, and also had before it the resolution of the
African States transmitted by the representatives of Africa
[see S/l 0943/ and the resolution of the non-aligned world
transmitted
by its representative (see S/10944/. The
Council adjourned to provide time for its members to study
these documents and to ponder on the course of action to
be taken. We now meet again to face our inescapable
responsibilities.

46. At the present juncture of internationa1 relatiotl
nations are looking again to the United Nations as thy
symbol of a world to be ruled by law and asa shieldagains
the forces which seek to have it degenerateinto a wod~
ruled by force.
47. It is our hope, it is our expectation that the Cnunci
will now be enabled to reflect in its decisionthe principk
and points that emerged from its discussionsduring thl
June meetings.Let me say againthat during those meeting
it was apparent that the assertion of the United Nation
authority for the preservation of international and it
responsibility to restore peace in the Middle East UQ
accepted. The reaffirmation of the obligation of Mcmbi
States to carry out the decisionsof the Security Counti
wasalso underlined. The unshakablestand of the member
of the Council regardingthe principle of the inadmissibilil!
of the acquisition of territoij by war wasagainstated.Th,
total disapproval and grave concern of the membersofthi
Council concerning the persistenceof Israelin its occupy
tion of Arab territories of the States of Egypt, Jordana~[
Syria and its obvious use of this occupation as a nlcamc~
coercion to achieveits political colonial objectiveswerealn
apparent in the deliberations of the Council. The tota
disapprovaland condemnation of Israeli obstruction of 31
efforts towards the achievementof the solution deternlinfd
by the Council, including Israeli obstruc;ion of the iaiti
atives of the Special Representative of the Secrctdo
General within the mandate defined for him by th:
were also stated. The imperative need to put a
end to the changeswhich Israel is introducing in li!#
occupied Arab territories in violation of international?Y$
and in utter disregardof the Council’s resolutions,inchtdi:!
those on Jerusalem,wasalso apparent in our deliberatinlr.
as was the obligation of Member Stat$:i; not to recogni!
such illegal acts, The need for the Council’s unhili~;;
support for the Secretary-General and his Special K:prc,
sentativein their endeavoursto assistin the implemcntsti~n
of the Council’s resolutions was stated. And, finally, th
conviction was expressedthat the respe8.tfor the rightsti
the Palestinianpeople has been and rcrnains an indispcs~
sableelement in achieving a just and durable peaceiii tl:,
Middle East.

40. In our view there are now three options before the
Council.
41. First, the Council could take the necessary measures
under the relevant Articles of the Charter to force Israel to
withdraw
from the territories it has occupied and to
comply with the Council’s decisions. This, in our view, is
the proper course of action. This is what we believe to be
the duty of the Council in accordance with the Charter. But
we know-alas-that
at least one permanent member of the
Council would use its veto power to prevent the Council
from taking this course.

Council,

42. Second, the Council may allow itself to succumb to
inaction, leaving Israel to pursue its policy of violence, war
and lawlessness in the area. Such a course would certainly
undermine the entire United Nations system,
43. The third option-the
only oue open to the Council
now-is
for the Council to pronounce itself on the
substance of the problem and support the application of
the principles of the Charter, impressing as much as it can
upon Israel that its expansionist policy is totally contrary
to the Charter and that the Council will continue to oppose
such a policy and declare it completely unacceptable, lu
this, the Council should make it clear that Israel’s occupation of the territories of three Member States constitutes a
most flagrant violation of those principles, that Israel’s
refusal to respect the territorial integrity of the States in
the area puts Israel outside the law. The Council should also
invite States to refrain from giving Israel any aid or

48. The lsraeli authorities today obvi~~,~.lsly
believethat tl:
more arrogantly they affront the interciational conmurri:!
the sooner will this community accept their policies863
despairof any further opposition to th “111.
4

49. The Israeli authorities today obviously believe that by
exercising more pressure on us they will get more and more
concessions until, finally, they realize their imperial dream
of the domination of our area.
50. We tell the Israeli authorities simply that we will not
yield. We tell the international community, represented in
this Council, that we will continue-as we should-to resist,
5 1. We now put this question, with which I shall conclude.
We ask the Council, we ask its members, who represent
great peoples in this Council: Will our resistancebe
supported by the international community and be in
accordance with the principlesof collective security, aided
and bounded at the same time by the United Nations
Charter, or do we have to resistalone? After the Council’s
long, thorough and patient examination of the situation in
the Middle East, that is the questionto which we expect an
answer.
52. Every vote--every singlevote-will thus be understood
by us to be a vote for peacethrough international law and
order or a vote for the victory of the policiesof violence
and counter-violence.
53. The PRESIDENT: The next name on my list of
speakers is that of the representativeof Israel, on whom I
now caI1.
54. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr, President,I shouldlike to
express to you my delegation’sprofound respect.Throughout the years of our associationin the United Nationswe
have held you in the highestregardand I am gladto seeyou
again. We hope that under your guidancethe causeof peace
in the Middle East will emerge unscathed from the
confrontation initiated in the Council by Egypt.
55. Disappointment and anxiety were widespreadwhen
Egypt asked two months agofor a Security Councildebate
on the Middle East situation. It wasclear that the causeof
peace could not be servedby public polemic and sterile
recrimination. In all parts of the world conflicts were being
settled and international differences resolvedby dialogue
and agreement. Confrontation was being replaced by
negotiation; inveterate hostility supplanted by understanding and co.operation. There was hope, indeedexpectation,
that constructive diplomacy would not stop at the
gates of the Middle Eastand that Israeland the Arab States
as well would find some way to initiate a processof
negotiation. Instead, Egypt chose again the course of
collision.
56. In his speechof 16 July, PresidentSadatmadeit clear
that Egypt did not go to the Security Council for a peaceful
solution of the conflict. “There is no peacefulsolution”, he
added, revealing Egypt’s true attitude.
57. yet Israel will remain undeterred in its searchfor
pcncc. It will not abandon hope that Arab Governments
will eventually realize that peaceisbetter than continuation
of the conflict, that if seriouslypl,,?aed,peaceis attainable,
and that all the peoplesof the Middle East, including the
Arab nation, are yearning for it. DespiteEgypt’s persistent
refusal to enter into a meaningfuldialogueon peace,Israel

will try again and againto persuadeit that sucha dialogue
would bc beneficial and essentialin bringing about a
peacefulsettlement.
58. Two conceptions of the Middle East situation are
vying with each other in the present Security Council
debate.One conceptiondrawsinspirationfrom the age-long
sagaof the Jewishpeople, uprooted from its homelandby
foreign conquerors, struggling through the centuries to
preserveits civilization, faith andnational identity and to
restore its freedom and sovereignty.The other originatesin
a refusalto recognizethissagaandin a denialof the Jewish
people’s rights to liberty, self-determinationand equality
with other nations. Israel, and with it enlightenedworld
opinion, holds that the Jewishpeople’srebirth in its ancient
homelandand the re-establishment
of the soleJewishState
has been an epos of supremejustice. The Arab Governments continue to view it as a wrong againstthe Arab
nation, although that nation hasattained its rights in 18
sovereignStates, including the PalestinianArab State of
Jordan.
59. On the one hand, there is the dramaof the Jewish
people,beleagueredand embattledfor a quarter century, its
very right to independenceand sovereigntyunderconstant
assault.On the other, there is the demandto penalizeIsrael
for having withstood this relentlessonslaughton its life, for
having repelled the aggressorand driven back the forces
which seekits destruction.
60. Egypt and other Arab Stateshavingpersistentlytried
to bring about Israel’sdownfall, now wishthe world would
ignore the origin, nature and duration of their war against
the JewishState. They would haveall disregardthe chainof
Egyptian acts of war in 1967 that led to the outbreak of
hostilities in June of that year: the imposition of a war
blockade, the expulsionof the United Nations Emergency
Force, the conclusion of military pacts with other Arab
States for co-ordinating the attack against Israel, the
massingof huge armiesalong the frontiers for an all-out
onslaught against Israel, the bombardmentof Israeli villages,PresidentNasser’sproclamationof the final battle to
annihilate Israel, To them the only developmentin recent
years worthy of attention is Israel’ssuccess
in frustrating
Arab designson its existence,resultingin the deployment
of Israeli forces on the present cease-firelinesestablished
by the Security Council. Juxtaposed to this is the realization that such a selectiveand distortedview of the Middle
East situation must inevitably impedethe solutionof the
conflict, It is the realizationthat efforts to attain a peaceful
settlement between Israel and the Arab States cannot
succeedif they are basedon the one-sidedcontentionthat
the main problem is Israeli withdrawal, while in fact the
Israeli presenceon the cease-firelines is a mereby-product
of the protracted war of aggressionpursuedby the Arab
States since 1948, a war those Stateshave refusedtill this
day to terminate fully anddefinitively.
6 1. Israel’sposition is that after all the yearsof violence
and bloodshedthere appearsto be a possibilityof attaining
genuine peace in the region and establishingsecureand
recognized boundaries where only truce, armistice or
cease-firelines have existed until now. The Arab Governmentsdemand the restoration of the old military lines,the

East cannot affect Israel’s position founded on the precepts
of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. It is not surprising, that in these circumstances,
Egypt should seek to mask the real meaning of its demands
by invoking principles of international law and of the
United Nations Charter. It is surprising, however, tllat
Egypt should assume that the misinterpretation and distor.
tion of these principles would go undiscerned even when
the Egyptian Foreign Minister calls to his aid the statements
of the Soviet representative who misused his office of
President to put forward one-sided and warped iatcrpretations without prior consultation with members of the
Security Council.

very lines which had been a principal cause of the
insecurity, chaos and belligerency of the past.
62. Israel calls on the Arab States to start building peace
together by talking peace with each other. The Egyptian,
and other Arab Governments, counter with the demand
that the Arab views and terms be imposed on Israel from
the outside in total disregard for Israel’s rights and vital
interests. They have tried to achieve that objective by a
variety of means, including resort to force and pressure by
third Powers, individually and collectively. It seems that the
Arab leaders’ deliberate insensibility to the history and
struggle of the Jewish people has led them to repeated
mistakes in the assessment of Israel’s attitude and mood. A
people which has been ready and able to resist oppression
and cruelty, force and inhumanity for thousands of years in
order to preserve its heritage and to defend its rights, will
not yield to its assailants now that it stands on the
threshold of ensuring for itself, at long last, the right to live
in peace and security. Such a people can be reasoned with.
It can be convinced by thoughtful and understanding
deliberation. It cannot, however, be pressured. When the
Arab States come to accept this fundamental truth they
will turn away from confrontation aiming at forcing their
will upon Israel, and then there will be agreement in the
Middle East.

66. Thus the Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs has
singled out the concept of non-admissibility of acquisitir)a
of territory by war which appears in the preamble of
resolution 242 (1967). That entire resolution is a series of
principles on the application of which the parties are to
reach agreement. It is, of course, up to the parties, not up
to others, to agree between themselves how those principles
should be applied in practice.
67. The most important of the principles appear, as usual,
in the operative part of the resolution and not in its
preamble. In any event, whatever their relative significance,
and even if all the principles in the preamble and in the
operative part alike were to be considered of equal
importance, it is clear that they cannot be tampered with
by selectively singling out one or another for special
emphasis. To do that would destroy resolution 242 (1967)
and its carefully constructed balance. Yet, that is precisely
what Egypt demands: to single out one of the many points
in the resolution, thus consciously undermining the reso.
lution as a whole. Egypt goes even beyond that, and w11cl1
citing the concept of inadmissibility
of acquisition oi
territory by war, deliberately omits the secondpart of that
concept, Indeed, the second preambular paragrapllof
resolution 742 (1967) states:

63. In the United Nations, Egypt and other Arab States
still deceive themselves, at times, that by marshalling their
automatic majority to pass one-sided resolutions they could
sway Israel from defending its basic rights and legitimate
positions. The ~1nS states forget that in its millennial
struggle to :cmain aiive, the Jewish people has come to
learn that r> 1 strength and merit of its heritage and the
justice of its cause cannot be weakened by the fact that its
opponents are numerous. The Arab States also forget that
in the bnited Nations, even at this Security Council table,
there are Governments which thought little of General
Assembly resolutions, some adopted by more than a
hundred vote?, or of Security Council resolutions which
had gained 13 or 14 votes and were vetoed, and even of
resolutions adopted by the Council but judged by those
Governments as inequitable and prejudicial to their national
interests.

“Emphasizirzgthe inadmissibility of the acquisitionof
territory by war and the need to work for a just mod
lasting peacein which every State in the areacan livein
security,“.

64. The only resolution that has played any significant
role in the Middle East conflict since 1967 is Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). This has been so because it
was adopted unanimously
following
consultation and
understanding with the parties, One thing is self-evident:
resolutions
not based on the parties’ consent cannot
contribute to the attainment of agreement between them.
This is sometimes recognized in Egypt as well. Thus a
detailed analysis of the first stage of the present debate
published in A/ Ahrurn on 13 June 1973 referred to such
United Nations resolutions as “rusty medals”, Al Ahianz
cited Egypt’s Foreign Minister as having said:

68. To have any meaning whatever in the Middle l&t
context, the first part of this provision can only bc readatid
mustbe interpreted in conjunction with its secondpartthat
callsfor peace, the central element of which would haveIQ
be security. This is further elaborated in paragraph1 ol’tlie
resolution, envisaging the establishment of secure3!1d
recognizedboundariesbetween Israel and the Arab Stalts.
69. A similar distortion and misinterpretation is resorted
to by Egypt when it invokes the concept of territorial
integrity. This is also one of the points in resolutic~ri
242 (1967). However, as already indicated, it must1~
consideredtogether with the others. To separateit fromtile
other principles would subvert and destroy resohfi~~n
242 (1967).

“Can you imagine the representative of Egypt to the
United Nations walking through the codoirs, his chest
covered with these rusty medals? He will make people
laugh.”

70. Moreover, the full text of paragraph 1 (ii), the rwlution’s provision which refers to territorial integrity, sallr
for the application of the following principle:

65. The partisan political views expressed in such resolutions which do not serve the cause of peace in the Middle
6

“Termination of all claims or states of belligerency and
respect for and acknowledgement
of the sovereignty,
territorial
integrity and political independence of every
State in the area and their right to live in peace within
secure and recognized boundaries free from threats or
acts of’force;“.

76. The argument that the 1967 line betweenIsraeland
Egypt should be considereda State boundary, despitethe
specific provision to the contrary contained in the IsraelEgyptian Armistice Agreement,is groundless.
The Egyptian
claim that the 1967line wasnot final on the Israelisidebut
was a definitive boundary on its Egyptian sideis a concept
devoid of any foundation and even of logic. A line hasno
width; it hasthe samemeaningand validity for both parties
which it separates.If the 1967 line established
for Egypt in
relation to Israel, as stressedby the Foreign Minister of
Egypt, is a mere separationof military forces,it could only
be a military, temporary line of identicalnaturefor Israelin
relation to Egypt. Thus the Egyptian thesisregardingthe
1967 Iine as transmitted to Israel, inter alia, in the Jarring
aide-mimoire of 8 February 1971[S/10403, annex11 is a
travesty of international law. To give it support is to
demolishresolution 242 (1967), which deliberatelyleft the
question of secure and recognized boundaries to be
determined by agreementbetweenthe parties.

71. It is clear from this text that the establishmentof
secure and recognized boundariesis a prerequisitefor the
acknowledgement of territorial integrity. The idea of
territorial integrity doesnot standin exclusivesolitude.It is
part of a broader principle. In the Middle Eastcontext it is
a purely theoretical idea unless and until secure and
recognized boundariesbetween Israel and the Arab States
are, for the first time, determined by agreementbetween
the parties. In examining the Middle East questionwe are
dealing with a concrete situation and with the need,
specifically enunciated by the Security Council, to agreeon
the application of a number of principlesto that situation
through a peace agreement.Such agreementwill not be
reached by maimingand amputating those principlesor by
singling out some while relegating others to secondary
positions.

77. It is immaterial by what semanticstratagemEgypt
tries in 1973 to imposeits dikrat that the old vulnerable
and provisional linesbe restored andthat Israelwithdraw to
those lines, a diktut repeatedly rejected by the General
Assembly and the Security Council in 1967.WhetherEgypt
formulates this demandin specifictermsor by referenceto
the Jarring aide-mCmoire
which suggested
that Israelshould
accept the Egyptian position or by referenceto resolutions
supporting it, or whether it does that by professingto
invoke generalprinciples,the effect would be the same.The
central problem on which the parties are to reach agreement-the question of secure and recognizedboundarieswould be excluded from the processof agreement.The
essenceof the peace-makingefforts-attainment of agreement between the parties-would be shatteredand replaced
by the notion of imposition from the outside.Resolution
242 (1967), the only generally acceptablebasisfor United
Nations action, would be wrecked. To the complexity of
the Middle East conflict would be addeda jurisprudential
void and complete chaos,If there is a flicker of hope that
the parties could be brought to reasontogether and to try
to accommodateeachother, it must not be stampedout by
shortsighted partisanship.A situation in which there is still
some opening, no matter how modest and even disap
pointing, is, after all, preferableto a stark wall with all the
openings hermetically closed. It would be unfortunate
indeed if the Security Council itself becameinstrumentalin
creating such a situation.

72. It is to be observedthat even in General Assembly
resolutions unrelated to any specific problem or situation
and enumerating general principles in the abstract, the
notions which Egypt seeksto singleout are only a part of
elaborate, complex and balancedformulations.
73. Egypt’s demandsare contrary not merely to resolution
242 (1967) but also to the provisions of the Charter.
Article 2, paragraph4, of the Charter stipulates:
“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or useof force againstthe territorial
integrity or political independenceof any State, or in any
other manner inconsistent with the Purposesof the
United Nations.”

74. For 25 years Egypt and other Arab States have
resorted to threats and to the useof force againstIsraeland
its independence. For 25 years they have remainedin a
state of war with Israel in defiance of the United Nations
Charter. Egypt cannot invoke againstIsrael the provision
that Egypt itself hasconsistently violated and continuesto
violate in relation to the Jewish State. Nothing in the
Charter deprives a Member State of the right to defend
itself. Nothing prevents Israel from respondingto the Arab
war by a war of self-defenceand succeedingin its response. 78. Another attempt endangeringresolution242 (1967) is
Egypt’s demand regardingthe allegedissueof the rights of
Palestinians,Egypt would replacethe resolution’scall for a
75. Article 51 of the Charter declares unequivocally: just settlement of the refugee problemby a provision on
“Nothing in the present Charter shall impair the inherent Palestinian rights. In view of the opposition to such a
right of individual or collective self-defenseif an armed change that would inevitably sound the death-knell of
attack occurs. . ,“. Israel’srecourseto armsin self-defence resolution 242 (1967), Egypt hason occasionspokenof the
has been in accordance with the Charter and not in
possibility of using phraseology that would not mention
contravention of it. Furthermore, no principle or provision those rights specifically and would concealEgypt’s true
of the Charter precludes border changes,especially folobjectives by invoking the general principle of selflowing the useof force in self-defenceand especiallywhere determination.
no secure and recognized intelnational boundarieshad
79. To satisfy the Egyptian demandregardingthe prinexisted between the victim of aggression
and the Statesthat
have been wagingwar againstit for two and a half decades ciple of self-determination would meanintroducing a new
element into the framework of resolution242 (1967) in the
in violation of the Charter.
7

full knowledge that this would completely upset it. This
particular Egyptian claim has, however, two additional
ominous implications. The Security Council is not a
technical drafting committee dealing with abstract formulations. in a debate on the Middle East situation the
principle of self-determination or inalienable rights must be
viewed in the light of the realities of that situation. The
earlier part of the debate established that behind Egypt’s
references to self-determination and to Palestinian rights
lurks a design to dismember Jordan.

1967, understood that resolution 242 (1967) eJli’i%r::
in the 1967 lines and that no distinction was m.&
h, this respect between the line separating Israel from El%!F?
and the lines between Israel and the other Arab Stales. 13
was clear from the discussion that Egypt’s denlands. si
granted,
would undermine resolution 242 (1967) and lb&
some of them, such as the claim regarding the sC+~aikf
Palestinian rights or that Israel’s recognized borders Sh~!+f
be the partition lines of 1947, would play havoc With ah@
situation in the Middle East.

80. This has been confirmed in the meantime, both by the
governmental Egyptian media of information and by the
Arab terrorist organizations. Approval of the Egyptian
demand would therefore, in the present political realities of
the region, constitute, in fact, approval of the dismemberment of the Palestinian Arab State of Jordan. This is
doubtless the interpretation that has been given and would
be given again in the region to such a step by the Security
Council.

86. It is regrettable, therefore, that Egypt ham IIO~ III~&
fied its attitude and that it pursues the same COllrse ilk l&
resumed debate, The grave implications of this CollrsC ~~~~
highlighted
by Egypt’s Foreign Minister when, accord@
Qi
the governmental Egyptian Middle East News Agency, k
declared in Paris on 17 Jdy, just before his departure r*‘r
the United Nations, that a Security Councils
ft%Oh~tiWl 5r
support of Egypt’s demands would give Egypt % de&,
ration enabling us to resort to any means in order to end
the occupation”. The significance of that StatelllcIlt $5
obvious. Egypt’s aim in the Security Council is a feSohtiw
that could be used to justify Egypt’s continued CW~W~:
tation with Israel, including renewed resort to ~OLTC. *I’~o
was confirmed today by the Minister for Foreign Affairs 6 ?
Egypt.

81. Moreover, the Foreign Minister of Egypt has made it
clear that the new additional Palestinian entity should be
created by recognizing the 1947 partition lines as Israel’s
boundaries. Support of the Egyptian demand regarding
self-determination would thus be tantamount, in the Middle
East context, to an invitation to Egypt to carry out its
notorious two-stage plan: first, to bring about Israel’s
withdrawal to the 1967 lines, and then to pursue the
struggle for Israel’s truncation and ultimate liquidation.

,-llanges

87. This is not a course which could lead to agreement ~UL!
peace; this is not a position which could create conditir~
propitious for any constructive effort within the Unitc,i
Nations framework. This is not an attitude that could pskr
the way for a visit to the region by the Secretary-Genera?
In fact, it brings the United Nations close to a point a!
which it might find itself unable to play any role in tb
search for peace in the Middle East.

82. It is to be recalled that the Palestinian terror groups
which claim to speak on behalf of Palestinian rights, and
which are actively supported by Egypt, openly proclaim the
destruction of Israel as their objective. This is being
reiterated daily with the full knowledge and consent of the
Egyptian Government on Radio Cairo.

88. The first stage of the present debate and developnlc!rr+
since its adjournment have actually pointed the wny f$t:
effective peace making. As the discussion in the Seeuril~
Council progressed, it became increasingly apparent tI~‘i
the one method that could bring about agreement betwccr-,
the parties was that of negotiation. The truth of tlal+
conclusion was so obvious that the Arab GOverntne~~f:,
could no longer ignore or reject jt unceremuniousty,
;fq :r’.
the past. The Egyptian Foreign Minister himself found TV
necessary to declare that his Government accepted thu ides
of talks with Israel. He accompanied that statement \vi:E*
the allegation that Israel prevented the initiation of swl:
negotiations by insisting on prior conditions.
That rrllti~~
gation, however, is no more credible today than whc11 i!!
was first made, in the light of the known fact that lsracl ic
calling for negotiations without any pre-conditions,
arid 1~:
view of the assurances reiterated in statements befclru tj;r
Council that Israel does not ask Egypt to accept in :ldvtin;~
any of the Israeli positions. in the meantime, the Presidetat
of Tunisia and other international personalities have sp\,k~
publicly of the need for Arab negotiations with Israel.

83. It has been clear from the very beginning of the
Middle East debate that, as President Sadat declared last
Monday, Egypt did not initiate the Security Council
deliberations to advance a political solution, The first part
of the debate already made it evident that Egypt was
thinking in terms of continued confrontation with Israel,
rather than agreement with it. Egypt was merely seeking
the Security Council’s support in this confrontation. Thus
it called for approval of views and demands rejected by the
Council in 1967 because they would have made agreement
between the parties impossible.
84. The discussion, adjourned on 14 June, revealed the
Egyptian designs and the baselessness of Egypt’s argumentation. It showed how, in the last six years, Egypt rejected
one suggestion after another made by Israel and by the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative to advance the
peace-making efforts. The discussion brought out that the
Security Council in its resolution 242 (1967) had purposely
left the secure and recognized boundaries undefined so that
the Parties could agree on them between themselves.

89. In the circumstances, no pretext, no r\rgl~mc~~t L,f
allegation can justify Egypt’s refusal to enter into a gerluiee
dialogue with Israel. If there is now general recc~gr~itio~~ tllvt
negotiations between the parties to the conflict are csscIlti,~)
and inevitable, there can be no reason whatever f<>r dcla!,iIln?
them.

85. The discussion further clarified that all, includirlg
the
Arab delegations, as acknowledged by the Minister of State
of the United Arab Emirates, and their supporters, as
confirmed by the lndian representative on the Council in
8

90. The first round in the Middle East debate was
suspended on the eve of an historic event that underlined
the importance of contact and talks between nations. The
American-Soviet
summit meeting in Washington has drama.
tically demonstrated
the effectiveness of the process of
negotiations. None of the summit’s significant results could
have been envisaged and achieved without the serious
exchanges of view which had taken place between the two
Powers. Could anyone imagine the understandings reached
and the agreements concluded in Washington resulting from
a public debate in the Security Council? Would anyone
suggest that the Viet-Narn agreement, the epoch-making
improvement
of relations between the United States and
China., the progress on the German problem, would have
been possible if not for the patient, constructive “quiet
diplomacy”
that had been put into motion? There can be
110 excuse for not applying this proven method also in the
Middle East.

affairs of the Council with
greetings and compliments.

wisdom

and fairness, ou

9s. The Council enters a new and crucial phase in it
consideration of the Middle East question. It is nap
expected to act. The Council has heard the parties to the
conflict state their Views and cases. They have not beer
equally Positive or equally constructive, The Council is no\
formulating its verdict and charting the road to a reso.
lution. My delegation has presented to you, in the course 01
the debate, our analysis of the problem and our basic
position. We submitted that the issue is Israel’s occupation
for over six years now of the national soil of three States
Members of the United Nations. It has neither been
persuaded to evacuate these territories nor to accept the
Principle of evacuating those territories in the context of a
peaceful and guaranteed settlement. The Arab side had not
created the Arab-Israeli conflict, That conflict and the
suffering that it entailed had been imposed on it. The Arab
parties which came to the Security Council in 1967, while
deeply realizing this fact, sought a realistic solution in a
peaceful settlement which would guarantee future peace
and security for all sides in the area resulting from and
complementary to Israel’s withdrawal from all the territories it occupied in the hostilities of 1967. That was the
essence of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967.

91. The 25year .Arab war against Israel is a story of
fundamental errors of judgement and missed opportunities
by Arab leaders. The time has come to free the situation
from the entrapment in futile slogans and sterile prejudices.
The sufferers in this situation are the peoples of the Middle
East. For them there can be no plausible explanation why,
with Israel’s continuously expressed readiness to negotiate
peace, the Egyptian Government has remained adamant in
its refusal. The peoples of the Middle East, including the
people of Egypt, are not interested in the nuances of the
Security Council debate and its resolutions. They know one
thing: in all parts of the world, representatives of hostile
Governments
meet face-to-face and try to settle their
differences.
Only in the Middle East do they remain
immersed
in the mire of fruitless rhetoric, semantic
quibbling
and doctrinaire postures in vain attempts to
justify
the absence of a constructive effort to reach
understanding
and harmony. How can one explain to the
people the tortuous arguments and endless polemics in the
Council chamber? How can one explain to them the refusal
ta meet with Israel and discuss seriously and fruitfully any
matter with a view to making progress towards peace? How
can insistence on prior conditions and prior commitments
outweigh
the need to test at least the possibility of making

96. When Jordan accepted resolution 242 (1967) its
understanding of its content and intent was clear. The
resolution was aimed at ending the occupation and establishing the conditions of a just and stable peace. It was an
agonizing experience for Jordan to accept resolution
242 (1967) which contained some concepts and provisions
that were less than fair or adequate for the Arabs in terms
of absolute justice. But we accepted the resolution, and
with it the will of the Security Council, in the interest of
peace in the Middle East and the peaceful liberation of our
occupied lands and people. There was no doubt in Jordan’s
mind then, nor is there any now, as to what the provisions
of the resolution meant. Certainly there was and is no
doubt in our mind as to what the provision for withdrawal
meant. As a resolution based on balance between withdrawal and territorial integrity on the one hand and
guarantees for peace on the other, it could have meant
nothing less than total withdrawal. Incomplete withdrawal
is neither entertained in the resolution nor acceptable to
the aggrieved half-occupied countries. To us, and to any
objective and fair-minded observer, the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from the territories occupied means a withdrawal based on the lines which existed prior to the
outbreak of hostilities on 5 June 1967. The Charter of the
United Nations confirms this understanding bY stipulating,
as its very essence, respect for the territorial integrity of
States and the undertaking by Members not to use force
against the territorial integrity and political independence
of States, The same understanding is confirmed by the fact
that resolution 242 (1967) states in its very outset the
principle of the inadmissibility of acquisition of territory
by war. Even Israel, which now appears as the only source
of a different interpretation of the resolution, sided with
the logical and natural interpretation when it did not Vote
during the summer of 1967 against a Latin American draft

such progress?
92. Few aie the capitals of the world that Egypt’s leaders
have not visited in the last six years to discuss the Middle
East situation. They have tried various ways and means and
travelled everywhere
except to the one obvious destiIlation-peace
talks with Israel. The time has come to take
this road. The peoples of the Middle East are sure to give
their biessing to such a step.
133. The PRESIDENT:
The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Jordan, on whom 1
now call.
94. Mr. SHARAF
(Jordan): Mr. President, may I express
tC1 YOU my delegation’s highest esteem and regard on the
occasion of your assumption of your high office. May I add
to the expression of our high esteem that of our great
affcctioI1.
Allow me also to convey to your predecessor,
Anlbassador
Malik, who during last month handled the
9

resolution in the General Assembly
following operative paragraph:
“Urgently

which contained the

requests:

“[a) Israel to withdraw all its forces from all the
territories occupied as a result of the recent conflict.“r
97. So there is no place for an interpretation of the
Security Council resolution which could compromise its
categorical call for complete withdrawal. This is Jordan’s
understanding of it and the basison which Jordan accepts
the other obligations derived from the other provisions of
the resolution.
98. In this context the provision for “secure borders”
cannot be construed in any way incompatible with this
basic understanding of the resolution. There is no room for
an interpretation which identifies secure borders as “expanded” borders. As I said in an earlier statement during
this debate:
‘d
. . . security is not a one-sided concept. Security among
nations is by definition mutual. It certainly can have no
other meaning in a resolution on peace in the Middle
East.
“If ‘secure borders’ were to mean expanded borders,
why should it not mean borders expanded at the expense
of Israel, rather than at the expense of the Arab States
neighbouring Israel? In fact, it would be more logical, in
view of the situation on the ground, to argue for
expanded-meaning secure-borders for the Arab countries now under Israeli occupation after the withdrawal of
Israeli forces, if this notion were to be accepted.
“But secure borders are not borders basedon forcible
expansion. Secure borders are made so by other elements:
a major element is the absenceof mutual grievance; a
major element is the solution of the explosive outstanding
problems between the countries sharing the borders,”
f 1725th meeting, paras. 6668.]
I added then that borders cannot be made more secureby
the acquisition of one State of a hill or a river belongingto
the neighbouring State-less still by the planting of military
settlementsin the heart of the neighbouring country.
99. Jordan’s position remains the same.What causedthe
war of 1967 was not the faulty demarcation of armistice
lines. What caused it was the existence of an explosive
political situation. The explosivenesshad its roots in Arab
grievance against Israeli violence and intransigence. Israel’s
continued occupation of Arab territories will not make the
situation less explosive, to put it euphemistically. Nor
would the situation be made less explosive by an Israeli
partial withdrawal, which means by Israel’s acquisition of
“some”, not “all”, of the national territories of its
neighbours. There is no security for Israel in establishingits
borders on the grievance of its Arab neighbours. Nor can
peace and its objective and subjective conditions be ensured
on sucha basis.
1 Officiu! Recordsof the General Assembly,Fifth Emergency
SpecialSession,
Annexes,agenda item 5, documentA/L.523/Rev.l.
10

100. In this connexion my delegationhas another essential
point to make. The issueof withdrawal and non-aggression
is not only juridical and legal. It is an issuewhich goesto
the heart of international order and human existence, No
national entity-but more importantly-no people mustbe
subjectedto uprooting or military and political subjugation
by any other foreign people or country, The people living
in and around Palestine,before and after the establishment
of Israel, have been subjected for several decadesto
successivephasesof suffering, dispersalor lossof natiottsl
independence. Be their name Palestinian, Jordanian,
Egyptian or Syrian, they have all been partners in these
sufferings, trials and tribulations. They all belong to the
samenation, culture, heritage, history and future, and they
have all lived for centuriesin the sameexpanseof territory.
The sufferings of all these peopleare derived from the same
sourceand the solution to their problemsis indivisible, The
moral key is that no national entity should be ahowedto
displaceor subjugateby force another national entity. The
political key liesin the principles of territorial integrity, the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of national territory by
force, self-determination and national independence. Regardlessof their technical nationalities, the Arab people
who are now under occupation or are victims of the
preceding phasesof the conflict must be granted their full
moral rights. These Arab people can then in the future
readjust and restructure their relationshipsin the way they
seefit. This is an inter-Arab affair. For its part the Jordan
Government has made it clear that it intends to review the
structure of relationships between the two flanks of the
Kingdom once the physical obstacleof occupation is ended.
It has also made it clear that the wishesand desiresof its
citizens now under occupation would be democratically
and constitutionally ascertainedafter their liberation with a
view to restructuring the framework of relationships in
accordancewith the needsand aspirationsof its people.
101. In the meantime, and while the occupation lasts, the
Jordan Government will never abandon or let down its
people under occupation. But the primary and basictask is
the termination of the occupation. It is the only road to
any positive and imaginative construction of the future of
the inhabitantsof the area.
102. As I said at the outset, the Council has now reached
the crucial phaseof its deliberations. It is now formulating
its resolution. What we hope for is that the Council should
take into account the facts and the principles which my
delegationhasbeen trying to emphasize.In this framework
Jordan welcomes the effective resumption of the efforts
undertaken by the Special Representativeof the Secretary
General, the honourable and capable AmbassadorJarring,
in order to put into effect resolution 242 (1967) and help
establish a just and lasting peace. Jordan welcomes the
interest shown by the Secretary-General in the efforts at
peace making in the Middle East both personally and by
virtue of his office.
103. We are ready to undertake the responsibilities involved in the establishmentof ajust and lasting peacein the
area. In doing so Jordan takes pride in being a faithful and
enthusiastic member of the Arab family, genuinely con
cernedfor the security and future welfare of its fellow Arab
States and deeply inspired by its intimate associationwith

the tragedy, the sufferings, the struggle and the hopes of
the Palestinian people. We maintain our faith in the United
Nations, We believe the United Nations to be the only arena
for a fair and balanced process of peace making. We do not
acquiesce in a settlement imposed on our people and our
sovereignty by military and political pressure. We believe
peace to be a free undertaking based on the realization of
the objective conditions of justice and the moral satisfaction that justice has been ensured.

110. All the members of the Security Council, as well as a
number of Arab, African and other non-aligned countries,
took a most active part in the general discussion of the
Middle East question in the Council. The basis of the
discussion was a detailed report-prepared by the SecretaryGeneral with the active participation of his Special Representative, Ambassador Jarring-on United Nations efforts to
bring about a peaceful settlement in the Middle East.
111. The discussion of the Middle East situation in the
Security Council was the focus of world-wide attention. It
can be stated without exaggeration that, in view of the
favourable changes which have been brought about in the
international situation and the general relaxation of tensions taking place on our planet, world opinion expects the
Security Council to take constructive steps towards a
settlement, of the Middle East conflict, which continues to
be explosive and poses a threat to international peace and
security.

104. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(frunslaribn
from Russinn): Mr. President, first of all I
should like to thank you for the kind words you addressed
to me and for your assessment of the manner in which I
presided over the Security Council last month. May I, in
turn, congratulate you on four assumption of this responsible post and wish you success in carrying out the tasks
facing the Council, which are so serious and so important to
the cause of peace, and particularly those relating to a
Middle East settlement. We should like to think that your
return to New York to preside over the Security Council in
its discussion of such an important international problem
can
be regarded as an encouraging indication that the
United Kingdom delegation in the Council, which sponsored resolution 242 (1967), intends to join with the other
members of the Council, in an effort to bring about the
adoption by the Council of a new, strong resolution and
ef’fective measures to implement resolution 24.2 (1967) in
all its parts and provisions, with particular reference, of
course, to a solution of the main issue on which a
settlement depends-that is, the withdrawal of Israeli troops
from alI occupied Arab territories.

112. The abnormality of the situation in the Middle East
was stressed by all the participants in the discussion. An
overwhelming majority of the members of the Council and
of the non-member participants advocated a peaceful
political settlement of the conflict in the Middle East and
the establishment of a just and lasting peace in that area on
the basis of the well-known decisions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
113. Special stress should be placed on the fact that all the
members of the Council and all the countries participating
in the discussion of the Middle East problem with, of
course, the single exception of Israel-that is, 31 of the 32
participants in the discussion-supported
the principle of
the non-acquisition of territory by means of war or the use
of force. All of them called for observance of the principle
of the territorial integrity of States in the Middle East.

105. I should also like to express my gratitude to
Mr. El-Zayyat, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, for the friendly words he addressed to
me today; I, in turn, wish to welcome him to the United
Nations and to this meeting of the Security Council.

114. Mr. Tekoah attempted to present this as a “mechanical majority”, as he put it. No, Mr. Tekoah, this is a
principle of international law; this is respect for the
principles of the Charter, which are endorsed by all
Members of the United Nations and by every State that
applies for membership in the United Nations. This applies
equally to Israel. When it became a Member of the United
Nations, Israel made a solemn undertaking to respect those
principles.

106. I also wish to express my gratitude to the Ambassador of Jordan for the kind words that he addressed to me.
107. The Security Council has met to resume its consideration of the Middle East situation. We have all listened
with great attention to the brilliant and convincing state.
ment by Mr. El-Zayyat, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Arab Republic of Egypt, in which he took stock of the
first round of the Council’s discussion of the Middle East
situation, undertaken on the initiative of Egypt.

11.5. In condemning Israel’s aggression and demanding the
return of the territories seized by Israel and the withdrawal
of its troops, all these countries called for strict observance
of the principle of the non-use of force in international
relations, which was approved by the General Assembly at
its twenty-seventh session [resolution 2936 (XXW)].
This
is another rule of international law which has been
endorsed by the General Assembly.

108. In the Council’s discussion of the Middle East
situation
in June, over 30 States Members of the United
Nations
took part. Nine of them were represented by
Ministers for Foreign Affairs or Ministers of State, including
six ministers who, speaking on behalf of the whole of
Africa on instructions from the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity,
vigorously condemned Israel as an aggressor and supported
the Arab countries.

116. In this connexion, it is appropriate to recall that the
Security Council has so far not complied with the recommendation of the General Assembly that the Council, in
accordance with the General Assembly resolution on the
non-use of force in international relations and permanent
prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons, should for its
part’ adopt an equivalent resolution and take appropriate

109. I followed all those statements with attention since
the occupant of the chair is under an obligation to listen
with
particular care to all speakers at meetings of the
Security Council.
11

tant document which can assistin bringing about a Middle
East settlement in strict conformity with resolutioll

steps to ensure the non-use of force in relations between
States and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear
weapons. It is quite clear that those who oppose this bring
grist to the mill of the aggressor and hamper the effort to
uphold and defend the just cause of the victim of
aggression.

242 (1967).

122. As we are all aware, during the time when regular
consultations on the Middle East were being held ar:long
the permanent membersof the Security Council, all four
participants in those consultations, including the United
States, officially supported that initiative on the part of
AmbassadorJarring-his aide-mbmoireand all of its provisions. All the participants, including the United States,
pointed out that AmbassadorJarring’sinitiative wasfully in
accord with his mandate under resoIution 242 (1967). We
hope that they will all, as before, firmly adhere to that
position in support of the aide-m&moire.

117. All those from the third world who participated in
the discussion-,-particularly
the representatives of Arab and
African States-urged
strict observance of the principle of
the non-acquisition of territory by force. They linked this
principle with the need for the speedy withdrawal of Israeli
troops from all occupied Arab territories. The African
countries called upon the Security Council, in formulating a
decision on the question under discussion,, to take into
account the extremely important resolution on the Middle
East adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the countries of the Organization of African
Unity at its tenth anniversary session at Addis Ababa in
May of this year. The non-aligned countries appealed to the
Security Council to consider the resolution on the Middle
East adopted at the Conference of Foreign Ministers of
Non-Aligned Countries held at Georgetown in August of
last year. The representatives of the countries of Latin
America in the Security Council drew the attention of the
members of the Council to the draft resolution on the
Middle East submitted by the Latin American countries to
the General Assembly at its fifth emergency special session.
The basic provisions of all those resolutions are the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force,
respect for the territorial integrity and political independence of States and the full and unconditional withdrawal
of all Israeli troops from all occupied Arab territories. That
is not a “mechanical majority”-it is the voice of the entire
world.
118. All those who participated in the discussion-with
the exception, of course, of the representative of Israelalso stated bluntly that it was impossibleto achieve a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East without ensuring
respectfor the lawful rights of the Arab people of Palestine.

123. Consequently, the discussioxiheld in the Security
Council and the documents that I have mentionedrepresenting as they do the will of an overwhelming
majority of the members of the Council and of States
Membersof the United Nations as a whole-have brought
out clearly the following principles and concepts on the
basisof which we can and must establisha just and fasting
peace in the Middle East: the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by meansof war, the non-useof
force in relations between States, respect for the territorial
integrity and political independenceof the States of that
area, the complete and unconditional withdrawal of all
Israeli troops from all occupied Arab territories asa
primary condition of a Middle East settlement, respectfor
the lawful rights of the Arab people of Palestine, the need
for compliance with Security Council resolution
242 (1967) in all its parts and provisions, approval of the
Jarring aide-m&moireof 8 February 1971 asan important
initiative aimed at achieving a political settlement in the
Middle East in full conformity with resolution 242 (1967),
and the need to activate the Jarring mission. No new
measuresshould undermine or supplant what has been
recognizedand accepted by the United Nations asthe basis
for a Middle Eastsettlement.
124. It is the conviction of the Soviet delegation that
theseprinciplesand conceptsshouldbe made the basisfora
Security Council resolution on the Middle East asa result
of this discussionin the Council.

119. What were the other extremely important results of
the first round of discussionsof the Middle East questionin
the Security Council?

125. In this connexion, it is important to note that an
120. Of the 15 members of the Security Council 14
supported Council resolution 242 (1967) asthe only agreed overwhelming majority of those who took part in the
discussion,and particularly the members of the Security
basis for a Middle East settlement. They all called for
implementation of all the provisions of that resolution, and
Council, pointed out that the United Nations, and aboveall
the Security Council, bore a specialresponsibility and was
an overwhelming majority of them alsocalled for activating
called upon to play a primary role in achieving a Middle
the Jarring mission. An overwhelming majority of the
non-memberparticipants in the discussionstrongly stressed Eastsettlement,
the need for compliance with resolution 242 (1967) in all
its parts and provisions. Egypt, Jordan and Israel-the latter
126. The wish wasexpressedthat the permanentmembers
with certain reservationswhich are, of course,characteristic of the Security Council should once again actively assist
of the aggressor-also confIrmed their acceptanceof reso- AmbassadorJarring in fulfilling his noble mission,that isto
lution 242 (1967) as the basisfor a settlement.
say, that they should first of all resumetheir consultations
on the Middle East. This also means that those two
121. Furthermore, a majority of the members of the
membersof the Security Council which in words express
Council, as well as the overwhelming majority of the Arab,
support for peacein the Middle East but in practice are
unwilling to lift a finger to promote a Middle East
African and other non-aligned States taking part in the
discussion,actively supported AmbassadorJarring’s widely
settlementby consultations or other meansshould cease
to
obstruct a resumption of consultations on the Middle East
publicized aide-mimoire of 8 February 1971 asan impor12

---

by the five permanent members of the Security Council
and, together with the other three permanent members,
actively participate in the work of helping Ambassador
Jarring to fulfil his important international mission. Thus,
the duty of the Security Council and the obligation of its
permanent members are quite clear.

“One of the most important tasks of the present day is,
we are convinced, that of eliminatjng the hotbed of
aggression in the Middle East. We must no longer permit
the aggressors and adventurers to continue to keep the
whole of this vast region in an explosive condition. The
rights of the Arab peoples, who have been victims of
aggression, must be fully safeguarded. The Israeli troops
must be withdrawn from all occupied Arab territories.
The peace, security and State frontiers of all the countries
of the Middle East must be guaranteed. We, for our part,
shall remain steadfast in pursuing precisely that course,”

127. As for the position of the Soviet Union on the
Middle East problem, it remains unchanged. The Soviet
Government has always viewed and continues to view the
situation in the Middle East as one of the most acute and
important international problems. The USSR has favoured
and continues to favour a peaceful political settlement of
the Middle East conflict and a just and lasting peace in that
area. In striving for a just settlement of the Middle East
problem, the Soviet Union has always sought to exploit all
available possibilities. The Soviet Union takes the view that
the problem of a Middle East settlement should be decided
on an over-all basis and that its separate aspects, parts or
stages should be inseparably linked with a general settlcmerit and should form parts of a whole. The key issue of a
Middle East settlement has always been and continues to be
the withdrawal of Israeli troops from all the Arab territories
occupied in 1967. A solution of this basic problem would
also make it possible to achieve agreement on other aspects
of a settlement on the basis of respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity and the safeguarding of the lawful rights
and interests of all States and peoples in the area, including
the Arab people of Palestine.

131. Guided by the Soviet Union’s position of principle
with regard to the Middle East, as I have just described it,
the Soviet delegation is prepared to co-operate constructively with other delegations to enable the Security Council
to formulate and adopt an effective resolution and
measures that will contribute to the speedy attainment of a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
132. The PRESIDENT: I call on the Foreign Minister of
Egypt in exercise of the right of reply.
133. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT
(Egypt): Having spoken for the
Jews of the world-which
means for citizens inter aliu of
Panama, Austria, the United States of America, the United
Kingdom-and having spoken for Jordan, the representative
of Israel chose also to speak, first, for the people of Egypt
and then was kind enough to speak for me. I wish the
representative of that imperial Power would at least refrain
from speaking for us, I do not think he knows Egyptians. If
he wants me to offer him some insight into the thinking of
one Egyptian, I can tell him that passing through Belgrade,
Vienna and Paris, the following questions came to my
mind: Where are the occupation armies that once occupied
Belgrade? Where are the occupation armies that once
occupied Vienna? Where are the occupation armies that
once occupied Paris? Indeed, where are the occupation
armies of the past? They do not exist; and the occupation
armies of today will not exist. in the future. That would
perhaps help him to know the thinking of Egyptians.

128. In this connexion, the Soviet delegation feels that,
guided by the generaUy recognized principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by means of war, we
must seek a settlement on the basis of unswerving compliance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967) in all
its parts and provisions and also in accordance with the
aide-memoire of 8 February 1971 of Ambassador Jarring,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the
Middle East-an aide-mCmoire which is fully in keeping
with the letter and spirit of the resolution.
129. In a recent decision of the Politburo of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR and the
Council of Ministers of the USSR on the “Results of the
visit of Comrade L. I. Brezhnev to the United States of
America”,
it is stressed that the Soviet Union, in conformity
with the programme for peace approved at the
Twenty-fourth
Congress of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union. “attaches fundamental importance”-and
I
particularly
stress the words “fundamental importance”“to the elimination of the hotbed of war in the Middle East
on the basis of respect for the lawful rights of the’States
and peoples that have been victims of aggression, The basis
for a just solution of the Middle East problem is the
withdrawal
of Israeli troops from all occupied Arab
territories”.

134, As for me, there are two StateJnentS
that I would like
to appear correctly in the records. The first is a reference to
talks with Israel, The talks which I have been readyperhaps until Mr. Tekoah’s speech today-to undertake
were talks under the auspices of the United Nations with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, to
whom I have given to the best of my ability my full
co-operation during the time when he needed it and was
able to make use of it, on the basis of United Nations
documents that have been explained and contained in the
Secretary-General’s report and explained also in the first
part of the meeting of this Council.
135. The second concerns the declarations Mr. Tekoah
said I made in Paris. People think that their short memory
can get us to say whatever they want. I do not think that
the memory of the members of the Council is so short.
With the Council’s permission, I shall restate what I said
only about one hour ago: We tell the international
community
represented in this Council that we will
continue, as we should, to resist occupation and aggression.
We now ask the Council: Will this resistance be supported

130. In the speech which he delivered on 11 July of this
year in Moscow upon being awarded the Lenin Prize for the
Strengthening
of Peace between Peoples, Comrade
Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, said the
folIowing:
13

I’

by the international community and be in accordance with
the principles of collective security, aided and bound at the
same time by the United Nations Charter, or do we have to
resist alone? That is what I said earlier today.

resolution open to it under international law and the
Charter-to order the immediate vacation of an occupation
which has continued too long-then it is time now for the
Council to do so.

136. This is what I said in Paris: The failure of this
Council to reach anything that would support us in our
international struggle will, of course, leave us with no
recourse except to use all methods and possibilities in our
ability to resist aggression. I repeat that again, and I wish
the record to show it correctly.

142. The PRESIDENT: I call next on the representative of
Israel, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
143. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The Foreign Minister of Egypt
spoke of Egypt’s faith in the United Nations. Only a week
ago, last Friday, OR 13 July 1973, a close confidant and
adviser of the President of Egypt, Mr. Muhammad Hassanin
Heykal, wrote in Al-Ahrum as follows, after referring to the
United Nations:

137. Mr. ‘Tekoah also chose to refer to a declaration made
on 16 July--I
believe him, although I was not in Cairo on
16 July-in which he alleged that the President said “no
peaceful solution is possible”. May I be allowed to say,
without
any discourtesy,
that if that statement was
made-and perhaps it was-it was because the President
knew in advance the kind of speech Mr, Telcoah would
make, or remake, today; it was because he knew in advance
Israel’s position and the support it gets from the United
States which blocks the road to peace; because peace, in
our view, cannot and will not be built except on a base of
justice-and Mr. Tekoah’s speech denies us that justice,

“It is a mere stage of free deliberations, without any
difference between what is going on there and what the
visitors can see in the corners of Hyde Park in London.”
Apparently there is one Egyptian truth for the people of
Egypt and another and different one, for obvious tactical
reasons, for the benefit of the Security Council.
144. Minister El-Zayyat told 11s about his travels through
capitals of Europe on the way to the United Nations, and
his thought about ‘Where are the Nazi occupation
armies? “. Well, those occupation armies were destroyed by
the forces of States which had been attacked by the Nazis
and which were finally successful in stamping out the Nazi
scourge. In the same manner, the Egyptian forces, which
for 25 years have been waging war against Israel by all
means at their disposal, whether by over-all military
confrontation or by barbaric, murderous terrorist attacks
against innocent civilians, were finally in 1967 repulsed and
pushed back, resulting in the creation, for the first time in
two and a half decades, of a prospect for the establishment
of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East, if Egypt
finally agrees to talk peace and to work for peace,

138. The difference between Israel and Egypt, as we all
is a real difference between our faith in the United
Nations and their total disdain for the United Nations. It
has been pointed out in some books that the real tragedy of
the United Nations is that its Members are divided into
those who believe in it and those who do not believe in it
and act accordingly. Those who believe in it come to this
Council; those who’*do not believe in it say “nothing in this
Council will give results except and until you come to us
and know the only place to go”.
know,

139. Mr. Tekoah said that we had journeyed to many
places but not to the one obvious destination. Tel Aviv? , I
ask. Perhaps. And that is not novel, because after the 1967
war Isiael’s Minister of War said that he was going to rest by
the side of his telephone and wait for a call from Cairo. The
Guardian, a London newspaper, under the title “I Never
Forget” mentioned declarations attributed to a high authority; without identifying him, to the effect that “they
will come crawling on their bellies”. The telephone did not
ring, nor did we go crawling on our bellies, nor are we going
to the only one and obvious destination under pressure and
coercion of the occupation-no
matter how many Phantoms, no matter how many vetoes.

145. The Foreign Minister of Egypt tried to explain away
his statement the connotation of which was that he has
come before this Council in order to ask for support for
Egypt’s continued confrontation with Israel, and not for
the search for peace with Israel by Egypt. He spoke of
resistance to occupation in order to cover up the obvious
interpretation that must have been given by all those who
listened to his remarks. But no one is suggesting or asking
that Egypt should accept any kind of occupation. All that
is being suggested to Egypt is to join hands with Israel ia a
serious, genuine, responsible effort to reach agreement on
peace. What Egypt is in fact resisting is not occupation;
what Egypt is resisting is negotiations with Israel, agreement with Israel, peace with Israel. Perhaps the most
striking aspect of Egyptian policy, reflected again today in
Minister El-Zayyat’s speech, is Egypt’s refusal to free itself
from the mistakes of the past and to remove the obstacles
which have for long barred the way to peace.

140. Before concluding, I should like to say that when the
Foreign Minister of Israel in 1967, after the Council had
adopted resolution 242 (1967), went to Israel and met with
representatives of the Hebrew press, they began criticizing
his acceptance of resolution 242 (1967). The man was
impatient and said-and I quote again from memory, but I
am sure this quotation is right-“Wait
until YOU look with
nostalgia at resolution 242 (1967), when the Security
Council meets again and adopts a resolution of unconditional and immediate withdrawal
from all the lands we
occupy.”

146. This reminds one of the Arabic story of the Sultan
Mahmoud, who one day was in the streets of Ghazna, his
capital, when he saw a poor porter struggling under the
weight of a heavy stone he was carrying on his back, Moved
by pity for his condition, and unable to restrain his
compassion, Mahmoud called out to him in royal corn-

141. If subsequent developments have prevented the
Council from meeting before now to adopt the only
14

rnand: “Drop that stone, porter.” Immediately he was
obeyed; the stone lay there, an obstacle to all who tried to
pass, for years on end. Ultimately, a number of citizens
interceded with the King, asking him to give a command for
the stone to be finally taken away. But Mahmoud,
reflecting in administrative wisdom, felt himself bound to
reply: “That which has been done by command cannot be
rescinded by an equal command, lest the people think that
imperial orders are motivated by whims. Let the stone
remain where it is.” And the stone remained, therefore, for
the rest of Mahmoud’s lifetime; and even when he was
dead, out of respect for royal commands, it was not moved.

meaning of the peoples’ rights. Of such attitudes are born
totalitarian rigimei which invoke abstract political slogans
while trampling to dust the rights and needs of their
citizens.
151. As for the political settlement, the Jordanian Government knows well that when it will be ready to enter with
Israel into serious peace negotiations agreement will be
reached. Indeed Jordan’s gravest problems are not with
Israel. King Hussein expressed this in an interview published
in the Greek daily Elftwos Cosmos on 1 March 1972 in the
following terms:

147. Thus it is with Egypt: the heavy stones, such as
one-sided resolutions, the February 1971 aide-m&moire and
the rejection of negotiations, are still blocking the road.
There is no reason whatever why they should be allowed to
bar movement towards peace. Yet Egypt insists on keeping
them where they are, trying ‘to justify the unjustifiable, and
even increasing and adding to the obstacles that have
accumulated over the years. If there is an objective which
requires immediate attention, it is the removal of these
obstacles on the road to peace.

“From the internal point of view we have no problems.
However, the greatest danger of all threatening Jordan,
especially since 1967, is on the State’s northern border
with Syria and this is why the main part of Jordan’s army
is deployed along the State’s northern frontier.”
152. In the meantime, since that statement, an even
greater threat to Jordan has arisen. Jordan’s very right to
exist as an independent State is being questioned. The
Government responsible for the creation of this threat is
Egypt. The implications of the Egyptian Foreign Minister’s
statements regarding Palestinian rights made in the first
round of the present debate were clear. Egypt was
proposing Jordan’s dismemberment. The folIowing are
some of the headlines on the matter in the Egyptian press.
On 7 June in AZ-Ahmnz:

148. How distant public polemics in the Security Council
frequently
are from the realities of the Middle East
situation has been demonstrated today by the statement of
the representative of Jordan. The real situation between
Israel and Jordan is characterized by conditions which
contain significant and indisputable elements of peaceful
relations. First of all, there is tranquillity on the border,
and quiet and security on the East and West Banks of the
Jordan. There is freedom of movement, practically without
restriction, of people and goods across the river.

“El-Zayyat demands international recognition of the
Palestinian State.”
A headline in Al-Ahram on 9 June:

149. In an interview on 24 June 1973 the Prime Minister
of Jordan, Zeid Al-Rifai, stated:

“Jordan raises a problem regarding El-Zayyat’s proposal
that the United Nations recognize a Palestinian State. The
representative of Jordan requests clarification from
El-Zayyat regarding the proposal.”

“The volume of traffic between Jordan and the
Israeli-occupied West Bank is growing, and the organic
links that naturally existed between the two halves of the
I-Iashemite Kingdom are being restored.”

On 10 June a headline:
“The establishment of a Palestinian State within secure
and recognized boundaries, a step called for in the
Egyptian Foreign Minister’s statement before the Security
Council.”

Hundreds of thousands of persons from Jordan and other
Arab countries travelling via Jordan come annually to the
West Bank and visit Israel. These Arab visitors see for
themselves that in addition to freedom of movement the
Arab inhabitants enjoy freedom of thought and expression
and freedom to obtain full employment on the West Bank,
in Gaza or in Israel. The result has been the elimination of
unemployment,
which for years has plagued the Arab
population, and in particular the refugees in its midst, and a
dramatic rise in the standard of living. Agricultural production has reached unprecedented levels; industry is developing for the first time; cultural life, including Arab
literature and press publications, is flourishing.

153. Jordan’s reaction, as we all know, was swift. Radio
Amman announced on 14 June:
“The Prime Minister of Jordan reported to the Jordanian Cabinet on 14 June regarding the memorandum
that he sent to Arab Foreign Ministers concerning the
meaning of the Egyptian Foreign Minister’s call in the
Security Council to create a Palestinian State in the
occupied West Bank and concerning the dangers inherent
in this call with regard to the Palestinian cause.”

150. Israel has never suggested that this development
disposes of the need for a political solution. However, those
who are not ready to acknowledge the importance of the
freedom of movement, the freedom of thought and
expression, the freedom from want and the freedom from
fear as fundamental rights of men, of cardinal significance
to every human being, do not begin to understand the

Since then the threat to Jordan created by Minister
El-Zayyat’s bombshell has grown dramatically. In an
interview published on 6 July in the pro-Egyptian Beirut
newspaper Al Nahar, President Bourguiba of Tunisia called
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan “an artificial entity”
which historically should be Palestine. He also suggested
!5

i

that King Hussein should Step down and make room for a
Palestinian Republic. When these views were confirmed by
President Bourguiba to the Jordanian Ambassador in Tunis,
Jordan broke relations with Tunisia on 17 July.
154. Yesterday the Government of Libya in a statement
by its Minister of Information expressed its support for the
view that Jordan is an artificial entity. These are Jordan’s
rtial problems. Israel does not regard the Hashemite
Kingdom as an artificial entity. Israel is ready to reach
agreement with Jordan and to live in peace with it within
secure and recognized boundaries. In these circumstances
the appearance of the Jordanian representative in this
debate side by side with *,Egypt’s Foreign Minister is
certainly one of the oddest spectacles witnessed in this
Council. Jordan has suffered time ancl again when it has
been drawn into the web of Egyptian machinations and
designs against Israel. This is what happened to Jordan in
particular and most tragically in 1967. As Ring Hussein
declared in an interview with the Washington Post on 17
April 1972:
“I will never be drawn into anything unless one and one
make two. Any move that Jordan makesin the future SO
long as I am in a position of responsibility, whether
political or military or in any other sphere,will only be
taken after deep study and after we are sureit is the right
course. In 1967 we knew we were walking into disaster.”
155. The present debate was initiated by Egypt for
reasons which the Egyptian Government, though not
everyone in the Egyptian Government, regardedas warranting the convocation of the Security Council. To use
King Hussein’swords: For Jordan to becomeEgypt’s tool
in this debate is not the right course. For Jordan to do
Egypt’s bidding while Egypt calls for its dismemberment
is
a courseof disaster. It would be regrettableif Jordanwere
to suffer againbecauseof Egypt’s folly insteadof ensuring
its own rights and securingits future in peacewith Israel.
156. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof
Jordan in exerciseof his right of reply.
157. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): The contrast between the
statement which I presentedbefore this Council in a spirit
of moderation and positive approach to the solution of
problems and the polemical statement just made by the
Israeli representative to this Council speaksfor itself. The
irrelevancies,misquotations, quotations out of context and
falsifications do not add substance or any spirit of
constructive contribution to the statementby the Israeli
representative. However, the Israeli representativemight as
welI speak of the troubles of Jordan because,as the
chronicle showsvery clearly, it refersto the troubles of the
neighboursof Jordan as well as the troubles of the area.
The troubles of Jordan are part of those troubles of the
area, troubles which were created not by natural history,
not by the natural flow of history and development,but by
the insistenceof Israel since it cameviolently into the area
on pursuing its policy of expansion, of violence, of
pressuringits neighbours, of compoundingthe problemsof
the successivehuman barriers that stood in its way. It
started with the Palestinians, who were dispersedand
turned into uprooted refugeesin the Arab world, andthen

proceededgradually and systematically, phaseafter phase,
through violent military incursionsinto the territory of
Jordan and its neighbours,whether they were in the north
or in the south.
158. If we have troubles in the Arab world, these are
natural. In the last analysis, most of these troubles in
inter-Arab relations focus on the difficulties the Arabs have
in working out a plan for containingthe danger.
159. However, the reference by Israel to the peaceand
tranquillity in the occupied territories is not new. That
referenceis made in a spirit and a tone that have been
rejectedin the various chambersof this great Organization,
the United Nations. That same concept and argument
advancedrepeatedly by the spokesmenof the colonial
presence
hasbeenrejectedby the Charter and by the bodies
of the United Nations stemmingfrom it. The vast membershipof this Organization has come into existenceas a
reaction to, and a revolution against colonialism, The
argumentof the allegedeconomic and other benefits for
the people under occupation has been rejected. It has
becomenot only futile and invalid but alsoshameful.No
nation, no State can in any way justify the occupation of
the territories of other nations, the subjugationof peoples,
under the pretext-false asit is in the caseof the territories
occupiedby Israel-of an allegedbenefit to thesepeoples.
That argumenthasbeenrejectedin this Council and it need
not be repeated.
160. The fact of the matter in the occupied territoriesparticularly in the West Bank of Jordan, about which I
know more-is that -there is a systematic attempt at
absorption,The economic measuresof Israel in the occupied territories cannot be isolated from the implanting of
Israeli-Jewishsettlementsin the heart of the occupied
territories, the confiscation of landsand property over vast
areas,the processof gradualde-Arabization of the occupied
territories. How can one isolate this thrust, this strategy,
from the figures or statistics-false as they may be-of
economicindices.
161. The relationshipbetweenJordan and Egypt hasbeen
drawn into the debate in this Council. That, again, is
irrelevant. Inter-Arab relations are not being discussedin
this Organization. The conceptsand the formulas advanced
by various Arab spokesmenand Governmentswith regard
to the structuring of relationsbetweenthe various parts of
the Arab world or the variousArab peoplesare not brought
before this Council. The point on which Egypt and Jordan
agree, the point on which the vast majority of this
Organization agrees,is the fact that Israel has no right to
occupy
the territories of its neighboursand then to proceed
to absorbthem and advanceas a pretext and a rationale a
misinterpretationof a clear-cut resolution adopted by this
Organizationproviding for its withdrawal in the context of
a peacefulsettlement.The Arab parties-in this caseJordan
andEgypt-have acceptedthat resolution.
162. Wehave insistedthat our approachis a positive one:
we want the elimination of occupation; we want a peaceful
solution; we want peaceand justice to prevail in the area.
We have not been an impediment to that. Neither our
statements,nor the tone of our declarations, nor the
substantivecontributions we have madein this regard-and
16

I’

I am now speaking on behalf of Jordan-have in any way
been an obstacle to peace. It is the statements made before
the Council by the Israeli representative and the policy and
strategy pursued on the ground by his Government that
have been the main block and obstacle to peace, The
dismemberment of Jordan is threatened more by the armies

17

of occupation in its midst than by any verbal formulas. This
is an obvious fact that cannot go unnoticed in this august
and intelligent chamber. I need not make any additional
references to it.
The meeting rose at 1.35 pm.

i

i

1,
[I
,;:

/’
/,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
d-es Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
ct les agences
d6positaires
du monde entier. Informer-vous
aupr&s de votre Iibraire
ou adressez-vous
R : Nations
Unies. Section tfes ventes, New York ou Gen&ve.
KAXC

IIOJIS’IWTh

Iz3AAHLftf

OPrAHlf

CON0

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACXONES

BAL[HM

DE LAS

OD’liEANHEHHhIS

NACIONES

HALWH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en ventn en librerias
y casas distris su librero
o dirijaso
a: Nariones

New

in other

*,
Lltho

in United

Nations,

York

Price:

3U.S.

2.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

73.82o01-May

1979--2,200
