S/PV.7921

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7921st meeting

Wednesday, 12 April 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-09852 (E)
*1709852*

S/PV.7921

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: The stakes in Syria today are
very high; we all know why. In the light of recent
developments, two paths lie before us: one is more
outrages, more destruction and death, stoked by
regional and international divisions or even escalation
and deeper confrontation. That is what all Syrians fear,
and I share their fears.
But there is another path — more serious discussion,
a real de-escalation and ceasefire, and a rallying
behind the only way out of the Syrian nightmare. We
urgently need a consensus among major stakeholders to
support concretely the United Nations-led negotiation
process, and this is the occasion for doing it with the
goal of attaining a package for an orderly, mapped-out,
credible and irreversible agreed political transition as
per resolution 2254 (2015).
Before the events of last week, we had made
modest but incremental progress towards that goal.
The fifth round of intra-Syrian talk in Geneva saw no
breakthroughs — let us be frank — but no breakdown,
either. The parties engaged — truly engaged — on
substance for nine full days, which was no small feat.
The discussions were mostly business-like and correct,
and on the final day they all told me that they were
ready to return to Geneva for a sixth round in May, at
our invitation.
The Government and the opposition discussed
in parallel, in the format of proximity talks, all four
baskets: governance issues, constitutional process
2/20

12/04/2017

issues, election issues and counter-terrorism, security
governance and confidence-building measures. These
discussions were framed by the goal of a political
transition, while preserving — obviously, we do
not want mistakes like those we have made in the
past — the sovereignty, unity, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria within the context of
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), the
statements of the International Syria Support Group
(ISSG), and resolutions 2118 (2013), 2254 (2015),
2268 (2016) and 2336 (2016). Council members are all
familiar with these, since they adopted them.
Yes, the delegations preferred to focus on different
issues and yes, the gaps are still wide, but everyone in
Geneva did engage on all baskets. They also discussed
general principles regarding the character of a future,
post-transition Syrian State. These United Nations
ideas remain living points that can be further developed
as the negotiations progress on the substance of each
of the baskets. One day soon, we hope, all of these
discussions must come together into a package for an
overall negotiation — a real negotiation.
While it was premature to secure common
understanding at this stage, some points became
quite clear or more clear than before, at least to me,
and perhaps to the Syrians, too. For example, I felt a
growing appreciation that the basis of transition must
be legally and constitutionally solid and the journey
and destination well-mapped out and agreed upon. I had
hoped that we could have proceeded in more detail on the
constitutional dimension, which has potential for how
to ensure the constitutional basis of the transition and
how Syrians in transition mode might write and agree a
new constitution. Nevertheless, there was a deepening
of the process, and this should not be underestimated.
But now, let us be frank, this fragile progress is
indeed in grave danger. Already in Geneva, the talks
were overshadowed by an intensification of fighting on
the ground and continued lack of safe, sustained and
unimpeded humanitarian access. I sent formal written
appeals to the Astana ceasefire guarantors the Russian
Federation, Turkey and Iran. I urged all with influence
and leverage to restore the credibility of the ceasefire
and to do more to ensure that the United Nations can
reach 4.7 million people in hard-to-reach and besieged
areas. We are ready to do so.
Displacement also has continued. Over the past
month, more than 6,000 fighters and their families
17-09852

12/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

have been evacuated from Al-Waer to Idlib as part
of local agreements. We have also learned of serious
developments regarding the so-called four towns.
Political statements issued after the Geneva talks
also sent some warning signals. The Government
stated its intention to reconquer the entire territory
of Syria rather than emphasize a ceasefire with real
negotiations. Some opposition voices, on the other
hand, also expressed support for military offensives,
including battles led by internationally prohibited
terrorist groups, or even cast doubt on the need to
return to Geneva and give priority to military solutions.
Then, as representatives from over 70 countries and
international organizations gathered in Brussels in
what was supposed to be and has been an important
meeting regarding the future of Syrian to address
Syrian humanitarian needs and commit to a posttransition reconstruction, which is terribly needed, we
witnessed the horrors inflicted by chemical weapons
on innocent Syrian victims, including children, women
and men, in Khan Shaykun.
This outrage shocked the conscience of the whole
human family. People all over the world also realized
once again that the Syrian calamity is not just an affront
to our shared values, but that it can affect the lives of
citizens of any land, particularly if chemical weapons
are used and war crimes, terrorism, mass displacement
and unending war are accepted as something that we
have to live with. The Syrians cannot live with it and
neither can we, wherever we are.
A few days later, the United States targeted
Al-Shayrat air base with a strike of 59 Tomahawk
missiles. Under-Secretary-General Feltman briefed
the Council on that extremely serious development on
Friday (see S/PV.7919). Since then, we have seen more
fighting and violence, with new claims of the use of
cluster munitions in inhabited areas, barrel bombs and
incendiary weapons, including in close proximity to
Khan Shaykhun itself.
The Secretary-General has made clear his own
position. He is appalled by the chemical weapons
attack in Khan Shaykhun and calls for accountability
for such crimes. In the aftermath of the United States
strike, he is mindful of the risk of escalation and
appeals for restraint. He calls for for reinstating a
nationwide ceasefire and for a refocus on the need for
a political solution, which is also essential in the fight
against terrorism.

S/PV.7921

This is a time for clear thinking, strategy,
imagination and cooperation. on the ground. Those who
do not want a negotiated a political settlement — we
call them spoilers, as Council members know — are
stopping at nothing to undermine the political process.
They want us to fall into their trap. We must not allow
that to happen. We must all resolve that the time
has come for the intra-Syrian talks to move beyond
preparatory discussions and into the real heart of the
matter, across all four baskets, in order to secure a
meaningful negotiated transition package.
The United Nations is ready to do its part. I have
consulted with the Secretary-General, and I personally
remain at my post and will continue to serve, especially
in view of the current emergency. I am ready to
reconvene talks in May, and the United Nations is ready
to offer a real, substantive starting point for discussion
and negotiations among the Syrians. But let us see a
few things sorted out first, if we can.
As we speak, United States Secretary of State
Tillerson is in Moscow to meet with the Russian
Government. We welcome that direct, high-level
diplomatic engagement at this crucial moment between
the United States and Russia. I was in Moscow myself
just before the last round and in Washington, D.C.,
yesterday. I participated on behalf of the United
Nations in the trilateral encounter with the United
States and Russia during the Geneva talks. Those
two countries, the co-chairs of the ISSG, have serious
differences — we know it — but also common interests
and, indeed, responsibilities. They must find a way to
work together in order to stabilize the situation in a
deliberate, realistic and concerted way in support of the
political process. Indeed, the Council, the region, and
the ISSG members need to unite behind one process of
mediation in Geneva.
We also need the ceasefire guarantors to step up
and deliver now. Important countries have assumed the
responsibility as guarantors. Those guarantees are being
put to a severe test. Next week, the guarantors will meet
in Tehran for a working-level meeting before a higherlevel meeting in Astana planned for early May. We urge
them to work towards renewing the ceasefire and on
confidence-building measures linked to the ceasefire,
along with a continued effort to fight terrorism. Astana
must bring forth Geneva and vice versa. That is why
the United Nations will be in Tehran and Astana, and
provide whatever technical support it can to what we
consider a very important step.

17-098523/20

S/PV.7921

The situation in the Middle East

It has been said so many times. We have said it
together so many times, but I will say it again: there
can only be a political solution to that bloody conflict.
There is no military solution despite what some try
or believe. That is what I hear from Syrians from all
walks of life. That is what we have been told from those
who participated in the United Nations Civil Society
Support Room and by the Women’s Advisory Board.
That is the voice of the Syrians. That is what members
of the Council have long agreed upon. Let us therefore
view this moment of Crisis — and it is a moment of
Crisis — as a watershed and an opportunity, perhaps,
for a new level of seriousness in the search for a
political solution.
The President: I thank Mr. De Mistura for his
briefing, and we greatly appreciate his commitment to
and leadership on this issue.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank Staffan de Mistura for his briefing and his
unrelenting efforts to secure a political solution to the
conflict in Syria. He has our continued full support.
Despite his efforts and those of the Security
Council and the international community, the people
of Syria have been denied a political solution for more
than six years. They have suffered over six years of
ever-increasing and ever-escalating barbarity, failed
ceasefires and full storms. For more than six years, the
Council has been held to ransom by Russia’s shameless
support for the Al-Assad regime — support, which the
regime is flaunting. Throughout that time, we have met
in this Chamber to discuss atrocity after atrocity, while
hoping that Al-Assad had finally reached the depth of
his cruelty and would finally see the need for dialogue.
Yet every time without fail he just plunged to new lows.
Chemical weapons scientists in the United Kingdom
have analysed samples obtained from Khan Shaykhun.
Those have tested positive for the nerve agent sarin or
a sarin-like substance. The United Kingdom therefore
shares the United States assessment that it is highly
likely that the regime was responsible for a sarin
attack on Khan Shaykhun on 4 April. That sickening
use of chemical weapons — weapons that Al-Assad
had agreed in 2013 to destroy — is just the latest in a
long list of abhorrent attacks. With that attack, he has
made clear that he is not committed to a ceasefire or the
Astana process, thereby ruining Russia’s credibility.
4/20

12/04/2017

As we mourn the victims of the chemical attack on
Khan Shaykhun, we must not forget the 13.5 million
people who, thanks to Al-Assad, are in urgent need of
humanitarian assistance and a long overdue peace. It is
clear today as it has been for some time that there can
be no place for Al-Assad in Syria’s future.
There is however a way to end the nightmare that
the Syrian people continue to suffer. The 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254
(2015), which we unanimously adopted, chart the way
to peace in Syria. We have a Special Representative in
Staffan de Mistura who is rightly determined to keep
the political process alive and pursue a renewed United
Nations-facilitated effort. We have in our position
prepared to take a pragmatic approach to discussions,
and we have millions upon millions of Syrians inside
and outside the country crying out for long overdue
peace. Yet we are still here in this Chamber with the
regime showing no interest in peace, encouraged by
Russia’s support in the Council to continue dropping
bombs and using chemical weapons.
Russia has repeatedly abused its use of the veto
to protect the regime and defend its use of chemical
weapons. What has Russia received in return for its
use of the veto seven times during six years? Let me
tell everyone. Russia’s initiative in 2013 to dismantle
Syria’s chemical weapons has been exposed as a
shambles. Russian pride in the Astana process has been
turned into humiliation, and Russia’s credibility and
reputation throughout the world have been poisoned
by its toxic association with Al-Assad. It has chosen
to side with a murderous barbaric criminal rather than
with its international peers. It has chosen the wrong
side of history. However, it is not too late for Russia to
change course. It is not too late for Russia to fulfil its
responsibilities as a permanent member of the Security
Council. It is not too late for Russia to use finally its
influence over the regime to end the conflict.
Those efforts must begin meaningfully with
attempts to end the use of chemical weapons and
barrel bombs — real efforts to bring about a ceasefire
and ensure proper humanitarian access. In doing so,
Russia can establish the space needed for a renewed
push on the physical process that leads to that political
transition to a Government that represents all Syrians.
Should it do so and choose that path, we stand ready
to work with Russia to preserve Syrian institutions
through the political transition. We Stand ready to find
ways of cooperating with Russia to counter Da’esh
17-09852

12/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

and other international terrorist threats. We stand
ready to engage with Russia as a constructive partner
on the Council. While Al-Assad offers Russia only
shame and humiliation, we offer Russia something
else — the chance once again to work with the
international community as a credible member.
Finally, the Syrian people have waited for more than
six years. Hundreds of thousands have died. Countless
hospitals, schools and homes have been destroyed. Now
more than ever, the international community must come
together to end that senseless conflict. That is why we
stand shoulder to shoulder with the United States and
its decision to take military action against the Sharyat
airfield from where last week’s attacks were launched.
We stand shoulder to shoulder with our allies from the
Group of Seven and all those who are committed to
deter the future use of chemical weapons and finally
bring peace to Syria.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We
meet once again to discuss a crisis that has resulted in
hundreds of thousands of innocent victims, displaced
millions of families and contributed to establishing a
safe haven for tens of thousands of mercenaries and
terrorists whose presence is a threat to the region and
the world. Despite the fact that Syria’s humanitarian and
security disaster and the Syrian conflict are among the
top priorities of the media, politicians and, for several
long years, the Security Council’s agenda, and while we
have repeated the same condemnations and expressions
of compassion countless times, that disaster continues
unabated and without mercy. As the years go by, the
crisis only deepens and becomes increasingly complex
to such an extent that a political situation, which should
have been the definitive solution, has now become only
a first step to try to contain the disastrous repercussions
that the Syrians and the people of other countries in
the region continue and will continue to suffer for
many years.
I deplore the fact that there have been so many
times throughout all these years when we thought that
a political solution was within reach, that the outline
of a settlement was clear in our minds and in the
international documents we produced, that there was
a consensus expressed in those documents. Now, once
again, we are faced with a another conundrum, another
breakdown that is evidence of a new international and
regional polarization. Instead of managing to bring
the various Syrian parties together, the international
community has forced them to dig in their heels to defend

S/PV.7921

false hopes of achieving a victory that is impossible to
achieve. The march to such an illusory victory will only
increase the suffering of the Syrian people.
We have issued many warnings about how serious
it is to accept this polarization both within and outside
the Security Council. I have said more than once that
this regional and international rivalry will lead only to
more deaths. Failure to interfere or to support one of the
parties in the Syrian conflict does not mean that one is
abdicating one’s responsibilities. Quite the country, it
simply means that there will be no winner in this crisis
and that as long as the crisis continues the suffering of
our Syrian brothers and sisters will also continue.
We have sought to reach an agreement in the
Council and outside it to put an end to a proxy war that
threatens the future of everyone. I would like to call once
again on the various international actors, particularly
the joint chairmanship of the International Syria
Support Group, Russia and the United States, to work
as quickly as possible to reach a political agreement. I
would also like to underscore that cooperation is best
way to counter those who are trying to undermine the
possibility of reaching a political settlement.
Those who exploit the vacuum created by
polarization are trying to undermine all attempts to
end the crisis. That is why I would like to call on all
the Syrian parties, regardless of their orientation, to
act responsibly and engage in serious and objective
negotiations in good faith and without preconditions
for the future of the country under the auspices of
Special Envoy De Mistura. I call on them to set aside
their narrow interests and ask them to understand that,
if they do not do so, they and the Syrian people will be
the losers in this conflict.
Once again, I recall that the interests of the
Syrian people and of these various parties will not be
served by acting in the interests of the parties’ foreign
sponsors; that will lead only to more destruction and
further deepen the disaster in Syria, a country that has
made significant contributions to a Muslim, Arab and
international culture. I am not exaggerating when I say
that achieving an agreement based on the interests of
the Syrian people will force everyone to accept the will
of the Syrian people.
Due to the gravity of Syria’s experience and
the Security Council’s inability to agree to open an
investigation into the Khan Shaykhun events, I reiterate
our call to move forward and investigate these events in

17-098525/20

S/PV.7921

The situation in the Middle East

a clear, neutral and independent manner. I would like
to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. De Mistura, for his efforts, and reiterate that Egypt
will spare no efforts in supporting his work pursuant
to resolution 2254 (2015) and the road map that has
been adopted.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): A week
ago, the regime perpetrated another chemical-weapons
attack. At least 86 people died from asphyxiation near
Idlib; hundreds were injured. The symptoms observed,
as well as the dramatic number of deaths, are indicative
of the use of a neurotoxic agent, probably a mixture
based on sarin. The decision of the United States to
strike the Al-Shayrat air base was a response to the
gravity of the act and the threat. It sent the Syrian
regime a message it should have heard long ago — its
time of impunity has now passed.
Together with the United States and the United
Kingdom, France has proposed a draft resolution which
will be put to a vote in the Security Council shortly. Its
simple and balanced text condemns the 4 April attack and
reaffirms United Nations support for the investigation
of the Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
into the circumstances of this attack and the nature of
the substance used. It is a matter of bringing the Council
together around a fundamental objective: the protection
of the international non-proliferation regime, which has
been flouted in Syria, and the fight against the impunity
of the perpetrators of chemical attacks.
Beyond the tragedy of Khan Shaykhun, all of
Syria offers a landscape of devastation and desolation
today. The cessation of hostilities, as guaranteed by
the 30 December agreement and the Astana process,
no longer exists. The regime’s supporters never acted
seriously to respect it. The humanitarian situation is
deteriorating day by day. Throughout the country, the
regime is tightening its grip around civilian populations
by refusing to grant the authorizations needed to carry
out the monthly plan of humanitarian convoys. Let us
not deceive ourselves. We are seeing here a deliberate
policy of obstruction and siege designed to compel
opponents to surrender and people to flee, in violation
of Security Council resolutions and the fundamental
principles of international humanitarian law.
The Syrian regime’s allies are responsible for
applying all appropriate pressure to force the regime
to finally live up to its obligations. In particular,
Russia, as the guarantor of the regime of cessation of
6/20

12/04/2017

hostilities announced last December, needs to turn its
commitments into action. The immediate urgency must
be to force the Syrian regime to finally respect the
cessation of hostilities and finally provide access to the
necessary humanitarian assistance to all those in need.
Furthermore, the cessation-of-hostilities system
needs to be completely revised. We have to avoid the
flaws of the previous versions and put in place a more
inclusive, coherent, and robust monitoring mechanism.
Since last September, France has called for the
establishment of such a mechanism for monitoring the
cessation of hostilities. Some deny the evidence, but
no matter what happens, we can no longer act as if the
4 April attack had not taken place. We can no longer
act as if this track record of desolation and chaos is
not primarily the track record of the Bashar Al-Assad
regime. The attack on Khan Shaykhun is just a reminder
of a sinister reality about which France, since August
2013, has never ceased to alert the members of the
Security Council.
We must come to an understanding today about the
obvious: a political solution leading to a real transition
is now more urgent and necessary than ever. As long
as the regime keeps itself in power through terror and
destruction, with the complicity of its supporters, there
will never be peace and reconstruction in Syria. The
millions of refugees forced onto roads of exile will
have no hope of returning to their homes nor will they
ever overcome a terrorist threat that will continue to
feed on the violence and desolation that gave rise to
it and made it prosper in the first place. The absolute
urgency, the priority of the priorities, is therefore the
resumption of the negotiations to craft — together — a
political solution.
It is therefore incumbent on all of us to exert the
necessary pressure on the leading stakeholders so that
they can engage in good faith negotiations without
delay. In that connection, France renews its fullest
support and confidence in Special Envoy De Mistura,
whose commitment is exemplary. We commend his
announcement of resolutionesumed negotiations under
the auspices of the United Nations in mid-May. France
supports the start of the next cycle of negotiations on an
accelerated timeline with a view to reaching a speedy
agreement on a political transition based on the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution
2254 (2015). We must all rise above our political
choices, national interests and moral considerations,
17-09852

12/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

and shoulder our responsibilities in order to support
this solution. That is an imperative that concerns our
collective security. It is at the heart of our mandate
and a responsibility shared by all members of the
Security Council.
In conclusion, recent developments have realigned
the situation and highlighted the urgency of the need
for a political transition in Syria. We hope that the
recent developments have created the conditions for
re-engagement of the leading stakeholders with a view
to a political solution. Given the tragedy in Syria,
which continues to spiral downwards into the deepest
of abysses, we are more bound to our duty than ever.
We are also faced with the opportunity of injecting new,
decisive life into a political solution. Let us make sure
that we seize the opportunity. This is a time of truth.
Let us make sure that we shoulder our responsibilities
at this historical moment.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Special Envoy for Syria De Mistura and his
whole team for their tireless work and determination
to move forward in spite of all the difficulties faced.
We are also very happy to hear that he will continue
moving forward in the face of such difficulties. We
fully trust Mr. De Mistura and the efforts of SecretaryGeneral Guterres to continue the search for a political
solution to the crisis in Syria.
Neither Mr. De Mistura nor Secretary-General
Guterres is the main actor in this tragedy. The primary
responsibility in this situation falls on Syrians — the
Government, the opposition, civil society and religious
leaders. It is up to them to assume responsibility for
determining their own futures. There is only one way
to do that — sitting down and engaging in discussions.
Mr. De Mistura has been working specifically on that
task, but he is not a person who can make decisions on
behalf of the Syrian people. They have to make those
decisions themselves.
Another subsidiary responsibility falls on thirdparty States. They ought to stop interfering in the
Syrian conflict in order to advance their own interests.
Another responsibility that is no less important falls on

S/PV.7921

the Security Council. The Security Council must exert
pressure and seek to persuade the parties to continue
negotiating. We should take advantage of the current
momentum, which started in December 2016 with the
most recent cessation of hostilities and continued with
the Astana process and the ceasefire mechanism.
The events of last week strengthen our conviction
that there is no possibility of a military solution to the
conflict. Only through a political process mediated by
the United Nations and agreed to by the Syrians can we
find a solution. We would like to reiterate our strongest
condemnation of the continued use of chemical weapons
in Syria. That applies to last week’s attack and all others.
An impartial, independent investigation is required to
identify who is responsible for this crime and to hold
them accountable. We reiterate our appeal to stay calm
and refrain from any unilateral action that might lead
to an escalation of tensions. The Syrian conflict should
be dealt with in a multilateral framework.
We are aware that the absence of a negotiated
settlement has only one victim: the Syrian people — those
in the street, men, women, children and the elderly. Our
collective responsibility is to them.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to start by thanking the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy for Syria, Mr. Steffan de Mistura, for his tireless
efforts in the service of pursuing peace in Syria.
I should also like to acknowledge the spirit of
responsibility shown by the Syrian actors during the
fifth round of discussions, held in Geneva from 23 to
31 March.
The fact that such discussions have been held as
planned, without interruption or abandonment, reflects
the commitment and determination of participants
to recognize the complexity of such substantive
agenda items, such as a political transition, territorial
integrity, the fight against terrorism and measures to
restore confidence, as well as governance, security and
constitutional reform.
The Senegalese delegation expresses the hope that
this spirit of sacrifice and persistence, which is really
necessary, must continue to impel all parties so that a
definitive solution can be reached to the crisis Syrian

17-098527/20

S/PV.7921

The situation in the Middle East

conflict, which has lasted too long. We reiterate our
hope that the cessation of hostilities throughout the
Syrian territory will be sustained and consolidated,
notably in the framework of the Trilateral Ceasefire
Monitoring Mechanism in Astana. We welcome the
efforts of the Mechanism’s princapl actors: the Russian
Federation, Turkey and Iran. It is important that this
truce translate into a continued improvement of the
humanitarian situation on the ground. My delegation
believes that the Astana process should reinforce the
political process.
My delegation welcomes the conference on Syria,
convened in Brussels on 4 and 5 April at the intiative
of the European Union and in collaboration with the
United Nations, which registered pledges of $6 billion
for 2017 to help tackle the daunting challenges facing
Syria, where in six years of conflict the level of
development has declined by four decades.
We have said on many occasions that the crisis
currently faced by Syria is a multidimensional one; it
has political, humanitarian and security aspects, and
touches on the issue of non-proliferation. With respect
to the security aspect, the fight against terrorism — in
particular against Da’esh and the former Al-Nusrah
Front — is an absolute priority for us. That is why
we reiterate the need to implement a comprehensive
strategy that respects international humanitarian law
and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
With respect to non-proliferation, I unreservedly
condemn — as I did last week — the recent use of
chemicals as weapons in Syria. In the same vein,
Senegal once again encourages the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, through its Factfinding Mission, to gather and study, with all the required
professionalism, data from all available sources so as to
attribute responsibility for the chemical weapons attack
that we saw in Khan Shaykhun. We are hopeful that our
Council will find itself in the midst of this essential
question of accountability, following this vile act,
which affected many civilians — including children.
My delegation, as it was compelled to do here five
days ago (see S/PV.7915), cannot stress enough the
imperative of a peaceful settlement of the dispute in
order to face the challenges that have been repeatedly
referred to, including chemicals weapons, the
proliferation of terrorist groups and, even more serious,
an unprecedented humanitarian catastrophe. Senegal
is convinced that only a negotiated political solution,
8/20

12/04/2017

based on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
and resolution 2254 (2015), will enable us to reach a
lasting solution to this conflict. We therefore place great
hope in the meeting between the Secretary of State of
the United States of America, Mr. Tillerson, and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
Mr. Lavrov.
Senegal reiterates its calls on the Security Council,
the most influential countries, and in particular the
International Syria Support Group and its co-presidents,
the Russian Federation and the United States of
America, to continue to provide the necessary support
to the efforts of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. De Mistura.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Senegal’s
fullest support for Mr. De Mistura’s tireless efforts,
especially since he has just confirmed his intention to
convene the next round of talks in May.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura, for his extensive
briefing, and commend his efforts to keep the political
process moving forward. The first round of intra-Syrian
talks in Geneva demonstrated the willingness of all
sides to talk seriously with both the Government and
opposition groups, undertaking discussions without a
major pause or suspension. Mr. De Mistura described
for us today that there has been discussion on key
substantive issues while pointing out the need to move
beyond the preparatory stages.
Regrettably, the relatively positive news from
Geneva is outweighed by grim news on the ground.
The alleged use of chemical weapons last week is an
affront to humanity and a blatant violation of Security
Council resolutions. The Council must reaffirm its
determination to urgently address this alleged use of
chemical weapons. At the same time, we must not lose
sight of the humanitarian situation as a whole. Even
with a monthly meeting on the humanitarian situation,
it is important that we emphasize it here in the context
of the political process as well. We were shocked by
the use of chemical weapons; but we have also been
shocked for many months by the enormous number
of besieged people, now at 644,000 according to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Japan’s position is clear. We will continue our
assistance to all Syrian people in need. This means not
simply contributing funds, but taking the responsibility
to ensure that aid reaches the people who need it. For
17-09852

12/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

this reason, our attention turns again to the repeated
warnings of the United Nations that bureaucratic
impediments are the main obstacles to humanitarian
access. We have repeatedly urged the Syrian
Government, which bears primary responsibility for
this obstructed access, to simplify procedures. Japan
is deeply disappointed that even on occasions when the
Syrian Government has responded, we have not seen
any significant change. We will continue to engage
closely with other relevant parties to improve access,
but we cannot fully succeed without the cooperation of
the Syrian Government.
Last year, Mr. De Mistura often used the metaphor
of a three-legged stool for Syria. The first leg, the
political process, seems more steady after the recent
Geneva talks, and we strongly support United Nations
efforts there. The second leg, the ceasefire, is starting
to wobble with news about fighting. Japan supports
efforts by the three guarantors of the Astana process,
the only functioning ceasefire mechanism at the
present time. We are also encouraged that Mr. De
Mistura is extending support to Astana. The third leg,
humanitarian access, seems to be very unstable. We
need to see major improvements to send a clear message
to the Syrian people that they have not been abandoned.
The facts are clear. The International Syria
Support Group is working despite some confrontations.
United Nations mediation is making some progress.
Humanitarian bodies are doing their utmost under
difficult circumstances. The Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the Joint
Investigative Mechanism are ready to implement their
mandates. But what about the Security Council? We
must prove that this institution is also serious about
finding a solution to this crisis. Proof is long overdue.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the convening of today’s open meeting and
thanks the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. De Mistura, for his briefing.
The Syrian conflict has been going on for six years
now, resulting in considerable civilian casualties and
destruction of the State. China is deeply sympathetic to
the suffering endured by the Syrian people and strongly
appeals to all Syrian parties to proceed with the future
of the country and the welfare of its people in mind, and
to find an appropriate solution to the conflict as soon as
possible through dialogue and consultation. Recently,
the relevant parties made joint diplomatic efforts,

S/PV.7921

launched the Astana talks on Syria, maintained the
overall momentum of the Syrian ceasefire and created
the conditions to resume the Geneva talks. China hopes
that the Astana talks continue to play an important role
in maintaining the ceasefire and advancing the Geneva
talks to achieve progress.
A political solution is the only way out of the
Syrian impasse. Military means will not solve the
problem. In the last round of Geneva talks, all Syrian
parties negotiated political governance; constitutional
issues, elections, counter-terrorism, security and
confidence-building measures. That gave expression to
their attitude towards ownership and participation and
enabled encouraging progress in the political process
in Syria.
In the current situation, all relevant parties should
continue diplomatic efforts, prevent the deterioration of
the situation in Syria, continue to support the United
Nations as the main channel for good offices and
support the work of Special Envoy Mr. De Mistura. The
Security Council should prioritize the interests of Syria
and its people and play its constructive role in advancing
the Syrian political process. China appeals to all Syrian
parties to continue to maintain the ceasefire, follow the
Syrian-owned and Syrian-led principle to gradually
develop a comprehensive and durable solution through
dialogue and negotiation that is acceptable to all.
The fight against terrorism is an important and
pressing issue in the solution to the Syrian issue. The
counter-terrorism situation in some parts of Syria
has taken on new complexities in recent times. The
international community should be highly vigilant
about related developments, strengthen coordination
and cooperation, unify standards and combat all
terrorist organizations listed by the Security Council.
China welcomes the Brussels international conference
on Syria that was convened recently. China would like
to work with the international community and continue
to play a positive and constructive role in advancing the
political solution to the Syrian issue and in easing the
humanitarian situation in the country so as to advance
a comprehensive, just and appropriate solution to the
Syrian issue as soon as possible.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I deeply thank Mr. Staffan
de Mistura for his efforts. We stand fully behind him,
the Secretary-General and the political solution, for
which he tirelessly strives and which can be the only
way forward.

17-098529/20

S/PV.7921

The situation in the Middle East

When we spoke in the Chamber last week (see
S/PV.7919), on several occasions we expressed our
outrage over the atrocity in Khan Shaykhun, near
Idlib. But let us not forget that, every day, the Syrian
people continue to suffer the Syrian people continue to
suffer the brutality of war in all its forms. Despite the
horrifying images and their gruesome description in the
world media, heroic efforts by humanitarian workers
and endless discussions in the Security Council over
the years, the — now routine — brutality has continued
unabated. It is high time to end the war.
I believe that we have reached a critical moment. In
order to move forward, Sweden calls upon the Council
and the wider membership present in this room to
redouble efforts on three or four fronts. First, we must
reinvigorate the political process; secondly, revitalize
the ceasefire, and, thirdly, grant full humanitarian
access. I would like to add a fourth point and that is
that the Council must fully shoulder its responsibilities.
First, we all know that a political solution is the only
way to end the Syrian tragedy, which has now lasted over
six years. The shared objective remains a negotiated
transitional political process, in line with resolution
2254 (2015). We therefore welcome the conclusion of
the fifth round of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva. The next
round of talks should resume as soon as circumstances
allow in mid-May. We offer our wholehearted support
to the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy and his
leadership, including his efforts to ensure the full and
effective participation of women and civil society in
the political process. While we welcome the progress
from the talks and that both parties have engaged on
all 3+1 baskets, we still feel that they need to do more.
In the next round, the Syrian Government’s delegation
needs to seriously, meaningfully and concretely engage
on all baskets. The opposition delegation has engaged
constructively and maturely, but needs to continue
efforts to maintain unity.
Secondly, over the past couple of weeks we have
witnessed an intensification of fighting. The ceasefire
developed through the Astana process is increasingly
threatened. The United Nations-led political process
will be seriously at risk without an effective nationwide
ceasefire. We therefore urge the guarantors of the
ceasefire agreement to live up to their commitments
from Astana and to step up their efforts, including
towards a more effective monitoring mechanism. We
call upon all actors present here today with influence
10/20

12/04/2017

over the parties to help put an end to violations and
reduce violence.
Thirdly, we all urgently need to do more to increase
humanitarian access. Convoy deliveries during the last
week of March shows that access to besieged and hardto-reach areas is possible when there is a will. We call
on the Syrian authorities here today to simplify the
approval process, as requested by the United Nations
We urgently need a systematic shift to sustained and
unhindered humanitarian access. United Nations aid
convoys are ready to assist 300,000 people every week
who are now suffering in horrendous conditions in
hard-to-reach and besieged areas. They must be given
the administrative approval to do so.
With regard to the repugnant attack in Khan
Shaykhun on 4 April, we regret that the Council has
so far not been able to agree on a strong resolution.
There must be a rapid, full and impartial investigation
to confirm the use of chemical weapons and those
responsible for that horrendous attack must be held to
account. We will continue to pursue efforts to that end.
Unspeakable atrocities and crimes against humanity
have been committed during the conflict. While long
overdue, we must now do our utmost to end the war in
Syria. We all agree on the need for a sustainable political
solution. Let us therefore engage seriously to make it
happen. This is a shared responsibility, particularly and
not least for the Security Council.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation
expresses appreciation to Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura for his update and commend him on his
determined spirit, commitment and leadership. We also
welcome our colleague, Ambassador of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the United Nations, Mr. Bashar Ja’afari.
My delegation would like to make the following
observations and recommendations. With regard to
the chemical weapons situation, the developments of
the past week have a direct bearing on the political
track. We therefore call on all sides to work towards
a compromise so that the political process can move
forward. We welcome and support the multifaceted
diplomacy being conducted by Mr. De Mistura. We
note the efforts made by the United Nations and Mr. De
Mistura to settle the Syrian conflict and especially to
encourage the participation of almost all major Syrian
opposition groups in the fifth round of the Geneva talks.
That direction alone will lead to a peaceful solution
and end the conflict in Syria. We are optimistic that
17-09852

12/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

at the fifth round of talks in Geneva, held from 23 to
31 March, this time the negotiators were able to move
from discussing formal and procedural issues to the
substantive and political aspects of future peace talks.
We believe that relieving the political situation will
enhance our political objectives.
The crisis in Syria is still unfolding and has an impact
on the entire region. Kazakhstan therefore believes that
the regional approach, involving neighbouring countries
should be considered to prevent further deterioration.
In that regard, my country calls on all countries in the
Middle East and the Gulf region to join the guarantor
countries in doing everything possible to ensure that
the ceasefire regime is respected and observed by all
parties and to support the guarantors.
The Astana process is important for achieving
confidence-building measures and we call on all parties
to work together to achieve a political settlement.
Kazakhstan is deeply concerned about the situation
surrounding the use of chemical weapons in Syrian.
For the sake of the future of the Syrian people, Astana
calls on all members of the Security Council to remain
as united as when they adopted resolution 2336 (2016)
last December, and demonstrate the same solidarity in
moving towards a political settlement, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), adopted in November 2015.
Kazakhstan welcomes the Declaration of the
28th Summit of the League of Arab States, which is
aimed at contributing to a peaceful resolution of the
Syrian crisis and acknowledges the enormous efforts
of the League. We are grateful to the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, and His Majesty King Abdullah II
in particular, for hosting 1.3 million Syrian refugees,
and we call on the international community to support
Jordan and the other countries that have accepted
Syrian refugees.
Kazakhstan urges all sides to ensure as
soon as possible that the United Nations and its
implementing partners have unrestricted access,
without preconditions, to Syria’s besieged areas. It is
essential that humanitarian assistance be able to reach
people promptly if they are to receive medical care and
whatever they need to survive.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his
briefing on the outcome of the latest round of talks
in Geneva, and to take this opportunity to once again
express our full support for his tireless and dedicated

S/PV.7921

diplomatic efforts to help bring an end to the Syrian
crisis. We appreciate his wisdom and leadership in
facilitating the intra-Syrian talks, and we take note of
the limited but incremental progress that has been made
in the latest rounds, which have enabled the parties to
once again sit in the same room and start engaging
substantively on the four basket issues involved in a
possible settlement of the Syrian crisis.
It is clear that we are meeting today against a
backdrop of the reports of the use of chemical weapons
on 4 April, which has shocked and appalled all of us here
and indeed the whole world. We hope that the alleged
incident will not have a serious impact on the political
track. The issue now is how, while doing what we
must to assure accountability, we can return to honest
pursuit of the noble goal of making progress towards a
peaceful settlement and thereby ending the suffering of
the Syrian people, who have endured so much for the
past seven years. We believe that the Foreign Ministers
of the Group of Seven (G-7) struck the right note on
11 April in their joint communiqué from Lucca, Italy,
when they said that
“[W]e believe that there is an opportunity to bring
this tragic crisis to an end and we hope that all
major partners will live up to their international
responsibilities and seize this opportunity.”
It was even more encouraging to hear them say that
if the situation were conducive and others were also
willing to meet their obligations, the Group would be
prepared to do its part by “pursuing a political settlement
and ultimately contributing to the costs of stabilization
and reconstruction”. As we have said time and again,
only a comprehensive political solution can enable that
objective to be realized. That is why we must fully
support the intra-Syrian talks and the efforts of Special
Envoy de Mistura. Once again in that connection, the
message of solidarity that came out of the high-level
Brussels Conference on support to Syria and the region
was indeed timely, and an important ingredient in the
creation of a supporting environment for the Geneva
talks under the auspices of the United Nations.
Now is the time for the Council to do everything
possible to make sure that the peace talks make
tangible progress. In that regard, it is absolutely vital
that those who have influence on the parties exercise
the leverage on them needed to ensure that they
seriously and collectively engage in the talks with a
clear commitment to ending the conflict. It has become

17-0985211/20

S/PV.7921

The situation in the Middle East

very clear that without the involvement and cooperation
of the major Powers and the countries of the region,
nothing will move forward. It is with that in mind that
we, like Special Envoy de Mistura, look forward to the
outcome of the meeting between the Foreign Ministers
of the United States and Russia in Moscow today.
We have of course been following the developments
on the ground and are deeply disturbed by the continued
fighting across many parts of Syria. The military
approach should not be allowed to have the upper hand.
We believe that the role of the guarantors is critical to
ending the violations of the ceasefire and consolidating
the Astana process. We very much hope that the next
Astana talks, which are expected to take place next
month, will be instrumental in that regard. Without full
implementation of the ceasefire the prospects for any
progress in the intra-Syrian talks will be doomed.
Lastly, what we have understood in the course of
the past three months or so on the Council is that the
views on a number of important issues concerning the
crisis in Syria do converge. Everybody agrees that there
is no alternative to a political solution. Everybody also
agrees that it is essential to fight terrorism and violent
extremism in Syria. We all agree on the importance
of ensuring safe and unhindered humanitarian
access. Furthermore, everybody agrees that the use of
chemical weapons is totally unacceptable and that any
party, State or non-State, found guilty of such crimes
must be held accountable. We should therefore really
capitalize on what unites us in order to ensure progress
on finding a lasting political settlement of the Syrian
crisis and realizing the hope expressed in Lucca by the
G-7 Foreign Ministers. We know that this is easier said
than done, but if the necessary political will is there,
we do not believe that it is too difficult to overcome the
current paralysis and achieve a breakthrough.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. De Mistura for his briefing.
Russia has been following the March round of
the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva very closely and
encouraging all the participants to work constructively
to arrive at mutually acceptable decisions and
compromises regarding a peaceful settlement. In
that context, we have been in active contact with the
Syrian authorities and with a broad cross-section of
the opposition.
We support Mr. De Mistura’s efforts and believe
that he will enhance them. The fact that there have been
12/20

12/04/2017

developments in the Geneva process, and that the sides
have launched parallel conversations on all four of the
agreed-on discussion baskets on the agenda and have
begun studying the conceptual proposals of Mr. De
Mistura’s mediation can be considered an achievement.
We expect the Geneva process to continue steadily.
There should be no prolonged pauses. We already went
through that negative experience in 2016. I would like
to say to Mr. De Mistura that rather than give up, he
should continue his painstaking work with the Syrian
delegations, actively encouraging them to conduct
dialogue and seek common denominators.
However, the statement by Mr. Rycroft of the
United Kingdom showed that he is thinking only about
how to make Mr. De Mistura’s task more difficult, stop
the political process developing and bring confrontation
and hostility to the Security Council. But the fact of the
matter — and many in the United Nations are already
aware of it — is that he is afraid. He has been losing sleep
over the possibility that we could be working together
with the United States. He is afraid of that. He is doing
everything he can to undermine that cooperation. That
is why he should look at me. He should not look away.
Why is he looking away? This is precisely why he said
nothing today about the political process. He did not
listen to Mr. De Mistura’s briefing, and that was on
purpose. He makes insulting demands of the guarantors
of the Astana process, but what have he and his allies
done to advance the ceasefire? In London and Paris
they are receiving opposition groups — illegal armed
groups. They were suddenly afraid that things were
moving towards peace and a political settlement. They
serve the interests of armed groups, many of which
have been murdering Christians and other minorities in
the Middle East. They are committing acts of terror in
churches on Palm Sunday. That is who they care about.
They jabe completely lost his way with their anti-regime
notions. What do they think they are doing?
So it turns out that for them, regime change is more
important than the positions of the majority of the States
Members of the United Nations. Mr. Rycroft was not
speaking about the item on our agenda today. He has
insulted Syria, Iran, Turkey and other States. I would
ask you, Madam President, to ensure that the rules
of procedure for this meeting are respected, because
that is your job when some members are irresponsibly
resorting to insulting slang in the Security Council. He
should not dare to insult Russia again.
17-09852

12/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

We are nevertheless very grateful to Mr. De Mistura
for his work. In the run-up to the next round, further
efforts will be required to ensure that the intra-Syrian
dialogue is genuinely broadly representative. Every
patriotic Syrian party should be able to take part in
the negotiations on an equal footing in order to discuss
how to preserve Syria as a unified, secular State in
which all historical communities can live in peace, as
has always been the case, and take part in rebuilding
the country. The opposition should have an inclusive
and consolidated delegation whose members have a
common position that takes account of the views of
the key factions. There is no room for arrogance here.
We should be thinking not about pride and arrogance
but about the future of Syria. That is the substance
of Mr. Rycroft’s concept document. He should think
about the future of his own State, not interfere in these
people’s affairs. Let them conduct their dialogue calmly.
Mr. Rycroft should not interfere with Mr. De Mistura.
Look at those mentors!
In seeking a formula for a political solution — and I
know that this is Mr. De Mistura’s position — we cannot
allow any interruption in the work of State institutions,
especially the security institutions, which bear the
main burden in combating the terrorist threat. If we
look at the other countries of the Middle East, Africa
and other regions, it is clear that we cannot create State
institutions even on paper — and Mr. Rycroft wants to
destroy the ones that remain in Syria, one of the most
important countries in the region.
We insist on discussions being held without any
preconditions. We know that that is his position. Against
the backdrop of the political efforts, it is obviously
unacceptable for the opponents of the Government in
Damascus to try to gain military advantages. We should
recall that before the March round of negotiations
began, the opposition tried to advance on various
fronts, including in the vicinity of Syria’s capital. We
hope that the relevant capitals will cool the hotheads
and that such reckless acts will not be repeated.
This is Mr. Rycroft’s responsibility when he
professes to support the Astana process. He says one
thing in the Security Council but believes another,
and then in fact does a third thing. I would like to ask
him to do his part of the work. Here are London and
Paris working with opposition groups. He and his allies
should summon them and tell them to support the Astana
process. They should tell them that they should not even
think of firing on the Russian Embassy in Damascus.

S/PV.7921

But he will not even agree to put out an ordinary
announcement condemning the attack on the Russian
Embassy in Damascus, his diplomatic colleagues.
In a situation in which tensions have mounted
owing to the missile strike by the United States, the
importance of political efforts has only increased.
Clearly, provocations such as the incident in Khan
Shaykhun will only strengthen the positions of those
who favour a military solution. We need to determine
the facts and conduct a comprehensive investigation.
I was surprised, indeed amazed, to hear that French
experts have already reached the conclusion that
Damascus is responsible. No one has visited the scene
of the crime yet. How do they know?
The fate of the country should be determined by the
Syrians themselves, not by someone else. That is final.
We, together with the other guarantors, Turkey and
Iran — and here I want to also warmly thank the the
President of Kazakhstan for his leadership — are ready
to continue working on the Astana platform. Russia has
been responsible in addressing its obligations regarding
the strengthening of the ceasefire. But Mr. Rycroft and
his allies should also do their part in working with the
opposition groups. Astana cannot serve as a panacea in
a situation in which others are working to undermine it.
Significant progress has been achieved in terms of
local truces, which have made it possible to ease tensions
and normalize people’s lives from a humanitarian
point of view. Many have spoken today about access
to besieged areas, and that is an issue that should be
resolved. But let us be fair. Why is food not supplied
to areas that are controlled by the Government? What,
are they a different kind of people? Let us be honest.
We know the situation. Support is needed from capitals
that at the moment are providing only empty criticism.
The Astana process has a unique and special value. It
is aimed at practical weays of ending the violence and,
most important, it represents a form of direct support
to the Geneva process that Mr. De Mistura is leading.
We know that he and the overwhelming majority of
States Members of the United Nations greatly value the
Astana process.
We would also like to draw the attention of the
international community and the United Nations to
the significant contamination of Syrian territory by
mines, unexploded ordnance and improvised explosive
devices. We regularly inform the Council about the
significant activities carried out by Russian experts to

17-0985213/20

S/PV.7921

The situation in the Middle East

deal with this problem. We call for the formation of an
international coalition to demine Syria. Blackmail to
the effect that demining will begin once there is regime
change is unacceptable and hypocritical.
The specialized United Nations service could
play an important role in that regard. Of course, the
humanitarian component is very important in that
respect. People need to feel safe, when they return to
their homes and economic activity, that their children
will not be blown up and civilians will not suffer. At
the same time, mines must be cleared from the World
Heritage site in Palmyra. Those are the kinds of issues
we must work on. We need to discuss problems related
to migration — not regime change but mine clearance
and conflict resolution. People will return to their
homes by themselves; they do not need to be forced to
do anything. These are the kinds of issues that need to
be tackled. We need to work together on improving the
social conditions in which people live.
Instead, international and regional forums are
convened where virtual billions are pledged without
even the representatives of Syria being present. How
is that related to statements made here in the Security
Council that the fate of the Syrian people is in their
own hands? Many of us are giving serious thought
to the post-conflict future of Syria and the return of
internally displaced persons and refugees. That would
be the most meaningful and important response to the
terrorists’ acivities.
But to exclude Damascus and the representatives
of the Syrian Arab Republic from this process is
unprofessional, unacceptable, unethical and arrogant.
A political settlement is the only way to restore peace
in Syria and to ease the tensions in the Middle East
through Syria and a political improvement in that
country. That is the path towards normalizing the
situation in many countries of the Middle East. We have
an opportunity to make Syria a model of cooperation
towards a settlement, but destructive geopolitical
projects will not contribute to that. We will not give
them a free pass in the Security Council.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, allow me to
thank Special Envoy De Mistura for his briefing and
especially for his leadership in advancing the political
process in very challenging circumstances.
After six years, violence and destruction continue
to plague Syrian and cause tremendous suffering for the
Syrian people. With time, attacks against civilians have
14/20

12/04/2017

become even more barbaricand despicable, if that were
possible, as the horrific use of chemical weapons in the
air strike in Khan Shaykhun showed last week. Given
the current grave circumstances, a political solution that
meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people
and can relaunch the faltering cessation of hostilities,
reconsolidate the political process and possibly bring
this tragic crisis to an end is needed more than ever. We
all have a collective responsibility in that.
In that regard, let me recall the timely discussions
that took place yesterday at the ministerial meeting of
the Group of Seven (G-7), and then in the G-7 enlarged
to some key regional stakeholders, as Ambassador
Alemy rightly reminded us. On both occasions,
convened by Minister Alfano, all countries conveyed a
strong message of support to the political process, and
notably to the Geneva intra-Syrian negotiations and the
efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura.
We all need, therefore, to commit to a diplomatic
search, not a military search, to support the Geneva
talks and advance the political process by swiftly
implementing all steps agreed by the Council in
resolution to 2254 (2015). As the negotiationss move to
the substance of the issues, no rapid major breakthrough
can be expected, but we commend the Special Envoy
for having kept the parties engaged in the process and
committed to discussing the way forward, in accordance
with the defined agenda and in line with resolution to
2254 (2015).
The parties should now redouble their efforts to
address in detail the substantive matters on the agenda.
We have consistently encouraged the High Negotiations
Committee to adopt a realistic and flexible attitude
during the negotiations. Countries with influence
on Damascus should now press the regime to engage
seriously in negotiations and avoid dilatory tactics.
The Astana process made an important contribution
to the relaunch of the cessation of hostilities. However,
the situation on the ground has been deteriorating
again, putting a considerable strain on the truce. An
effective cessation of hostilities must be pursued as a
matter of priority. The Syrian regime has not renounced
its intention to achieve military territorial gains, and
the ceasefire continues to be violated by all parties.
Humanitarian access is denied in besieged areas,
notably by the regime. All parties must allow rapid,
safe, sustained and unhindered humanitarian access to
people in need throughout Syria.
17-09852

12/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

It is paramount that the core guarantors of the
Astana process, and more generally the key international
stakeholders, exert all their influence in that respect.
Progress in Astana on the implementation of the
ceasefire, humanitarian access and confidence-building
measures feeds, of course, into the Geneva process by
creating an environment conducive to the political talks.
Finally, let me underline that progress on the
political track is also key to ensuring better and more
effective international cooperation in the fight against
terrorism, and the effort to end violent radicalization,
extremism and terrorism needs to include a serious
and genuine effort towards a peaceful transition and
reconciliation process. Only a real political transition,
we think, will eradicate terrorism from Syria.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Madam President,
I thank you for convening this meeting in the
open Chamber.
Let me also thank Special Representative De
Mistura for his dedicated efforts and diligent approach
as the deep waters of the complex Syria political
situation become ever harder to navigate.
Today we are clearly at the low point with regard to
the Syrian political situation. Following the latest two
rounds of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva, I believe that
it is fair to say that, unfortunately, we have not seen
the much-desired progress on either of the 3+1 baskets.
Be it with respect to political transition, constitution,
elections or counterterrorism, there is not much to be
optimistic about. The only achievement so far is that
we have managed to get two delegations to Geneva.
Why? The answer is obvious; it is the lack of political
will, particularly from the Syrian regime, to negotiate
in full faith on the core issues. The stalled political
process may set in motion a vast number of alternative
scenarios that nobody would like.
It is only natural that every actor in Syria has a wishlist, yet Damascus and its allies need to understand that
a my-way-or-no-way kind of approach — the “ultimate
victory” attitude — will lead nowhere, prolong the crisis
and feed the extremists. Damascus needs to understand
one more thing — the international community has
made it crystal-clear that the political solution is the
only way out of the Syrian quagmire, and that the recipe
for this solution has long been out there. Any progress
on the political track will be unsustainable without clear
adherence to the letter and spirit of the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254

S/PV.7921

(2015), a transparent and strictly scheduled political
transition, and the guidance of the United Nations.
We believe that Russia has all the means at its
disposal to influence Damascus and its allied militias to
reconsider their militaristic approach, begin supporting
political process and national reconciliation, and finally
enter negotiations. For some reason, that influence has
never been never employed to good ends. I remain
convinced that, unless serious pressure is applied
on Damascus and an accountability mechanism is
established in Syria, we will not see any progress on the
political track. The chemical weapons attack on 4 April
is a grim reminder of that.
We are discouraged by the absence of real results
from the Astana process and the ceasefire negotiated
within its framework. One lesson to be learned from that
bitter experience is that the proliferation of negotiating
platforms does not necessarily bear fruit. It was a good
try, but it did not work. It is now time to concentrate
all efforts on the United Nations-led Geneva process
and ensure that it works. We therefore look forward
to the resumption of the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva,
hopefully, next month. It will already be high time for
Damascus and its allies to demonstrate a change in
mindset, intentions and attitude.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Madam President, for
convening this meeting.
First, let me begin by saying that in the current
situation, I believe that there is full agreement among all
members of the Security Council that we must support
the efforts being made Mr. De Mistura and his team
with regard to such a sensitive issue and the work of the
Secretary-General. Given that grim scenario, there may
be a glimmer of hope at the end of this long, dark tunnel
of war that is ravaging the brotherly country of Syria.
Three meetings took place during the Astana
process, and there was unanimous agreement in the
Security Council pertaining to decisions that were
reflected in the longest-lasting ceasefire during the
conflict as a result of the efforts of Russia, Turkey, Iran
and Kazakhstan. The peace talks under the auspices
of the United Nations through the Special Envoy have
already enjoyed their fifth round of talks in Geneva
on the four baskets, which Mr. De Mistura mentioned,
including governance issues, constitutional process
issues, election issues and counter-terrorism, among
others. Bolivia expresses its most fervent support

17-0985215/20

S/PV.7921

The situation in the Middle East

for the work of Mr. De Mistura and the Geneva and
Kazakhstan process, which are both complementary.
Another area of convergence — and I hope that
this is not just talk — is that we have all said that the
only option for resolving the conflict is through a
political process. We therefore call for the joint work
of the parties involved to ensure that the peace process
be taken forward for and by the Syrian people based
on candid, inclusive and constructive dialogue. We
urge the parties involved in the crisis to abandon once
and for all any provocative action, and ensure, as the
Secretary-General said, that they ensure that there is no
further escalatory intentions in the crisis. Peace talks
must continue without delays and must proceed in a
manner that strengthens and consolidates the mandates
of resolution 2254 (2015). That is a clear example that
it is possible for us to take coordinated and unanimous
action together.
As we have said, we believe that any type of
unilateral action will only undermine a dialogue
process and block the way to peacebuilding in Syria
at the expense of millions of lives in that country. We
acknowledge the efforts made by the Government
and the people of Syria in combating terrorism. We
vigorously condemn all terrorist acts as criminal and
unjustifiable, whatever their motivation, wherever
and whenever they take place, and by whomever they
are committed. We reiterate the need to ensure that
all States combat terrorism in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and relevant obligations
in accordance with international law.
Once again, Bolivia calls on the Council to ensure
that we defend mulitilateralism in line with the Charter.
We must say that the opposite of multilateralism is
unilateralism. Unilateral actions only undermine the
dialogue process being taken forward by Mr. De Mistura
and the Secretary-General. By the same token, it also
prejudices the outcome. We call for an independent,
impartial, comprehensive and conclusive investigation
of the atrocious chemical weapons attack. Of course,
we do not understand the logic behind the chronology
of the condemnation following the attack, before an
investigation. I do not really understand the rational
behind that attitude unless the intention is to bring
some sort of pressure to bear on the Moscow talks
taking place between Russia and the United States.
I fail to understand the intentions behind
introducing a draft resolution that, as we already know,
16/20

12/04/2017

will be vetoed. We have spoken about resolution 2254
(2015), which was unanimously adopted by the Council,
and we believe that the international community is
calling on the 15 members of the Security Council to
remain unified and work together towards achieving
peace. Who benefits from war? Who benefits from the
fact that the Security Council is not working as one
voice? The answer is, first and foremost, the terrorists.
My understanding is that we have a common enemy
with a name: Da’esh, Jabhat Al-Nusra, Al-Qaida and
Boko Haram. Those are our common enemies, and the
international community is demanding that the Security
Council act jointly, in unison and unanimously to
combat that threat to international peace and security.
Who else benefits from the failure of the peace
processes to advance and the Security Council’s failure
to work as one? The answer is the industrial military
complex and those who benefit economically from
war. They are the ones receiving the best economic
guarantees that result from the Syrian and other wars.
I read an editorial in the New York Times by Charles
Blow, who wrote that war is also a very lucrative
business from which many people enjoy the benefits.
We hope that the Security Council will assume its
responsibility not only under the Charter of the United
Nations, but also in accordance with the tenets of
humanity, and work as one to free humankind from the
nightmare of war and avoid an impasse from which, as
we know from the lessons of history, it is very difficult
to exit.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Mr. De Mistura for his helpful and informative
briefing today. We appreciate his commitment in this
process going forward.
Last week, Bashar Al-Assad yet again terrorized
his own people with one of the world’s most horrific
weapons. Al-Assad’s murderous attack shook everyone
of us to our core. It once again showed the world that
Al-Assad is not a partner for peace. It showed what
happens when Al-Assad’s allies — Russia, Iran and
Hizbullah — decide to lend their support to a barbaric
regime instead of joining the world to stop it.
When Al-Assad’s planes dropped chemical weapons,
his regime violated a resolution of this very Council
(resolution 2118 (2013)) and the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Al-Assad mocked every assurance the
17-09852

12/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7921

Russians gave us that there were no chemical weapons
in Syria. The United States was compelled to act.
We will not allow the use of chemical weapons to go
unanswered. We are not going to look the other way.
We are watching the regime’s actions carefully.

The Council needs to bring attention to Iran’s
barbaric acts in Syria. We need to collectively demand
that Iran stop. We need to make sure that Iran cannot
use Syria as a base to keep terrorizing the Syrian people
and the entire region.

My colleagues from Russia are isolating themselves
from the international community every time one
of Al-Assad’s planes drops another barrel bomb on
civilians and every time Al-Assad tries to starve
another community to death. People — not just in the
West but across the Middle East and the world — are
speaking out against Al-Assad’s brutality. It is long
past time for Russia to stop covering for Al-Assad. It
is long past time for Russia to push seriously for peace
and not continue to be part of the problem.

The Council also needs to be serious about peace in
Syria. Month after month, we all repeat the same points
in this Chamber. We all say there is no military solution
to this conflict, but look at what actually happens on
the ground. The Council’s relevance depends on taking
action to condemn those responsible for violence and
to hold them accountable for defying the Council’s
demands. The Council should not just say that it is in
favour of a political solution, but also actively pressure
the parties to prove it. That means adopting resolutions
that say what we mean — resolutions that we are all
willing to uphold.

The road to peace is long. We will not get a political
solution overnight, but we can start by working together
to actually de-escalate the conflict. For Russia, getting
serious about peace starts by fulfilling its commitment
to getting chemical weapons out of Syria. We urge
Russia to use its influence to make Al-Assad actually
live up to his international obligations. That means
giving investigators who are already mandated through
existing mechanisms full access to the bases from which
the regime launched its chemical weapons attacks and
access to anyone who might have been involved.
Russia talks about its commitment to a political
solution. It must commit to the Geneva talks. Now is
the time Russia needs to show the world whether it
genuinely wants to be a part of the political process. We
need to see a real ceasefire on the ground. We need to
see a credible political process through which Syrians
can chart their future. We need to see Russia choose
to side with the civilized world over an Al-Assad
Government that brutally terrorizes its own people.
The United States is ready to do our part. Russia, too,
needs to do its part.
Getting serious about peace also means that we
have to be honest about Iran’s role in Syria. Iran is
Al-Assad’s chief accomplice in the regime’s horrific
acts. Standing next to Al-Assad’s generals are Iranian
advisers whispering in their ears or giving orders.
Standing next to Al-Assad’s soldiers are Hizbullah
militias, with weapons courtesy of Iran and the power
to overrule the Syrian military. Iran is dumping fuel
on the flames of this war in Syria so it can expand its
own reach.

So what happens next in Syria will depend on what
all parties choose to do. For our part, the United States
will continue to use influence over any party to push
for peace. We will encourage our allies to use their
influence on any and all opposition groups, too. We
will not support a process that gives cover to Al-Assad
while he stalls for time and his forces slaughter the
Syrian people, and as we showed last week, we will not
stand for the continued use of chemical weapons. There
are actions by the Al-Assad regime that we simply will
not tolerate.
The United States firmly believes that a political
process can work despite the odds. We remain committed
to the Geneva process. We are ready to throw our weight
and resources behind diplomacy. We are ready to help
bring this conflict to an end. But our commitment is
not enough. The United States is looking for partners
that are serious about using their influence over the
Al-Assad regime and towards defeating the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham. Every country needs to do
its part. All of us must commit not just in words but also
in actions to the same goal — peace in Syria.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic, whom we ask to be conscious
of time.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Madam President, I hope you will be patient
enough, in your capacity as President of the Security
Council for this month, to hear what I have to say. I

17-0985217/20

S/PV.7921

The situation in the Middle East

listened carefully to each of our colleagues and have
the right and the duty as a founding Member of this
international Organization to inform them of the views
of my Government.
Some 14 years ago, a few weeks before 19 March
2003, the day of the invasion of Iraq, I was sitting
behind the then-Foreign Minister of my country, who
occupied the seat where the representative of Italy is
now sitting today. I was attending the meeting at which
Colin Powell, the former Secretary of State of the
United States, spoke about weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) in Iraq (S/PV.4701). I was there.
Everyone remembers what the Chairmen of the
investigation and inspection commissions said about
so-called weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, Ralph
Ekeus, Richard Butler, Scott Ritter, Hans Blix and
others were among them. They said that there were
no weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and that these
allegations were a pretext to justify invading and
occupying Iraq.
Evev more heinous, members of the Council
undoubtedly remember — or at least some of them
do — that in late 2008 the Security Council decided,
after the investigation of the alleged existence of Iraqi
weapons of mass destruction was closed, to bury the
archives of the United Nations Special Commission
established pursuant to Security Council resolution 687
(1991) and the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission, by placing them in vaults,
out of reach to anyone except the Secretary-General.
The vaults were sealed and can be opened only after 60
years had elapsed. Can you imagine, Madam President,
what secrets contained in the archives of those two
commissions?
The United Kingdom’s exit from the European
Union seems to have motivated it to seek out a new role
in the world — making and adopting irrational and
extreme statements and positions in the Council. We
recall the criminal role Tony Blair played in encouraging
the invasion of Iraq 14 years ago, fabricating the
lie of the existence of Iraqi WMDs and pushing the
American elephant to smash rich Iraqi lustre pottery
with a brutality that the people of Iraq are still paying
for to this day.
I deliver my statement today after an absence of
more than three months, as I was leading the delegation
of the Syrian Arab Republic in shuttle rounds of
intra-Syrian talks in Astana and Geneva with a view
18/20

12/04/2017

to launching a serious dialogue that would result in a
political solution driven by Syrians themselves without
any external interference and unify counter-terrorism
efforts. A week ago, we thought that we would be
coming to today’s meeting to inform the Security
Council of the progress recently achieved in Astana and
Geneva, give the necessary momentum and support to
His Excellency Special Envoy De Mistura and to all
parties that are working seriously to reach a political
settlement of the crisis in my country, Syria, and
coordinate our counter-terrorism efforts.
Despite this optimism, the United States
Administration insisted on repeating the same bloody,
theatrical play that it staged 14 years ago in thd Council
against Iraq. It was a play entitled The Lie of the Iraqi
Weapons of Mass Destruction. Once again, the United
States Administration is taking the war on terrorism
imposed on my country, Syria, to unprecedented and
dangerous levels by switching from a proxy aggression
through armed terrorist groups, who have been under
its control for years, to a new, direct aggression through
direct military action against Syria.
The United States has been leading terrorism in
Syria along with its allies and agents in the region. It
has provided all forms of support to terrorist groups
to commit the most heinous crimes against civilians
and Syrian infrastructure. Those crimes include the
practices of the so-called international coalition.
Recent incidents have proven that the coalition has
only destroyed infrastructure, bombarded civilians
and provided air cover to the Al-Nusra Front, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other affiliated
terrorist groups, as when it bombarded the Syrian
Army position on Tharda Mountain, in Deir ez-Zor, on
17 September 2016.
The direct military support and air cover to armed
terrorist groups was not only provided by the so-called
international coalition. Israel was the first to win the
honour of supporting terrorism. Since terrorist groups,
including Al-Nusra Front, started their operations in
the area of separation, Israel has provided all forms of
support to those groups, including medical relief and
care to injured terrorists at the expense of the Qatari
regime, as members know. Israel has provided air cover
by launching airstrikes against positions held by the
Syrian Army every time the Syrian Army has been
able to gain ground against these terrorist groups. Even
worse, Israel has provided direct support to the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant through airstrikes launched
17-09852

12/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

on 17 March against Syrian Army positions in Palmyra
in order to support the operations of the Islamic State
in that city.
Similar theatrics took place on the morning
of Friday, 7 April. At the time, the United States
Administration and its allies felt that the terrorist
groups that had been armed, trained and financed by
these countries had begun to lose ground because of the
heavy blows dealt to them by the Syrian Army and its
allies. They launched their premeditated and flagrant
attack against Shayrat air base with the pretext of the
use of chemical weapons in Khan Shaykhun, a village
primarily under the control of Al-Nusra Front. It did
not stop there. That attack was preceded by political
expediency when the United States decided to exploit
the international mechanisms of the Security Council
to submit provocative draft resolutions that would put
the blame on the Syrian Government for the abhorrent
use of chemical weapons and distance any suspicion
from the real enemy — terrorists and their supporters.
The dangerous attack had been thought through
for many months in the back rooms of intelligence
agencies in Tel Aviv, Riyadh, Doha, Ankara, Amman,
Washington, D.C., London and Paris. Those same
capitals have, over the past years, sought to provide
their terrorist agents inside Syria, notably Al-Nusra
Front, with toxic chemicals for them to use, placing the
blame on the Syrian Government. That was the case in
Khan al-Assal on 19 March 2013, in eastern Ghouta on
21 August 2013, in Talmenes on 21 April 2014, and in
Sarmin and Qamenas on 16 March, 2015.
I will not go into detail on the more than 90 letters
addressed to the Council since the beginning of the
crisis. The letters detail the possession by armed groups
of chemical elements to be used against civilians and
plans to put the blame on the Syrian Government with
a view to demonizing the Government in the eyes of
Council members and of world public opinion, thereby
justifying interference in the internal affairs of Syria.
Some of the letters have even detailed the smuggling
of sarin gas from Libya through Turkey on a civilian
airplane by using a criminal Syrian citizen of the name
of Haithem Al-Qasar. Two liters of sarin gas were
transported from Libya through Turkey to terrorist
groups in Syria. We have given the Council the names,
dates, incidents and events, as well as the itinerary of
the aforementioned trip from Libya to Syria.

S/PV.7921

I would like to refer the Council to a statement made
by the former French Foreign Minister, Mr. Roland
Dumas, in June 2013. In that statement, he said that
during a visit to London he was told of a conspiracy
against Syria, whose goal was to destroy Syria and
isolate its Government, given its anti-Israeli position.
That was two years before the start of the crisis in
Syria. Mr. Roland Dumas was made privy to a plot to
destroy Syria two years before the crisis even started.
I would also like to refer the Council to a report
in Daily Mail from January, 2013. The report, which
was withdrawn and deleted from online shortly after it
was published, detailed emails between high-ranking
officials in a British corporation , Britam Defence. The
emails talked of a plot agreed upon by Washington,
D.C., whereby Qatar, in cooperation with Turkey, would
finance insurgents in Syria to use chemical weapons.
At the time, President Obama only had to draw a
red line, saying that any use of chemical weapons in
Syria would not be tolerated. That red line was used
to justify military aggression against Syria. However,
he fortunately backtracked at the last minute when his
European allies decided to jump ship, given mounting
pressure from international public opinion that led
them to reject any interference in Syria.
Documents leaked by Wikileaks prove that the
White House had given a green light to a chemical
attack in eastern Ghouta, in the suburbs of Damascus,
in order to put blame on the Syrian Government. It uses
the chemical attack as an incentive for international
military aggression against Syria.
Today, the new United States administration, of
which we were optimistic, claims that counter-terrorism
is one of its priorities, and its allies could not find a
pretext except to regress to the same red-line deception
and fabricate the incident of chemical weapons in Khan
Shaykhun in order to launch an attack against Syria
and sabotage the Astana and the Geneva talks, save the
armed terrorist groups from their predicament and help
other opposition groups shirk their obligations related
to the political settlement and counter-terrorism.
Why was that? It was because we had added another
element to the talks in Geneva, the basket of counterterrorism, something that the enemies of the political
track in Syria did not like. Otherwise, how could a sane
and reasonable person accept the lies, disinformation
and accusations against Syria of using chemical
weapons that Syria does not even possess? We do not

17-0985219/20

S/PV.7921

The situation in the Middle East

have chemical weapons, as confirmed by the report of
the Joint Investigative Mechanism of June 2014 to the
Council, when Ms. Sigrid Kaag said on that date that
Syria no longer had any chemical weapons. Even worse,
those who destroyed the chemical weapons at the time
were ships of the United States in the Mediterranean.
This comes at a time when the Syrian army and
its allies are achieving crushing victories against
terrorism; national reconciliation is being concluded
across Syrian towns and regions; and significant steps
have been taken in the Astana talks, emphasizing, as
Mr. De Mistura said, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria. That means controlling the borders
with neighbouring States, particularly Turkey and
Jordan, preventing the flow of terrorists, ending the
hostilities, separating armed groups from Jabhat
Al-Nusra and ISIL, and unifying counter-terrorism
efforts. Those are the results of Astana; if they were
implemented, the Syrian crisis could have ended within
24 hours.
As the Geneva talks started to shape a political
vision and a road map for a settlement in Syria, as
my country is witnessing a diplomatic openness and
visits by parliamentary missions, including Western
delegations, which have been briefing the global public
opinion about what is really happening in Syria and
calling for support to the Syrian Government in its war
against terrorism. I put this question to every person
who still resorts to logic, reason and law law in this
Council to explain this blind madness and brutal desire
to burn my country and the region to the ground, as
well as to move the international community into a
new phase of war and conflict, in which there will be
no victors but terrorism, the doctrine of extremism,
hatred, and the logic of military might and the law of
the jungle.
In the face of this falsification and manipulation
to justify the military aggression, my country’s
Government has sent to you, Madam President, and to
other members of the Council a letter referring to the
call of the Syrian Government on the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons in The Hague to send a technical mission
to Khan Shaykhun and to Shayrat air base to uncover
the truth about what happened. This means that we,
the Syrian Government, want to know who used the
chemical gas in my country. We should all say no to a
war is being promoted by warmongers and the enemies

20/20

12/04/2017

of law as a normal option — business as usual as they
sit comfortably in safety, enjoying their privileges,
revenue and arrogance.
During the latest round of talks in Geneva, my
country’s Government submitted a number of papers
to Special Envoy De Mistura, starting with a paper on
general principles for a political solution in Syria with
a view to finding a logical and normal common ground
to start discussing all issues that are an essential part
of the debate pertaining to the four baskets. We have
also submitted other papers, including one on counterterrorism. Over the nine days of talks, we discussed
all agreed agenda items. Unfortunately, there was
no serious partner actually committed to pursuing
counter-terrorism and to finding a political solution, let
alone the existence of a multitude of oppositions, and
not a Syrian opposition.
My country denounces attempts by the United
States Administration, Britain and France to sabotage
the efforts of the Special Envoy and to block the Geneva
and Astana talks. We have engaged seriously, patiently
and responsibly in these talks because our people hold
us historically responsible for defending the country and
staunching the bloodshed. The American aggression
will not prevent the Syrian Government and its allies
from pursuing counter-terrorism, actively engaging in
the next rounds of Geneva and Astana talk, or discuss
ing the agreed agenda and engaging seriously on all
issues related to governance, the constitution, elections
and counter-terrorism simultaneously. We will also
spare no effort to support any genuine endeavour that
seeks to reach a political solution that will allow Syrians
themselves to decide their own future, whereby only
the Syrians themselves determine their future and their
options in a manner that would preserve the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
To conclude, I was perplexed by the statement
made by my colleague from France, according to which
he and the other three States or P3 intended to submit
today’s draft resolution and to put it to vote in shameful
diplomatic haste. Such a provocative step comes before
a fair international investigation by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. Therefore,
submitting a draft resolution was a blatant misuse of
the Security Council’s mechanisms, and it reminds us
of similar misuse of by Britain and America against
Iraq 14 years ago exactly, on 9 April 2003.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

17-09852
