United Nations

A/RES/58/162

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 March 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 116

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2003
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/58/507)]

58/162. Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights
and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to
self-determination
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/196 of 18 December 2002, and taking note of
Commission on Human Rights resolution 2003/2 of 14 April 2003, 1
Recalling also all of its relevant resolutions, in which, inter alia, it condemned
any State that permitted or tolerated the recruitment, financing, training, assembly,
transit and use of mercenaries with the objective of overthrowing the Governments
of States Members of the United Nations, especially those of developing countries,
or of fighting against national liberation movements, and recalling further the
relevant resolutions and international instruments adopted by the Security Council,
the Economic and Social Council and the Organization of African Unity, inter alia,
the Organization of African Unity Convention for the elimination of mercenarism in
Africa, 2
Reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations concerning the strict observance of the principles of sovereign equality,
political independence, the territorial integrity of States, the self-determination of
peoples, the non-use of force or of the threat of use of force in international
relations and non-interference in affairs within the domestic jurisdiction of States,
Reaffirming also that, by virtue of the principle of self-determination, all
peoples have the right freely to determine their political status and to pursue their
economic, social and cultural development, and that every State has the duty to
respect this right in accordance with the provisions of the Charter,
Reaffirming further the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, 3
_______________
1
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1490, No. 25573.
3
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

03 50430

A/RES/58/162

Alarmed and concerned at the danger that the activities of mercenaries
constitute to peace and security in developing countries, in particular in Africa and
in small States,
Deeply concerned at the loss of life, the substantial damage to property and the
negative effects on the policy and economies of affected countries resulting from
criminal mercenary activities,
Convinced that, notwithstanding the way in which they are used or the form
that they take to acquire some semblance of legitimacy, mercenaries or
mercenary-related activities are a threat to peace, security and the self-determination
of peoples and an obstacle to the enjoyment of human rights by peoples,
Welcomes the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
1.
Human Rights on the question of the use of mercenaries as a means of impeding the
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination; 4
2.
Reaffirms that the use of mercenaries and their recruitment, financing and
training are causes for grave concern to all States and violate the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations;
Recognizes that armed conflict, terrorism, arms trafficking and covert
3.
operations by third Powers, inter alia, encourage the demand for mercenaries on the
global market;
Urges all States to take the necessary steps and to exercise the utmost
4.
vigilance against the menace posed by the activities of mercenaries and to take
legislative measures to ensure that their territories and other territories under their
control, as well as their nationals, are not used for the recruitment, assembly,
financing, training and transit of mercenaries for the planning of activities designed
to impede the right of peoples to self-determination, to destabilize or overthrow the
Government of any State or to dismember or impair, totally or in part, the territorial
integrity or political unity of sovereign and independent States conducting
themselves in compliance with the right of peoples to self-determination;
Requests all States to exercise the utmost vigilance against any kind of
5.
recruitment, training, hiring or financing of mercenaries by private companies
offering international military consultancy and security services, as well as to
impose a specific ban on such companies intervening in armed conflicts or actions
to destabilize constitutional regimes;
Welcomes the entry into force of the International Convention against the
6.
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries, 5 and calls upon all States
that have not yet done so to consider taking the necessary action to accede to or
ratify the Convention;
Welcomes also the cooperation extended by those countries that have
7.
received visits from the Special Rapporteur;
8.
Welcomes further the adoption by some States of national legislation that
restricts the recruitment, assembly, financing, training and transit of mercenaries;
9.
Calls upon States to investigate the possibility of mercenary involvement
whenever and wherever criminal acts of a terrorist nature occur and to bring to trial
_______________
4
5

2

See A/58/115.
Resolution 44/34, annex.

A/RES/58/162

those found responsible or to consider their extradition, if so requested, in
accordance with domestic law and applicable bilateral or international treaties;
10. Welcomes the organization, in Geneva from 13 to 17 May 2002, in
compliance with General Assembly resolution 56/232 of 24 December 2001, of the
second meeting of experts on traditional and new forms of mercenary activities as a
means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to
self-determination, and takes note of its conclusions; 6
11. Takes note with appreciation of the proposal for an enhanced legal
definition of mercenaries contained in the report of the Special Rapporteur, and
requests the Secretary-General to circulate it to the Member States and to seek their
views in order to include them in the report of the Special Rapporteur to the General
Assembly at its fifty-ninth session;
12. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, as a matter of priority, to publicize the adverse effects of the
activities of mercenaries on the right of peoples to self-determination and, when
requested and where necessary, to render advisory services to States that are affected
by those activities;
13. Requests the Special Rapporteur to continue to take into account, in the
discharge of his mandate, the fact that mercenary activities continue to occur in
many parts of the world and are taking on new forms, manifestations and
modalities;
14. Recommends that the Commission on Human Rights renew the mandate
of the Special Rapporteur for a period of three years;
15. Urges all States to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the
fulfilment of his mandate;
16. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to provide the Special Rapporteur with all the
necessary assistance and support for the fulfilment of his mandate, both professional
and financial, including through the promotion of cooperation between the Special
Rapporteur and other components of the United Nations system that deal with
countering mercenary-related activities;
17. Requests the Special Rapporteur to consult States and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations in the implementation of the present resolution
and to report, with specific recommendations, to the General Assembly at its
fifty-ninth session his findings on the use of mercenaries to undermine the right of
peoples to self-determination;
18. Decides to consider at its fifty-ninth session the question of the use of
mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the
right of peoples to self-determination under the item entitled “Right of peoples to
self-determination”.
77th plenary meeting
22 December 2003

_______________
6

See E/CN.4/2003/4.

3
