United Nations

A/RES/65/100

General Assembly

Distr.: General
20 January 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 51

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 10 December 2010
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/65/422)]

65/100. Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, 212 (III) of 19 November
1948, 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949 and all subsequent related resolutions, including its
resolution 64/89 of 10 December 2009,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Having considered the report of the Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East covering
the period from 1 January to 31 December 2009, 1
0F

Taking note of the letter dated 22 June 2010 from the Chairman of the
Advisory Commission of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East addressed to the Commissioner-General, 2
1F

Deeply concerned about the critical financial situation of the Agency, caused
in part by the structural underfunding of the Agency, as well as its rising
expenditures resulting from the deterioration of the socio-economic and
humanitarian conditions in the region and their significant negative impact on the
provision of necessary Agency services to the Palestine refugees, including its
emergency-related and development programmes,
Recalling Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, 3
2F

Recalling also the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel, 4
3F

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/65/13).
Ibid., pp. vi and vii.
3
Resolution 22 A (I).
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2051, No. 35457.
2

10-51854

*1051854*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/100

Affirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 5 to the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
4F

Aware of the continuing needs of the Palestine refugees in all fields of
operation, namely, Jordan, Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic and the Occupied
Palestinian Territory,
Gravely concerned about the extremely difficult socio-economic conditions
being faced by the Palestine refugees in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, particularly in the refugee camps in the Gaza Strip, as a
result of the continuing prolonged Israeli closures, the construction of the wall, the
severe economic and movement restrictions that in effect amount to a blockade and
the continuing negative repercussions of the military operations in the Gaza Strip
between December 2008 and January 2009, which caused extensive loss of life and
injury, particularly among Palestinian civilians, including children and women;
widespread damage and destruction to Palestinian homes, properties, vital
infrastructure and public institutions, including hospitals, schools and United
Nations facilities; and internal displacement of civilians,
Commending the extraordinary efforts by the Agency to provide emergency
relief, medical, food, shelter and other humanitarian assistance to needy and
displaced families in the Gaza Strip,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolution ES-10/18 of 16 January 2009 and
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) of 8 January 2009,
Expressing regret over the continued restrictions that impede the Agency’s
efforts to repair and rebuild thousands of damaged or destroyed refugee shelters and
Agency facilities, including schools and health centres, and calling upon Israel to
ensure the unimpeded import of essential construction materials into the Gaza Strip,
while taking note of recent developments regarding the situation of access there,
Expressing concern about the severe classroom shortage in the Gaza Strip and
the consequent negative impact on the right to education of refugee children as a
result of the inability of the Agency to construct new schools owing to Israel’s
ongoing restrictions impeding the entry of necessary construction materials into the
Gaza Strip,
Stressing the urgent need for reconstruction to begin in the Gaza Strip,
including through the completion of numerous suspended projects managed by the
Agency, and for the commencement of other urgent United Nations-led civilian
reconstruction activities,
Urging the disbursement of pledges made at the International Conference in
Support of the Palestinian Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza, held in Sharm
el-Sheikh, Egypt, on 2 March 2009, to accelerate the reconstruction process,
Commending the Agency’s continuing efforts to assist those refugees affected
and displaced by the crisis in the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp in northern Lebanon,
and welcoming the efforts of the Government of Lebanon and the international
community to support the rebuilding by the Agency of the Nahr el-Bared camp,

_______________
5

2

Ibid., vol. 75, No. 973.

A/RES/65/100

Aware of the valuable work done by the Agency in providing protection to the
Palestinian people, in particular Palestine refugees,
Gravely concerned about the endangerment of the safety of the Agency’s staff
and about the damage and destruction caused to the facilities of the Agency during
the reporting period,
Deploring, in particular, the extensive damage and destruction of Agency
facilities in the Gaza Strip caused during the military operations between December
2008 and January 2009, including to schools where civilians were sheltered and the
Agency’s main compound and warehouse, as reported in the summary by the
Secretary-General of the report of the Board of Inquiry 6 and in the report of the
United Nations Fact-finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, 7
5F

6F

Deploring also, in this regard, the breaches of the inviolability of United
Nations premises, the failure to accord the property and assets of the Organization
immunity from any form of interference and the failure to protect United Nations
personnel, premises and property,
Deploring further the killing and injury of Agency staff members by the Israeli
occupying forces in the Occupied Palestinian Territory since September 2000,
Deploring the killing and wounding of refugee children in the Agency schools
by the Israeli occupying forces during the military operations between December
2008 and January 2009,
Deeply concerned about the continuing imposition of restrictions on the
freedom of movement and access of the Agency’s staff, vehicles and goods, and the
injury, harassment and intimidation of the Agency’s staff, which undermine and
obstruct the work of the Agency, including its ability to provide essential basic and
emergency services,
Aware of the agreement between the Agency and the Government of Israel,
Taking note of the agreement reached on 24 June 1994, embodied in an
exchange of letters between the Agency and the Palestine Liberation Organization, 8
7F

1.
Reaffirms that the effective functioning of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East remains essential in all fields
of operation;
Expresses its appreciation to the Commissioner-General of the United
2.
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as well
as to all of the staff of the Agency, for their tireless efforts and valuable work,
particularly in the light of the difficult conditions and unstable circumstances faced
during the past year;
Expresses special commendation to the Agency for the essential role that
3.
it has played for over sixty years since its establishment in providing vital services
for the well-being, human development and protection of the Palestine refugees and
the amelioration of their plight;

_______________
6

See A/63/855-S/2009/250.
A/HRC/12/48.
8
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/49/13), annex I.
7

3

A/RES/65/100

4.
Expresses its appreciation for the important support provided by the host
Governments to the Agency in the discharge of its duties;
5.
Expresses its appreciation to the Advisory Commission of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and
requests it to continue its efforts and to keep the General Assembly informed of its
activities;
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Working Group on the
6.
Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East 9 and the efforts of the Working Group to assist in ensuring the
financial security of the Agency, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary services and assistance to the Working Group for the conduct of its work;
8F

Commends the Agency’s six-year Medium-Term Strategy, which
7.
commenced in January 2010, and the continuing efforts of the CommissionerGeneral to increase the budgetary transparency and efficiency of the Agency, as
reflected in the Agency’s programme budget for the biennium 2010–2011; 10
9F

8.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to support the institutional
strengthening of the Agency through the provision of sufficient financial resources
from the regular budget of the United Nations;
Commends the Agency for the successful completion of its three-year
9.
reform programme, and urges the Agency to apply maximum efficiency procedures
to reduce operational and administrative costs and to maximize the use of resources;
10. Looks forward to the transmittal of the report the Secretary-General on
the strengthening of the management capacity of the Agency, as requested by the
Working Group and as endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 64/89;
11. Endorses the efforts of the Commissioner-General to continue to provide
humanitarian assistance, as far as practicable, on an emergency basis, and as a
temporary measure, to persons in the area who are internally displaced and in
serious need of continued assistance as a result of recent crises in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory and Lebanon;
12. Welcomes the progress made so far by the Agency in rebuilding the Nahr
el-Bared refugee camp in northern Lebanon, and calls for the expeditious
completion of its reconstruction, for the continued provision of relief assistance to
those displaced following its destruction in 2007 and for the alleviation of their
ongoing suffering through the fulfilment of pledges made at the International Donor
Conference for the Recovery and Reconstruction of the Nahr el-Bared Palestine
Refugee Camp and Conflict-affected Areas of Northern Lebanon, held in Vienna on
23 June 2008;
13. Encourages the Agency, in close cooperation with other relevant United
Nations entities, to continue making progress in addressing the needs and rights of
children and women in its operations in accordance with the Convention on the
Rights of the Child 11 and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 12 respectively;
10F

1F

_______________
9

A/65/551.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 13A (A/64/13/Add.1).
11
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
12
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
10

4

A/RES/65/100

14. Commends, in this regard, the Agency’s “Summer Games” initiative
providing recreational, cultural and educational activities for children in the Gaza
Strip and, recognizing its positive contribution, calls for full support of the
initiative;
15. Expresses concern about the relocation of the international staff of the
Agency from its headquarters in Gaza City and the disruption of operations at the
headquarters due to the deterioration and instability of the situation on the ground;
16. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply fully with the
provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949;5
0H

17. Also calls upon Israel to abide by Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities
of the United Nations3 in order to ensure the safety of the personnel of the Agency,
the protection of its institutions and the safeguarding of the security of its facilities
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
1H

18. Urges the Government of Israel to expeditiously reimburse the Agency
for all transit charges incurred and other financial losses sustained as a result of
delays and restrictions on movement and access imposed by Israel;
19. Calls upon Israel particularly to cease obstructing the movement and
access of the staff, vehicles and supplies of the Agency and to cease the levying of
taxes, extra fees and charges, which affect the Agency’s operations detrimentally;
20. Also calls upon Israel to fully lift the restrictions impeding the import of
necessary construction materials and supplies for the reconstruction and repair of
damaged or destroyed Agency facilities, in particular schools, health centres and
thousands of refugee shelters, and for the implementation of suspended civilian
infrastructure projects in refugee camps in the Gaza Strip;
21. Requests the Commissioner-General to proceed with the issuance of
identification cards for Palestine refugees and their descendants in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory;
22. Notes with appreciation the progress made by the Agency in the
modernization of its archives through the Palestine Refugee Records Project, and
encourages the Commissioner-General to finalize the remaining components of the
Project as rapidly as possible and to report on the progress made to the General
Assembly at its sixty-sixth session;
23. Also notes with appreciation the success of the Agency’s microfinance
and microenterprise programmes, and calls upon the Agency, in close cooperation
with the relevant agencies, to continue to contribute to the development of the
economic and social stability of the Palestine refugees in all fields of operation;
24. Reiterates its appeals to all States, the specialized agencies and
non-governmental organizations to continue and to augment the special allocations
for grants and scholarships for higher education to Palestine refugees in addition to
their contributions to the regular budget of the Agency and to contribute to the
establishment of vocational training centres for Palestine refugees, and requests the
Agency to act as the recipient and trustee for the special allocations for grants and
scholarships;
25. Urges all States, the specialized agencies and non-governmental
organizations to continue and to increase their contributions to the Agency in order
5

A/RES/65/100

to address the serious financial constraints and underfunding, especially with
respect to the Agency’s regular budget deficit, noting that financial shortfalls have
been exacerbated by the current humanitarian situation on the ground that has
resulted in rising expenditures, in particular with regard to emergency services, and
to support the Agency’s valuable and necessary work in assisting the Palestine
refugees in all fields of operation.
62nd plenary meeting
10 December 2010

6
