S/PV.7847

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7847th meeting

Tuesday, 20 December 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rajoy Brey/González de Linares Palou . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Martins
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Kyslytsya
Mr. Stewart
Ms. Mendelson
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Trafficking in persons in conflict situations
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of measures to counter
trafficking in persons (S/2016/949)
Letter dated 2 December 2016 from the Permanent Representative of Spain to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/1031)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-45113 (E)
*1645113*

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Terrorist acts
The President (spoke in Spanish): Sadly, we must
once again open a meeting by reiterating our firmest
condemnation of the cruel terrorist attacks that have
occurred in recent days, adding to the painfully long
list of such attacks. On Sunday, terrorist attacks were
carried out in Aden and Karak, Jordan, followed
yesterday by attacks in Berlin and Ankara, the latter
against His Excellency Mr. Andrey Karlov, Ambassador
of the Russian Federation to Turkey. I offer our sincere
condolences to the families of the victims and wish the
injured a speedy recovery.
In demonstration of the pain we share with all the
victims of terrorism and our firm rejection of these
cowardly terrorist attacks, I would now ask Council
members to rise and observe a minute of silence.
The members of the Council observed a minute
of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Trafficking in persons in conflict situations
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of measures to counter
trafficking in persons (S/2016/949)
Letter dated 2 December 2016 from
the Permanent Representative of Spain
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/1031)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to warmly
welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers and other
distinguished representatives present in the Security
Council Chamber. Their presence today underscores
the importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Eritrea, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
2/79

20/12/2016

Mexico, Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia,
Slovakia, South Africa, Thailand, Turkey and Uganda
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict; Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan, civilian
activist for Yazidi women’s rights; Ms. Nadia Murad
Basee Taha, Goodwill Ambassador for the Dignity of
Survivors of Human Trafficking and recent Vaclav
Havel Prize and Sakharov Prize winner; Mr. Ashraf
Nour, Director of the International Organization for
Migration Office to the United Nations; His Excellency
Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, Permanent Observer of the
Organization of American States to the United Nations;
and Mr. Emmanuel Roux, Special Representative, Office
of the International Criminal Police Organization.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Myria
Vassiliadou, Anti-Trafficking Coordinator of the
European Union, to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/949, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of measures
to counter trafficking in persons. I wish to also draw the
attention of Council members to document S/2016/1031,
which contains a letter dated 2 December 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Spain to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give
the floor.
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

The Secretary-General: I thank the Spanish
presidency of the Council. led by His Excellency
Mr. Rajoy Brey, for convening this important meeting.
I come with a plea for Member States to take steps to
help victims of trafficking today and prevent further
cases in the future. That means attention to immediate
crimes and underlying causes.
Trafficking is a global problem, but the most
vulnerable people are those caught in conflict: women,
children, internally displaced persons and refugees.
War provides oxygen to terrorist groups. It gives them
space to flourish. the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and others
are using trafficking and sexual violence as weapons
of terror and an important source of revenue. Both
ISIL and Boko Haram have engaged in the sexual
enslavement of women and girls through trafficking.
Yazidi girls captured in Iraq are trafficked into Syria
and sold in open slave markets as if they were things,
not people.
Before the conflict in Syria began, there were few,
if any, human trafficking victims from that country.
Now, victims from Syria — along with Iraq, Somalia
and other conflict-torn countries — are found in
Europe, Asia and the Middle East. Traumatized Syrian
refugee children are being forced to work. Instead of
studying and playing, they are sewing clothes, serving
food and selling items on the street. We have to fight
trafficking for the sake of the victims When we do,
we will also decrease funding for terrorists and make
everyone safer. We need action on two fronts.
The first is justice and accountability. These are
heinous crimes that demand immediate international
action. International law needs to be respected and
implemented. The United Nations is actively engaged
in preventing sexual exploitation and abuse perpetrated
by peacekeepers. States must also train peacekeepers
and others to respond to trafficking in persons and
prevent sexual exploitation and abuse. We should
intensify training on preventing trafficking in persons
as well as sexual exploitation and abuse.
The
United
Nations
Convention
against
Transnational Organized Crime is a vital tool. I
call on all States that are not party to its Protocol on
trafficking in persons to join right away. I also urge
countries to adopt dedicated anti-trafficking laws and
national action plans. States should consider creating

S/PV.7847

multidisciplinary law-enforcement units or specialized
prosecutors’ offices to address this threat.
Some States have successfully suppressed
trafficking syndicates by targeting money-laundering
and criminal proceeds. We should step up this action.
Governments have to respond, especially when their
own nationals are involved.
I call on all States to investigate and prosecute such
cases, including those in which their own nationals
commit this crime abroad. All perpetrators must be
brought to justice.
The problem of trafficking is international in
nature, and only an international response can succeed.
The United Nations is bringing together Governments,
other organizations and civil-society groups. I call for
increased support to United Nations entities that are
confronting the problem of trafficking.
I encourage contributions to the United Nations
Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, and the
United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary
Forms of Slavery. These initiatives are helping victims
to heal and become agents of change.
The second front is human rights and stability. If
conflict gives oxygen to traffickers, human rights and
stability suffocate them. That is why it is so important to
advance the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and its 17 Sustainable Development Goals. The 2030
Agenda promises a life of dignity for all people and
focuses on helping the farthest behind first. To fulfil
this promise, we have to stand for the human rights of
all victims and vulnerable people.
I call for all countries to ratify all international
human
rights,
refugee,
labour
rights
and
crime-prevention conventions, and to put efforts into
their effective implementation.
The majority of trafficking victims are women
and girls. Our response must include special attention
to their rights. States must adopt gender-sensitive and
rights-based migration policies. We need strategic
leadership in ending war and also in preventing
conflicts and sustaining peace. That is why I have
strengthened the commitment of the United Nations
to supporting Member States in early action and in
preventive diplomacy.

16-451133/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

As this may be my last speech to the Council, let
me emphasize once again that prevention should be at
the forefront. I welcome my successor’s focus on this
very important priority. Let us work together to help
today’s victims of trafficking while creating a more
stable and just world for all.
I thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership
and commitment.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now call on Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: Several tragedies took place
yesterday: the cowardly assassination of the Russian
Ambassador to Turkey and the despicable terrorist
attack in Berlin. May I express, on behalf of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), my
deepest condolences to the Governments of the Russian
Federation and Germany and to the families of the
victims. As the UNODC mandate includes counterterrorism, we stand ready to increase our support to
Member States to strengthen international solidarity
and cooperation in fighting the scourge of terrorism
and hatred.
Turning to the agenda item under consideration,
allow me to begin by expressing my gratitude to the
Security Council for its attention to this urgent issue.
Indeed, this is a historic meeting of the Security
Council, as the Council is set to adopt, for the first time
in its history, an action-oriented resolution dedicated to
human trafficking. I would also like to thank UNODC
Goodwill Ambassador Nadia Murad for helping to raise
awareness of the plight of trafficking victims.
Thanks to these efforts, heightened attention is
being given to the problem of human trafficking in
conflict and mass movements of refugees and migrants,
where we have seen this terrible crime acquire ever
more appalling dimensions.
In seeking to strengthen international responses, we
must keep in sharp focus the fact that human trafficking
is pervasive. It is transnational, and its victims are
everywhere. Trafficking victims have been detected in
106 countries and territories around the world.
Building effective action thus requires a strong
framework of international cooperation and shared
responsibility. I deliberately use the word “build”, as
4/79

20/12/2016

there is no single measure, no one step in any given part
of the world that can address this problem alone.
The building blocks we need can be found in the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. This international treaty, concluded
more than a decade ago, is still young, but some 158
countries have now criminalized most forms of human
trafficking in their domestic laws, in line with the
Protocol. It is true that the full implementation of the
Protocol’s provisions has yet to be achieved. However,
the Palermo Convention and the Protocol could serve as
a platform for a vast collective response to many of the
challenges raised by today’s debate.
What we really need is to strengthen existing
frameworks, which represent a solid foundation of
international law and years of painstaking operational
cooperation that we can build upon to act against
modern-day slave traders, including in situations
of conflict and wherever we find such activities
taking place.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/949)
details the efforts of the United Nations system to
support Member States in improving the implementation
of this international law instrument.
Tomorrow UNODC will present its 2016 Global
Report on Trafficking in Persons, which it is mandated
to do by the General Assembly and which provides
a snapshot of the state of national responses to the
challenges of human trafficking. The report, based
on reliable data and information provided by Member
States, establishes that an increasing number of
trafficking victims from conflict-affected countries
such as Syria, Iraq and Somalia have been detected
in Europe, Asia and the Middle East. The report also
features a thematic chapter on the connections between
conflict, migration and trafficking. I hope that all
present will join us tomorrow at the launch.
Looking ahead, I would like to highlight the urgent
need for countries to improve identification and referral
processes tailored to the challenges of conflict zones
and mass movements.
UNODC is helping countries to enhance the
identification and protection of trafficking victims
among refugees and displaced persons fleeing conflict
in the Middle East and Africa, and we hope to expand
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

this work in future. At the same time, strategic lawenforcement action must target upstream organized
criminals through intelligence-sharing, joint operations,
financial investigations and coordination within and
across borders.
The full arsenal of tools that we have to disrupt
organized crime networks and terrorist groups and to
fight money laundering and counter-terrorism financing
must be deployed. Criminals exploit weakness. Gaps
in our responses abet impunity and leave defenceless
people exposed. UNODC is committed to doing our
part to support the Security Council, to integrate
action against human trafficking, to promote justice
and accountability, and to protect the victimized
and vulnerable.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bangura.
Ms. Bangura: I join my colleagues in extending
my sympathy to the Russian Federation for the
assassination of the Russian Ambassador in Turkey.
I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to add my
voice to this critical and timely debate on human
trafficking in situations of conflict. I would like to start
by extending my thanks and congratulations to Spain
for convening this meeting today, and for its leadership
every day as a tireless champion of the women, peace
and security agenda during its tenure on the Council
and beyond.
Over the past four years, during which I have served
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, we have witnessed a
deep and enduring shift in the treatment of this issue
as a peace and security imperative. This unprecedented
political momentum has translated into the adoption
of zero-tolerance policies for national armed and
security forces; frameworks of cooperation and joint
communiqués signed by Governments, signalling
their commitment to act at the highest level — most
recently, by the Government of Iraq; and landmark
convictions for sexual violence as a war crime and
a crime against humanity, including at the level of
command responsibility.
Yet, as we take stock of this progress, we are also
forced to confront new and previously unforeseen
threats. These include the use of sexual violence as a
tactic of terrorism by groups that traffic their victims

S/PV.7847

internally and across borders in the pursuit of profit.
In the Chamber, we often hear accounts of survivors
of wartime atrocity. The stories of those brave enough
to bear witness — including the statements of the
trafficking survivors here today — are vital to our
work. But allow me to also take this opportunity to cast
a searchlight on the perpetrators — on those whose
deeds are often hidden by the so- called fog of war.
One such individual is Emir Abu Malek. He is
responsible for trafficking women and girls from Iraq
to Syria, dividing them up among his friends as the
spoils of war. According to information obtained by
my Office, this man issued instructions about where
they should be transferred, to whom they should be
given, and what his brothers in arms should do to these
girls. On one occasion, he ordered that a group of 15
girls, aged 9- and 10-years old, be transferred to Raqqa
and Mosul to be raped for half a day, and then sold
on further.
Another individual is Emir Abu Ali. He implemented
the so-called fatwa issued by Da’esh in April 2015,
ordering the separation of children from their mothers.
The aim was to enable children to be indoctrinated in
the Madrassa Jihadia and their mothers to be sold into
sexual slavery.
There is also the Sheikh in Raqqa who wrote his
name on the palm of a Yazidi girl during the purchasing
process to brand her as his property. There is the militant
in Mosul responsible for buying and selling girls along
with guns and rocket-propelled grenades. There is
the head of a police station in Raqqa who used his
position to facilitate human trafficking. And there are
women like Umm Sayyaf, who helped to enforce sexual
slavery, and Doctor Nawal, who carried out virginity
tests and forced abortions at the behest of Da’esh, even
injecting young girls with hormones to accelerate their
maturation and readiness for sale into sexual slavery.
There are many more like them — too many
to name — operating with absolute impunity.
These ongoing atrocities are motivated as much by
commercial as by ideological concerns. They are not
isolated incidents. Simply stated, women and children
have become part of the currency by which Da’esh
consolidates its power. This blood money is then used
to bankroll its actions and cement its authority.
Though it is largely invisible and difficult to
quantify, the blood money of women and children has
become part of the lifeblood that sustains that group. It

16-451135/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

is part of the financial calculus made by Da’esh fighters
that they will be able to supplement their salaries of a
few hundred dollars a month with potentially tens of
thousands of dollars raised through the sale and traffic
of women and children. Unlike oil and antiquities, to
which only top commanders have access, all militants
are able to exploit local women and children to boost
their personal economies.
In fact, a range of extremist groups are using
sexual violence to advance their military, political,
economic and ideological aims My Office has begun to
monitor this trend through the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on conflict-related sexual violence, which we
compile each year. These reports include an annexed
list of parties credibly suspected of committing or
being responsible for patterns of sexual violence in
situations on the Council’s agenda. Of the 48 parties
listed, 37 are non-State actors. Seven are designated as
terrorist groups. These include Da’esh, Ansar Eddine,
the Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Al-Shabaab, the
Al-Nusra Front, the Mouvement pour l’unicité et le
jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest, and Boko Haram. Such
groups invariably restrict women’s rights, autonomy
and freedoms through their reign of terror. Indeed, the
same litany of horrors echoes across the accounts of
Nigerian girls who have fled the grip of Boko Haram,
Somali women liberated from Al-Shabaab, and women
in northern Mali who languish in the shadow of Ansar
Eddine
The use of sexual violence as a tactic to strike
fear into the heart of the civilian population is not a
new phenomenon; neither are the commodification,
trafficking and exploitation of women and girls. But the
combination of the evils that we are witnessing today
seems unprecedented in its scope and brazen brutality.
Crimes of sexual violence have historically been
dismissed as random, opportunistic acts. They have
been part of the larger silence surrounding women’s
experience of war, linked to gender-based discrimination
and exclusion from security institutions. It is therefore
unsurprising that the crime of terrorism has never been
viewed through the eyes of its female victims.
Recognizing sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism
demands that we rethink our response. For instance,
we cannot deplore the public face of terrorism — the
bombing, killing and property destruction — while
ignoring the violence terrorists inflict on women and
girls in private, behind closed doors. Our efforts to
disrupt terrorist financing cannot be limited to oil
6/79

20/12/2016

smuggling and trafficking in antiquities, while ignoring
people smuggling and the trafficking of human beings.
As extremist groups evolve, their sources of financing
become increasingly sophisticated and diversified. The
result is a growing convergence between terrorism,
trafficking and transnational organized crime.
To meet these evolving threats, our policies must
also evolve. In this regard, applying a women, peace
and security perspective, or a gender lens, can be truly
transformative. Seen through this lens, sexual violence
represents the very front line in our battle against
violent extremism, because it is a battle being waged
on and over the bodies of women and girls. To disrupt
human trafficking is to help disrupt the business of
terrorism. This is critical, because when stripped of the
veneer of politics and the mystique of religion, we see
that the business of terrorism is business. It is profitable
crime under the cover of war. Although there is no
internationally agreed definition of terrorism, current
dynamics and realities on the ground have prompted
many to ask: “When is sexual violence a tactic of
terrorism?” To foster conceptual clarity, my Office has
identified six key dimensions.
The first is when it is committed by violent
extremists and terrorist groups in a systematic manner
that is integral to the operation.
The second is when it is deliberately used to spread
terror inculcate fear and create an atmosphere of
insecurity in order to intimidate and suppress opposition,
including as a form of collective punishment.
The third is when it is used to finance and sustain
the activities of terrorist groups or as part of the systems
of punishment and rewards through which they control
behaviour, and includes the gifting of women and girls
as a form of in-kind compensation for fighters and the
leveraging of the threat of sexual violence to extort
ransoms from the families of those abducted.
The fourth is when it is used to target political,
ethnic or religious groups as a form of prosecution.
Attacking women as symbolic bearers of cultural
identity to shred the social fabric and unravel kinship
ties. That tactic may be linked with forced displacement
and population flight.
The fifth is when it advances a strategy to
radicalize, recruit, retain or reward fighters — often
disseminated by a technology and communication
platform, as part of online propaganda. That includes
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

the promise of access to wives and sex slaves and the
trading of women between brothers in exclusive online
forums that cement group ties and affiliation.
Finally, sexual violence is a tactic of terrorism when
it is committed pursuant to an ideology of controlling
women’s bodies, sexuality and reproduction to produce
a generation that can be raised and groomed in the image
of the organization, according to their ideology. Da’esh
has established an official sex-trafficking institution,
dubbed Married Bureaus, to match young women to
fighters for that purpose.
Those six indicators of sexual violence as a tactic
of terror will continue to be tracked and monitored by
my mandate. Victims of sexual violence by terrorist
groups are victims of terrorism, in the same way that
victims of sexual violence by warring parties are
victims of war. Resolution 2331 (2016), adopted today,
is an important normative development in that regard.
The next step is to reflect that understanding in national
counter-terrorism legislation to render sexual violence
survivors eligible for relief and reparation programmes,
on a basis of equality with other victims. That must
be mirrored in national, regional and global counterterrorism strategies, which can no longer be decoupled
from efforts to protect and empower women and girls.
Greater coherence is needed between national
action plans on women, peace and security and plans
being developed to counter violent extremism. Indeed,
we have seen time and time again that if we ignore the
voices of grass-roots women, we do so at our peril.
Too often, women have identified the early signs of
radicalization but their warnings have gone unheard
and unheeded, due to a limited understanding of
terrorism and to narrow counter-terrorism strategies
which have traditionally been gender blind. Moving
forward, we must deepen the evidence base that informs
our advocacy and action. We must enhance information
sharing and judicial cooperation to combat crimes that
know no borders. It is a travesty and an outrage that not
one Da’esh fighter has yet been convicted for crimes of
sexual violence or even listed by our sanctions regime
on that basis. We must mobilize the moral authority of
progressive religious and community leaders who can
help to shift the blame, shame and stigma of sexual
violence from the victims to the perpetrators.
Socioeconomic reintegration support for survivors,
including medical, psychosocial, legal and livelihood
assistance must infuse all of our peacebuilding and

S/PV.7847

post-conflict reconstruction efforts. As evidenced
by their own families and communities, too many
survivors are seen as affiliates of extremist groups
rather than as victims. They are sometimes used as
intelligence assets by security forces. As we bring back
our girls, let us bring them back to an environment of
support and opportunity, not hostility and suspicion.
This is not just a fight against terrorism or a fight
against trafficking; it is ultimately a fight for the
values and ideas that shape our common future. Da’esh
and their affiliates may view abducted women as
commodities to be trafficked. They may itemize them
as price lists, ranging from $20 to $20,000, haggling
online over their victim’s perceived market value.
They may try to negotiate the waters for human life or
barter away a captured child for as little as a pack of
cigarettes, but I am confident that the Council and its
sanctions committees will meet those depraved acts of
terror with unity and clarity of purpose. Together, we
will send a resounding signal that the rights, freedoms
and futures of women and children are non-negotiable.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Bangura for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Hasan.
Ms. Hasan (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would
like to extend my most heartfelt thanks to the Spanish
delegation for having invited me today to talk about
an important subject that is ravaging the members of
my community.
I will open with a phrase that I heard on several
occasions after the black day of the attack on the Yazidi
region of Sinjar on 3 August 2014. It is a phrase told to
me over the phone by a Yazidi in the hands of Da’esh: “I
beg you to tell the authorities that if they cannot liberate
us, they should bomb us.” That phrase still reverberates
in my ears, as that sad and terrified girl told it to me.
That phrase, which I heard on subsequent occasions as
well, from other Yazidis, was uttered in vain. Indeed,
the terrorist organization Da’esh abducted over 6,500
Yazidi women and children. For two years, four months
and eighteen days, our women and girls have been sold
in slave markets and have been subjected to sexual
slavery and the slave trade in the worst phenomenon of
modern history, because Da’esh has taken us back to the
age of slavery and the slave trade, where a twelve-yearold girl is sold for a pack of cigarettes. Those crimes
are an embarrassment to humankind. The international

16-451137/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

community remained silent in the face of all that has
happened and is happening still.
Since 3 August 2014, the suffering of Yazidi has
continued. Women, in particular, and indeed, Yazidi
mothers have to choose between being raped themselves
or having their own children raped before their very
eyes. That is how we are treated by Da’esh. The
virginity of our girls has become the portal to paradise,
according to the laws and ideals of Da’esh. The majority
were presented as presents during Da’esh festivities or
religious competitions. What Da’esh is doing is based
on extremist precepts based on fatwahs and religious
texts within Islamic jurisprudence. We know that Islam
also contains moderate ideas and principles, but the
worst part is that Muslim political and religious leaders
have remained silent in the face of what Da’esh is doing.
That has led to our sadness and fear.
There is no clear fatwah stating that the murder of
the Yazidis or non-Muslims is a sin. There is no fatwah
that clearly states those who commit such crimes
are infidels. There is no such fatwa. We have heard no
clear expressions of sympathy from leaders. We are
facing a perniciousphenomenon that affects all States,
including those that are stable and democratic. We need
only consider the terrible attack yesterday in Germany
and the murder of the Russian Ambassador in Turkey,
committed in cold blood while the terrorists shouted
religious slogans.
The international community must eradicate
terrorism and eliminate its sources of financing. Da’esh
could not commit all those massacres without support.
The Yazidis are victims who have paid a very heavy
price and been forced to leave the countries where
they have lived for thousands of years. Some have
been freed, but genocide has been committed and the
Council has been unable to stop it. When selected areas
have been reopened, we find the mass graves of Yazidi
men, women and even disabled people. Yazidis have
often been the victims of murder. If the international
community does not provide us with protection, other
groups will commit similar crimes and once again
thousands of women and girls will become sexual slaves.
We cannot compromise with the honour and
dignity of our women and girls. I would ask members
to imagine for a few seconds that their son or daughter
became the object of a lucrative trade by terrorists or
was brainwashed and became a terrorist. Those are
very sad images, but unfortunately we them experience
8/79

20/12/2016

every day. That is the reality we witness daily; it is
a twenty-first century reality. Our women and our
children are brought to slave markets, much like in
medieval times. How can the human conscience stand
for that? More than 6,500 Yazidi women were abducted
but no military operation was carried out to free them.
Where is justice? More than 3,000 women and children
were freed by various means through the help of an
office of the Government of Kurdistan entrusted with
the affairs of kidnapped individuals and others.
The Yazidi religious leaders adopted a declaration
facilitating the reintegration victims and their provision
of special assistance. We are very grateful, but there are
more than 3,000 abducted women who are not treated
as prisoners of war. but used as sexual slaves, shared
and exchanged among fighters. We understand that the
international community has expressed sympathy for
our plight, but it must act to stop the genocide and to
protect our women so that they do not become objects
of such slavery.
To ensure the freedom of more than 3,000 Yazidi
women who remain in the hands of Da’esh, I request
that Yazidi areas be protected. I also ask for the
protection of other minorities to prevent the recurrence
of genocide and the enslavement of women. There is
a need to evacuate more than 4,000 immigrants from
Turkey and other countries, who currently live in very
difficult conditions, and to give the Yazidis, particularly
those who have been victims of slavery, opportunities
to immigrate, as Germany has done.
There are 100,000 displaced persons and refugees
in camps in Kurdistan. Despite the liberation of Yazidi
areas, they have been unable to return and need the
Council’s support given their humanitarian and health
problems. They need to be provided with consistent
support to face the problems of genocide and sexual
enslavement. We encourage the International Criminal
Court to investigate those crimes. I hope that our
requests will be considered so that we are able to
survive in dignity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Hasan for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Taha.
Ms. Taha (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank
the Spanish delegation for organizing this meeting on
human trafficking and for inviting me to speak to the
Council today. I would also like to thank the United
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

States delegation for inviting me to address the Council
for the first time a year ago (see S/PV.7585). 1 also thank
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and its
Executive Director, Mr. Yury Fedotov, for appointing
me Goodwill Ambassador for the Dignity of Survivors
of Human Trafficking.
When I was here in December 2015, I testified
about crimes of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) committed against me and the
Yazidi community. I told the Council about how ISIS
attacked my village of Kocho, how they rounded up all
the men and killed more than 700 of them in a single
day, including six of my brothers. I told the Council that
my mother was killed along with other older women. I
also recounted that I was enslaved by ISIS for sexual
slavery, along with more than 6,000 other Yazidi
women and children. I spoke about my ordeal — how
we were bought, sold and treated like property. I also
explained how I was raped by ISIS militants multiple
times per day.
Since I first sat before the Council, the ISIS
genocidal campaign against Yazidis has continued. As
of today, more than 3,000 Yazidis remain in captivity.
More than 350,000 Yazidis, along with more than
1.5 million other refugees, continue to live under
difficult conditions in the Kurdistan region of Iraq. In
my own family, two of my sisters-in-law, two nieces
and two nephews are still hostages of ISIS. A year ago,
my beloved niece Katherine was killed in an explosion
as she attempted to escape ISIS territory on foot. She
was just 18-years old.
My family has tried to rescue my nephew Malik,
now 13-years old. Malik has sometimes called us from
captivity, and we have learned that he has been held at
an ISIS training camp in Raqqa and is being trained as
a child soldier. A few months ago, a rescuer was able to
find Malik alone at a bakery in Raqqa. Malik refused to
try to escape with the rescuer, saying that Yazidis are
infidels who should convert and join ISIS. I am worried
sick that he will soon be on the front lines. Another one
of my nieces, Nasreen, remains in captivity. She was
just 16-years old when she was kidnapped by ISIS. As
we sit here having this discussion, she is probably being
tortured by ISIS militants three times her age.
Three months ago, I came to the United Nations
with my lawyer, Amal Clooney. We asked the Security
Council to establish an independent body to investigate
the crimes committed by ISIS against all Iraqis. We

S/PV.7847

have pointed out that the Iraqi Government made that
request and that it was the least the Council could do in
the face of ISIS’ systematic atrocities. We said that the
evidence was disappearing and time was running out.
There has been some progress. The United Kingdom
has shown great leadership in the Security Council
in proposing the establishment of an international
response to the global threat posed by ISIS, including
by setting up a mechanism to gather evidence of
international crimes committed by ISIS in Iraq. The
representatives of that country have spoken about that
this year at the United Nations including just last week
at an event at which the Attorney General spoke when
Amal Clooney and I met with representatives of France,
the United States and Russia. They were generally
positive with regard to the idea of establishing such a
mechanism in cooperation with the Iraqi Government.
The Iraqi Government has also encouraged it, as well.
Since the high-level summit of the General Assembly
this fall in New York, we have discussed it in Baghdad
and London. Six weeks ago, the Iraqi Minister for
Foreign Affairs also committed to working with the
United Kingdom to implement a United Nationsled campaign to act and preserve evidence of crimes
committed by Da’esh. I would like to thank Foreign
Minister Al-Jaafari and Prime Minister Al Abadi for
voicing support for that initiative.
However, time is running out, and statements of
support are not enough. Action needs to be taken. But
I do not know what more it will take for the Council
to act. I do not understand how there is no court able
to prosecute the perpetrators of crimes committed
against Yazidis or any independent body to investigate
them. I do not understand why the bodies of my
murdered mother and brothers still lie unprotected and
unexamined in mass graves. I do not understand how
ISIS militants can publish evidence of their crimes
online and fail to be arrested. I do not know how it is
that, although ISIS has no friends on the Council, the
latter still does not move forward. I am not a diplomat,
and my message is not political. My fight is one for
all Iraqis who have suffered at the hands of ISIS. My
cause is that it can never be wrong to collect evidence
of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
and that it is imperative, if we are not able to stop such
crimes, that we at least commit to establishing a record
of them.
Therefore, on behalf of all Iraqis who have suffered
at the hands of ISIS, I call on Prime Minister Al

16-451139/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Abadi to send a letter to the Security Council asking
for the establishment of an international independent
commission for Iraq to investigate and document the
crimes committed by ISIS. I hope that the Council will
then act swiftly to create such a commission. My fight
is one for justice, and I know that justice is important to
all victims of human trafficking throughout the world.
Yet many survivors whom I have met feel abandoned
and ignored. Minority groups see themselves as
forgotten and left to become a footnote of history.
Women and children in conflict areas are sacrificed
instead of being protected.
The worlds’ most powerful nations that are
represented here can stop that by ensuring that
human traffickers face punishment for their crimes;
contributing to the United Nations Voluntary Trust
Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, especially
women and children, which was established by the
General Assembly to provide critical assistance and
support to survivors; by providing assistance to the
establishment of international safe zones; and by taking
in refugees who are fleeing brutal wars, as countries
such as Germany, France, the United States, Canada
and Australia have already done or pledged to do with
regard to the Yazidis. Today, I ask members to take a
first step towards ensuring justice is done for Iraqi and
other victims of war, genocide and human trafficking
so that, one day, I can face my abusers in a court of law
and tell them what they have done, and so that other
victims of war terror and those who abuse them learn
that this is what the United Nations stands for and does.
We have waited long enough.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Taha
for her very meaningful briefing.
On behalf of all the members of the Security
Council, I thank all the briefers for their very
informative briefings.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2016/1073, which contains the text of
a draft resolution submitted by Albania, Andorra,
Angola, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico,
Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, Nicaragua,
Norway, Palau, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania,
10/79

20/12/2016

Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay and Vanuatu.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2331 (2016).
I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity as President of the Government of Spain.
I wish to begin my statement by warmly thanking
the following for their presence participation in today’s
debate: Secretary-General Ban-Ki-moon; Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime; Ms. Zainab Hava Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict; Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan;
and Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha.
This meeting is particularly important for Spain not
only because of the topic’s relevance but also because
it is the last debate that my country shall convene as
a non-permanent member of the Security Council.
Moreover, human trafficking is a clear affront to human
dignity and also represents a threat to international
peace and security in conflict and terrorism-related
situations. It is a reincarnation of slavery in the midst
of the twenty-first century. Leaders from throughout
the world and representatives of civil society have
underscored the moral imperative of combating human
trafficking and all modern forms of slavery. The
victims, the majority of whom are women and children,
require — as was stated here — an urgent response, in
particular by the Security Council.
My delegation proposes a paradigm shift
recognizing that national judicial systems can break
down in conflict situations. Under those circumstances,
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

action by the Security Council becomes necessary. It is
on that basis that we proposed resolution 2331 (2016),
the first resolution in the history of the Security Council
on this tragic phenomenon.
With this open debate, we are beginning to engage
in what will be a deep reflection upon what contributions
the Council can make to condemn human trafficking in
areas of conflicts and the situations of exploitation to
which that trafficking leads. We also propose exploring
means of strengthening the normative framework in the
area of sanctions, financial flows, victim protection and
assistance and developing a more effective strategy in
the fight against human trafficking in areas of conflict.
The response of the United Nations to the scourge
of human trafficking continues to be fragmented.
Eradicating this scourge requires more than just the
efforts of a single region, country, or department or
agency of the United Nations. It requires efforts from
all parties concerned, including the Council.
Unfortunately, the connection between conflict and
human trafficking is not a new one. The novel element
is the use of human trafficking as a tactic in terrorism in
the economy of war by groups like Da’esh, Al-Shabaab
and Boko Haram. We have just heard the shocking
account of a brave survivor, Ms. Nadia Murad Basee
Taha, who is now a strong defender of the rights of the
Yazidi people in Iraq and the winner of the Sakharov
Prize for Freedom of Thought. We have also heard
from someone who risked her life to rescue many of
those victims, Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan. Both of them,
along with Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, have explained how Da’esh is openly
promoting the trafficking and enslavement of women
and children, thereby defying the most elemental norms
of international law.
However, trafficking in situations of conflict is
not limited to the context of terrorism. The conflicts
in Iraq, Syria, Libya and the Sahel — just to mention
a few — are leading to the mass displacement of
particularly vulnerable groups. That renders them
even more vulnerable to exploitation and trafficking
networks. Like many other countries, at the end of
2015, Spain adopted a new comprehensive plan to
fight human trafficking for the purposes of sexual
exploitation. Also in 2015, my Government strengthened
coordination between civil society organizations and
our State security agencies. We have worked to develop
a counternarrative to extremism as part of our national

S/PV.7847

strategy to fight violent extremism. My country has
put in place a communication strategy on cyberspace
that includes a counternarrative to radicalization. In
that regard, it is essential to monitor social networks in
order to prevent extremism and gain knowledge of any
radical content that could lead to trafficking.
The next five years afford us a historic opportunity
for us to place the fight against the worst forms of
exploitation at the top of the list of United Nations
priorities. While important progress has been made
in certain areas, much remains to be done. In that
regard, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his efforts in combating sexual exploitation and
abuse and his zero-tolerance policy regarding sexual
violence, which in some cases is perpetrated by Blue
Helmets. I would like to conclude by stating that my
country will resolutely support all efforts to ensure that
perpetrators are brought to justice and that they serve
their sentences. Let us strengthen our efforts to achieve
that goal. That is what I ask of everyone today.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine) (spoke in Spanish):
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
on behalf of the European Union and wishes to make
the following statement in its national capacity.
First of all, taking advantage of the fact that the
President of the Government of Spain is presiding over
the Security Council, I would like to express, on behalf
of Ukraine, our sincere gratitude and appreciation for
Spain’s contribution to the work of the Council and its
dedication and effectiveness during these two years.
The active participation of Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi and his team on such important issues on the
Council’s agenda, such as the fight against terrorism,
non-proliferation and the promotion of human rights,
serves as an example for permanent and non-permanent
members of the Council.
In particular, we appreciate the consistent and
persistent position of Spain in the promotion of gender
equality. Resolution 2242 (2015), the Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security, which was
established by the delegations of Spain and Great
Britain, and the launch of the Network of National
Coordinators for Women and Peace and Security are

16-4511311/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

20/12/2016

just a few of the examples of real achievements made
by Spain to improve the efficiency of the Organization,
particularly of the Security Council

against trafficking in persons was identified as one of
the priorities of the Government of Ukraine in the area
of the protection of human rights.

I would also like to emphasize the importance of the
topic proposed for discussion in today’s open debate.
The issue of human trafficking has been the focus
of attention of the United Nations in recent decades.
The Palermo Protocol of 2000 and the Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons of 2010 are
cornerstones and key documents for all States Members
of the Organization. Nonetheless, in recent years, we
have observed an evolution of human trafficking,
especially in situations of conflict and post-conflict.
In different parts of the world affected by conflict,
sexual violence is used as a destructive tactic of war
or terrorism, as well as one of the key elements of the
ideology and activities of extremist groups, such as
Boko Haram and Da’esh. The terrorist groups that I just
mentioned are openly promoting human trafficking as
part of their military strategy or as a source of funding.
That is why the connection between phenomena like
human trafficking, sexual violence in conflict situations
and the activities of terrorist organizations requires
special attention from the Security Council.

At the same time, I would like to reiterate my
country’s request to include in the respective mandates
of the Organization consideration of the problem of
sexual violence in the Ukrainian territories temporarily
occupied by Russia. In view of the fact that Ukraine’s
police and security agencies do not have access to the
territory of Crimea, which is occupied by Russia, or
to certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions,
which are controlled by terrorists supported by Russia,
we must resolve the problem of the verification and
documentation of cases of sexual violence in those
territories in order to provide support and assistance
to victims.

The adoption of resolution 2331 (2016) is a timely
measure that demonstrates the ability of the Security
Council to respond to the new challenges and threats
that arise in the area of ​​peace and security. We cannot
close our eyes in the face of the situation on the ground.
We cannot wait for the number of victims of sexual
exploitation and sexual violence related to trafficking
to reach the terrible numbers of the war in Bosnia and
Herzegovina or the genocide in Rwanda.
A constant problem is the underestimation of data
on sexual violence in conflicts. That is mainly because
of stigma, fear of reprisals, lack of access for monitoring
and inadequate means to ensure accountability. That is
why it is important that the resolution adopted today be
a new tool for the Security Council that helps facilitate
the assessment of the situation on the ground in conflict
zones and post-conflict situations. That will allow us to
study and reflect on in future reports of the SecretaryGeneral the problem of the connection between
human trafficking and the activities of traffickers and
terrorist groups.
Ukraine strongly supports international efforts to
combat all forms of human rights violations and abuses
in conflict and post-conflict situations. The fight
12/79

I am convinced that General Assembly resolution
71/202, adopted yesterday, on human rights in the
temporarily occupied territory of Crimea provides the
United Nations with the necessary authority to compel
Russia to fulfil its responsibilities as an occupying
Power, as it is defined in the resolution. It is sad that
we are talking about a country that, as a permanent
member of the Security Council, must assume special
responsibility to fulfil the Charter of the United
Nations, even though it became a State Member of the
United Nations only 25 years ago.
Finally, I would like to mention another issue of
great importance to all of us, that is, accountability and
the prosecution of perpetrators of human trafficking
and crimes of sexual violence in conflict. The high
level of impunity for those who commit such crimes
in conflict is unacceptable, as the repetition of those
crimes creates a vicious cycle of criminality. Together
with the provision of psychological, social and medical
support to victims, we consider the fight against
impunity a priority.
Mr. Stewart (United Kingdom): Allow me to begin
by putting on record our deep condolences to the family
of the Russian Ambassador for the terrible tragedy
in Turkey.
The testimony that we heard from Ms. Nadia
Murad Basee Taha has really brought home to us,
through the specificity of her experience, the horror
of what she experienced: her six brothers killed, the
stories of what happened to Catherine or indeed to her
nephew, Malik. The story that she has shared with us
is not simply a story of violence, but in everything that
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

she said she underscored the way in which these are
forms of violence, of coercion, of slavery and, in their
systematic and deliberate nature, forms of war.
I would also like to pay tribute to the Spanish
delegation for bringing resolution 2331 (2016) forward,
and to the analytical clarity with which Ms. Zainab
Bangura in particular, and the Spanish Government in
drafting the resolution, has brought to our analysis this
problem, by which I mean specifically the ways in which,
in paragraphs 8 and 9, we focused on the mechanics of
human trafficking in conflict — on the ways in which
it is used for recruitment, for financing, for destroying
communities, for displacing communities, for gathering
intelligence, for advancing ideology; the ways in
which this violence can be perpetrated through rape,
through sexual slavery, through forced prostitution
and pregnancy. This detailed, rigorous and analytical
description does not minimize or distract from, in fact
it amplifies, the horror of what we are witnessing.
Personally, having been in Iraq in 2014 immediately
after the situation in Sinjar and having seen directly
Yazidi families struggling in those immediate first few
days with the death of family members who had been
kidnapped and removed from them, I could not believe,
as someone who had been working in Iraq since 2013,
the depth of that horror. Indeed, on my trip to Iraq just
two and a half weeks ago I saw how permanent the
scars of what the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
has done within refugee camps — the damage it has
done to communities, to countries and, above all, to
a civilization.
However, today we are really at this meeting
to focus on practical action, so I just want to take
a little time to make three brief observations on
practical action: the first is about our approach, the
second is about implementation and the third is about
bureaucracy. Humility needs to be fundamental to our
approach. We must take into account how difficult it
is to operate in a conflict environment; how difficult
it is to access; to provide protection; how difficult it is
to protect and to prosecute; how honest we have to be
about the gaps in our knowledge; how much we need
to learn from what the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) does in other areas — in counter
narcotics, illegal wildlife trade and terrorism. However,
we must also consider the ways in which this can be
quite specific, both in the nature of the violence but
also in the context in which it operates, whether it is in
Mosul, in Nigeria or with Boko Haram or with Da’esh.

S/PV.7847

On implementation, I would like to pay tribute to
the Spanish Government, particularly for two elements,
the focus in paragraph 2 (d) on victim identification
and the focus in paragraphs 19 and 20 on training,
in particular that of peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers. At the heart of our response there needs to be
not just an understanding of what we ought to do, but
what we can do, in particular an understanding of our
own bureaucracies and the impediments and problems
in those bureaucracies. Therefore, we have been very
clear on the challenges around predeployment training,
readiness standards, needs assessments and technical
capacity. But the next stage needs to be to really
understand our agencies — to really understand what
reform will mean within UNODC, the International
Labour Organization, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration — and the ways in which
that connects to what civil society is doing and to what
officials in the countries concerned are doing. It is
very easy to sit around a table like this and talk in the
abstract about coordination, but this is fundamentally
about resources, institutional culture and about training
in the broader sense.
Within the United Kingdom, we are focusing on two
things. We are focusing, as Nadia said, on the issue of
accountability in Iraq and with the Iraqi Government.
Our Prime Minister has set up a task force on modernday slavery, whose focus is above all on practical
learning, on coordination and on implementation.
In conclusion, this meeting today is in many ways
and optimistic moment. It is exactly the kind of thing
that the Council should be focused on — because of its
transnational nature and the non-State actors involved.
We owe huge thanks both to the Spanish leadership
and the multilateral Organization we exist within and
for the way that is being connected with the analytical
rigor, which is being provided by the officials and by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and also the way in which that connects to the human
testimony from Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan and Nadia,
which connects the rhetoric of this Chamber to the
reality on the ground. However, we are not just at
this meeting to describe the world, we are here to
change it. That is going to involve some very difficult
conversations within our own bureaucracies and
agencies on reform — reform that is needed because
this relates to our deepest moral intuitions and our
deepest moral obligations.

16-4511313/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. Mariano
Rajoy Brey, President of the Government of Spain, for
convening this important meeting and for presiding over
it yourself. My thanks also go to our briefers, who have
spoken clearly on concrete crimes, with striking power
and courage to reveal these attacks against human
dignity that taking place even now on the ground.
Japan welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2331 (2016), which is the very first resolution
of the Council to address trafficking in persons in
conflict. I would like to express my sincere appreciation
for the strong leadership of Spain in guiding us towards
this goal.
Japan welcomes the resolution, which makes it
clear that trafficking in persons is connected to sexual
violence, terrorism and other international organized
criminal activities and also that it exemplifies how
trafficking in persons in armed conflict and sexual
violence can be and is used as a tactic by certain
terrorist groups.
Trafficking in persons in conflict situations is a
violation of human dignity and human rights, but it
does not stop there. It is being used more and more
systematically, sometimes accompanied by sexual
violence, by terrorist groups and non-State actors as
a tool for fundraising, recruitment and the destruction
of communities. In such cases it poses serious threats
to international peace and security. The international
community is responsible for removing this threat by
holding those who engage in such activities accountable.
The briefings heard by the Council today, especially
from Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha, convince us of
the urgent need to take action to combat this problem.
In order to accurately recognize and address the
situation effectively, the Security Council needs to
have relevant information. This resolution promotes
information-sharing in the Council by requesting the
Secretary-General to report on trafficking in persons
in armed conflict and by welcoming briefings to be
submitted to the Council by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNDOC) and other relevant actors.
Furthermore, the resolution expresses the Council’s
intention to integrate this issue into the work of the
relevant sanctions committees, in accordance with
their mandates, to invite the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and on Children and Armed Conflict to brief those
14/79

20/12/2016

committees. I am confident that such steps will enable
us to move forward effectively.
Japan acknowledges that the Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol on
trafficking in persons are essential as an international
framework to combat trafficking in persons. It is
necessary to ensure that the spirit of the Convention
is reflected in national laws of Member States and
effectively implemented.
In that regard, Japan attaches great importance to
the assistance provided by the relevant entities, such as
UNDOC and the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence, including on legislation and law
enforcement. We expect them to make further progress
and we strongly support their critical work.
In concluding, I would like to reaffirm Japan’s
commitment to contributing to the efforts of all to
combat the trafficking of persons in conflict.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would
like to reiterate our expressions of solidarity and
condolences to the Government and the people of the
Russian Federation folowing the brutal assassination of
their Ambassador, Andrey Karlov ,yesterday in Turkey.
We call for an end to hate speech against the Russian
Federation regarding the situation in the Middle East.
We are honoured by your presence, Sir, Mr. Mariano
Rajoy Brey, as President of the Government of Spain, at
this important open debate. This is the final debate in
which we will participate as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council. We also wish to express
our warmest congratulations for the work of your
Ambassador, Sir, Mr. Román Oyarzun Marchesi, who,
along with the Spanish team, has done excellent work
during your membership of the Security Council.
We also appreciate the briefings given by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Mr. Yury Fedotov
and Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura. We especially wish
to thank Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan and Ms. Nadia
Murad Basee Taha for their courage and for reminding
us once again today of the consequences and trauma
experienced by victims of war and terrorism, in this
case in one of its most perverse forms: trafficking in
persons and sexual violence.
Venezuela furthermore wishes to align itself with
the statement to be delivered by the delegation of the
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Kingdom of Bahrain on behalf of the Group of Friends
against Trafficking in Persons.
The information provided by today’s briefers
and Nadia Murad Basee Taha’s wrenching testimony
in particular could not have been more eloquent or
revealing. Her sad experience regarding the murder of
her family and the situation in her village demonstrate
the brutal nature of the war taking place in the
Middle East.
It is unacceptable to us that human beings are used
by criminal and terrorist groups as spoils of war. We
are witnessing a tragedy that is being experienced by
thousands of people, especially women and children.
In addition to the horrors of armed conflict, they are
victims of trafficking and sexual violence: crimes
that attack human dignity in the most perverse of
ways and, depending on the circumstances, constitute
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law
and international conventions on human rights and on
transnational organized crime.
Trafficking in persons is a transnational crime
from which no country is exempt. Nevertheless, it is
necessary to highlight that the reasons for and causes
that promote this type of crime — and the fact that
extremist and terrorist groups use trafficking in
persons and sexual violence as part of their strategic
goals and to finance their criminal activities — have
been exacerbated in recent years due to situations of
armed conflict in various regions of the world, such as
the Middle East and North Africa, and in particular in
Iraq, Syria, Libya and the Sahel. In the case of the latter,
due to the destruction of the social fabric of the Sahel
region of Africa, terrorism has been spread throughout
the Lake Chad basin by groups such as Boko Haram,
which operate in various countries.
In the Global Report on Trafficking in Persons,
published by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in 2014, it was acknowledged that, prior to
the year 2011, when the Syrian conflict began, it was
very rare to identify victims of trafficking of Syrian
nationality. In the briefing given by Mr. Fedotov a year
ago he stated that since the so-called Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant began its uprising in the north of
the country, victims of trafficking from Iraq and Syria
have been more frequently identified in various parts
of the world.
The report of the Secretary-General on sexual
violence in armed conflicts (S/2016/361) highlighted the

S/PV.7847

fact that in the past two years sexual violence has been
increasingly linked to the strategic, ideological and
financial objectives of extremist and terrorist groups.
Venezuela recognizes that trafficking in persons and
sexual violence are being used by some extremist and
terrorist groups as a terror tactic and also to finance
this scourge. Moreover, the enslavement and trafficking
of women and children demonstrates their absolute
disregard towards women and their intolerance and
hatred of other races, cultures and religions. It is the
clearest sign of the brutal and despicable nature of
those extremist groups, which will have to be brought
to justice.
All the information we have available to us clearly
points to the fact that the training, equipping and
promotion of non-State actors, whose actions are based
on violent extremism, are aimed at promoting the breakup of States for political reasons and the creation of
such groups as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
the Al-Nusra Front and the Army of Conquerors. They
also facilitate the commission of various atrocities,
war crimes and crimes against humanity against the
population, in particular against the most vulnerable
groups, such as women and children.
In that regard, we once again demand that all
actors in the international community prevent those
kinds of crimes. The best way to do that is to fully
respect the standards and provisions of international
law and the relevant resolutions of the Council and
the General Assembly relating to the prohibition on
providing weapons and financial and logistical support
to such non-State violent groups, who often become
terrorist groups. That way we can effectively decrease
their operational capacity and, consequently, reduce
the number of various crimes related to trafficking
in persons and sexual violence. Ending trafficking in
persons and sexual violence in armed conflicts means
being fully committed to resolving armed conflicts
wherever such crimes occur.
While we need to confront the criminal mafias
that engage in human trafficking and take advantage
of the tragedy of millions of human beings, we must
also act in a coherent political and moral way, without
encouraging armed conflicts that are based on economic
and geopolitical interests. In that way, we can avoid the
tragic consequences that we want to eradicate today,
but which were not given due consideration when some
countries irresponsibly supported military aggression
in Iraq, Libya and now in Syria. In the Security Council

16-4511315/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

we need to expend a huge effort to put a stop and to
rectify the irreparable suffering of millions of people
and the destruction of entire societies.
We believe that accountability is one of the most
important aspects related to the prevention of this kind of
crime. We cannot accept impunity for this kind of crime.
Venezuela is in favour of effective accountability for all
forms of sexual violence. Exemplary sanctions should
be applied to all instigators and perpetrators of those
crimes, including the adoption of targeted sanctions,
in accordance with the mechanisms established by the
Security Council. Just as important is the establishment
and the scaling-up of national institutional capacities
related to justice, health care and social welfare systems
in countries in situations of armed conflict and postconflict, so that, while fully respecting the sovereignty
of the States concerned, we can develop and build their
capacities with the goal of providing due attention to
the victims.
We believe that we have sound legal instruments
at hand that could make it possible for us to combat
the crime of trafficking in human beings and also to
cover situations of armed conflict. An example is the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. That is an instrument that has almost
reached universal membership. We also have the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, including provisions pertaining to examining
this problem in situations of conflict. In 2017, there will
be a full review of that Plan of Action. It will be an ideal
opportunity to strengthen the Plan and to address the
challenges that we are currently dealing with.

20/12/2016

States, with the goal of coordinating and establishing
synergies together with the various entities of the
United Nations that have a remit in that area and with
different regional and subregional mechanisms.
To conclude, Venezuela would like to reiterate
its commitment to contribute to strengthening the
institutional, administrative and judicial instruments
that are key in the fight to eradicate those horrendous
and barbaric crimes against humanity, which are an
affront to civilization and to the modern world. They
are a pressing responsibility for the Organization if we
want to see its noble purposes and principles become
a reality.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we would like to thank you, Mr. Mariano
Rajoy Brey, President of the Government of Spain,
for presiding over today’s open debate. I also thank
the briefers for their comprehensive statements. We
congratulate Spain on having convened this open
debate, which is of particular importance in the current
context, given the unprecedented mass migration
crisis, with refugees and internally displaced persons
becoming the main targets of traffickers.
Trafficking in persons in situations of conflict is
a global problem. It concerns not only the countries of
origin, but also the transit and destination countries of
victims, the countries in which those criminal networks
operate and those through which money passes for
those networks. And the list could continue.

Resolution 2332 (2016), adopted today by
consensus in the Security Council, is an extraordinary
and concrete contribution by the Security Council on
this topic for those situations of armed conflict that we
were discussing. Also, it clearly points to the need to
have better strategic coordination of efforts in order to
prevent trafficking in persons and sexual violence and
also to confront it, in line with efforts to combat violent
extremism, which could lead to terrorism.

Human trafficking is a means of subjugating and
using human beings for profit. It gravely violates
their human rights. Through abuses and violence,
it degrades the victims’ human condition and turns
them into commodities. It removes their physical and
emotional integrity. It is a threat to all of society and
affects the well-being of communities and the security
of nations. According to the World Report on Human
Trafficking of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), that phenomenon affects practically
all regions of the world. UNODC has identified at
least 510 flows of transnational trafficking in persons.
Most of those victims are targeted for the purposes of
sexual exploitation.

In addition, I would like to add that the nature of
both crimes and the measures aimed at their effective
prevention and eradication in the context of armed
conflict also requires forms of broadened democratic
discussion that ensures the full participation of Member

Those conflicts and humanitarian crises only
increase the risks of human trafficking. They find
fertile ground in economic desperation and in the
weakening of the rule of law and fewer social services.
As a result, people are forced to leave their homes, and

16/79

16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

even their countries of residence. In that regard, when a
country is in a situation of conflict, the rule of law in its
territory can be weakened. That creates greater freedom
of action for those organizations that seek to exploit the
institutional weaknesses for their illegal activities, such
as human trafficking. Even if we deem that today one
of the main elements that creates human trafficking
situations in conflict situations is the self-described
Islamic State and its associated groups, we need to bear
in mind that those crimes are also perpetrated by other
actors that operate in the same violent manner in others
regions of the world.
Resolution 2231 (2016), which we have unanimously
adopted today, which Uruguay co-sponsored, roundly
condemns human trafficking in armed conflictaffected areas. That is a cross-cutting and multifaceted
phenomenon. Unfortunately, it is being replicated and it
is affecting very fragile areas of the world where people
are living in situations of high vulnerability. Uruguay
wishes to highlight several elements in the resolution
that we believe are extremely important.
First, the resolution calls for ratifying and
implementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, as well as the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. Those agreements
make up the international legal framework of rules and
obligations to ensure that States develop international
instruments to combat trafficking in persons.
Secondly, the resolution highlights the need for
cooperation and exchange of information. In that regard,
Uruguay positively views the growing connection
between the work of UNODC, the Secretary-General
and the Security Council, since increasingly trafficking
in persons is linked to armed conflicts and threats to
international peace and security. We welcome the work
of UNODC as the guardian of the Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, including the Palermo
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, especially Women and Children.
Thirdly, the resolution addresses sexual violence
and the strengthening of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Uruguay condemns the use of
sexual violence by any party as a terrorist tactic to
further such an agenda. Those practices have led to the
development of a growing nexus between trafficking
in persons and conflict, thereby violating the rights of

S/PV.7847

thousands of women and children within the context
of war.
Another significant aspect is training. The
complexity of human trafficking means there needs to
be greater awareness, in addition to specialized training
within that scope for as many people as possible, but
especially for the officials and points of contact to
whom it is most likely victims will turn, such as police
and military officers, help centres, consulates and
embassies, among others.
Furthermore, we recognize the role of civil society
in providing assistance and support to victims. In that
regard, Uruguay has concluded drafting a comprehensive
preliminary bill to prevent and fight trafficking in and
exploitation of persons that underscores the human
rights of the victims as a top priority. It also calls
upon diplomatic missions to engage in trafficking
prevention activities, promote training for staff, make
available information easily accessible and create
support initiatives for victims. Moreover, the resolution
emphasizes the need to reintegrate victims into society
and adopt mechanisms to protect and support them.
Uruguay, as a country committed to promoting,
protecting and upholding human rights, wishes to
underpin the need to provide comprehensive assistance
to the victims of trafficking in persons. We must focus
on their recovery and reintegration into society, and
not just penalize the crime in question. The victims
must receive assistance and legal and psycho-social
protection. Furthermore, for Uruguay, it is key that the
victims of human trafficking not be punished for crimes
that they may have committed, if it is determined
that they were subjected to trafficking at the time of
committing those crimes.
Uruguay also believes that activities related to
trafficking in persons not be restricted to the time
period of a given conflict. The frameworks for action in
the wake of armed conflict are also lacking in terms of
shortcomings within the justice system and compliance
with the law, in addition to an organized civil society
that can file complaints about such situations. That is
why our country believes that the work of UNODC
and the Security Council should be carried out in
close coordination with the Peacebuilding Commission
with a view to preventing territories in post-conflict
situations from turning into fertile grounds for
criminal organizations.

16-4511317/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

By way of conclusion, we believe, in short, that
fighting trafficking in persons in conflict situations
requires efforts and cooperation from the international
community as a whole in order to address the needs
of those who are most vulnerable, such as women and
children. To that end, we must take appropriate action
both internally and internationally. We must recognize
that we are the ones that are responsible for effecting
real change, which we can do by taking a broad,
comprehensive and multifaceted approach to the issue of
trafficking in persons in conflict situations, something
that requires determination and political will. The
international community can count on Uruguay’s firm
commitment in that vein.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): On behalf
of France, I would like to begin by expressing our
deepest condolences and sincere sympathy to all those
who have been struck by the tragic terrorist attacks
over the past two days.
Allow me to warmly thank the Spanish presidency
for organizing this especially important debate and to
congratulate it for its tireless efforts that have led to
the adoption of resolution 2331 (2016). It is an excellent
illustration of the outstanding Spanish presidency and
the exceptional work carried out by its Ambassador to
the United Nations and his team. I would also like to
express my gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
presence here and for his commitment to the topic,
as well as to Ms. Bangura and Mr. Fedotov for their
always enlightening briefings. Finally, I would also
like to particularly thank Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan
and Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha for their moving
testimonies, the reminder that they have offered us and
their fight, which is also our fight.

20/12/2016

In Syria women suffer the worst types of
atrocities — rape, forced marriage and prostitution are
the daily lot for the people who live in the areas controlled
by Da’esh. Da’esh has established an actual market in
Iraq, where women and girls from minorities, such as
Yazidis or Christians, are sold to be used as sexual
slaves. The United Nations Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
confirmed in its June 2016 report to the Human Rights
Council that crimes against humanity and crimes of
genocide were committed by Da’esh against young
Yazidi women. In West Africa, particularly in Nigeria,
Boko Haram has tortured, raped and held as prisoners
hundreds of women and children.
Those acts are not only unacceptable from a
moral point of view, but they constitute war crimes,
crimes against humanity and, in some cases, crimes of
genocide. Terrorist groups that commit such atrocities
take what it means to be human to new lows. Those
responsible for such crimes will be held accountable
before the court of law. To confront such crimes, we
must act in the name of protection — protection of
civilians, obviously, especially of women and children,
but also protection of international humanitarian law
and the very principles of our Organization.

France aligns itself with the statement that will
be made by the Anti-Trafficking Coordinator of the
European Union.

For France, the fight against trafficking in persons,
especially in women and children, and the fight against
sexual violence committed against them in situations
of conflict, is an absolute top priority. Such priority
has led France to take action on the various fronts in
this important fight. France is involved in numerous
bilateral and regional cooperation efforts to help the
most vulnerable States in confronting such a scourge.
France also actively participates in capacity-building
programmes of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), particularly in West Africa. And my
country has been the largest contributor to the UNODC
funds for human trafficking since its establishment
in 2010.

Trafficking in persons is one of the most profitable
and widespread means of trafficking around the world.
The actions committed by Da’esh and Boko Haram
dramatically illustrate the link between trafficking of
persons, often related to sexual violence, and terrorism.
For those terrorist groups, the first victims claimed
are generally women and children. And trafficking
in persons is not only a way of sowing terror among
civilian populations, but it is also used as a source of
financing or recruitment tool.

France has spared no effort, and will spare no
effort, to mobilize the international community in
this fight. Following the conference that took place
in Paris in September 2015 on the victims of religious
and ethnic violence in the Middle East, during France’s
presidency of the Council in June we organized a debate
(see S/PV.7704) on trafficking in persons and sexual
violence in conflict situations. We commend the fact
that some of the recommendations formulated during
that debate were reflected in resolution 2331 (2016),

18/79

16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

presented by Spain. Finally, UNODC will present
tomorrow, with the support of France, its biennial
global report on trafficking in persons.
The Security Council shoulders a collective
responsibility in the fight against trafficking in persons
in conflict situations. We have at our disposal the
relevant international legal framework — the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its protocols, including the protocol dedicated
to combating human trafficking. It is within that
framework that we need to strengthen our engagement.
Human trafficking and sexual violence committed
in situations of conflict are too often considered as
separate from the threats to international peace and
security that are reviewed by the Security Council. In
fact, those practices are part and parcel of the strategies
of such terrorist groups as Da’esh and Boko Haram, and
indeed are a threat to international peace and security.
As the threat of terrorism evolves, we must evolve with
it.
I would therefore like to conclude by echoing
one of the main messages of the resolution: the need
to better take into account the link between human
trafficking, sexual violence and terrorism, which for the
very first time has been clearly recognized as a threat
to international peace and security — a potentially
crucial breakthrough. Following presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/25, adopted in December 2015, the
Council has taken a major step forward today. On
that basis, a more in depth analysis of the threat and
identification of the individuals and entities that,
through their actions, are involved in human trafficking,
is necessary. That work should be carried out jointly by
the entities in charge of the fight against terrorism in
the United Nations: the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Office of the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
In the face of such appalling crimes and challenges
to human conscience, it is our collective responsibility
to act in order to put an end to those crimes and
prosecute those responsible for such actions without
let-up. The resolution that we have adopted today gives
us additional legal instruments to move ahead in that
direction. Let us unite our efforts to make the best
possible use of those instruments.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I wish once again to
warmly welcome the President of the Government of
Spain to the Security Council and to express to him my

S/PV.7847

appreciation for his presiding earlier over our meeting
today. His presence here today is a clear indication of
the importance that Spain attaches to this issue. The
focus on the phenomenon of human trafficking in
armed conflict, which highlights a disturbing trend that
warrants strengthened international action, is indeed
commendable and timely.
Allow me to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and the other briefers for their respective
briefings and steadfast commitment to addressing the
issue of human trafficking in their work. I also wish
to thank Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan and Ms. Nadia
Murad for their harrowing and powerful testimonies.
Their courage and fortitude in the face of unspeakable
horrors should compel us to act, and demands to be
matched by the strongest resolve from the international
community to ensure that the detestable treatment that
they and others have experienced is not repeated.
Trafficking in persons is abhorrent in any context;
on that there is universal agreement. Human trafficking
entails the extrajudicial judgment that certain groups
of people, whether on the basis of ethnicity, faith,
gender, economic status, age or other random criteria,
are inferior lots and can be used as a means to an end.
Human traffickers strip people of their dignity and
negate the respect inherent to all humankind, thereby
debasing their victims as mere chattel for the profit of
others. Such twisted concepts and beliefs are especially
pernicious in situations of armed conflict, where the
vulnerability of civilian communities renders them
prime targets for such horrendous acts.
Moreover, we are currently witnessing a nightmare
scenario in which non-State armed groups that expose
violent and extremist ideologies are actively engaging
in human trafficking activities to fulfil their distorted
visions of the world. Da’esh and its ilk have shown
that they are capable of immense cruelty through the
prevalant use of sexual violence and the enslavement
and trade of women and girls for recruitment and
financial purposes. In that regard, the practices of
groups such as Da’esh and Boko Haram in perpetuating
sexual violence, including through the trafficking of
women and children, demands heightened and greater
attention and responses from the Council. Malaysia is
therefore pleased to have supported and co-sponsored
resolution 2331 (2016), just adopted. That resolution
marks an important contribution to reinforcing the
existing international framework to combat trafficking
in persons, particularly where that is being used to fuel

16-4511319/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

terrorist activities. We wish to highlight three aspects
that we believe will make a real difference in tackling
the scourge.
First, as with all transnational crime, strengthening
cooperation and coordination between Member States,
as well as regional and international organizations, is
imperative. In that regard, we call upon Member States
that have yet to subscribe to and implement the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its additional protocols, which provide the
principal foundation for our concerted action, to do
so. We also encourage Member States to prioritize
ratifications of other international instruments that
complement efforts to eradicate human trafficking
in all its forms, such as the relevant protocols of the
International Labour Organization, the Committee
on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, among others.
Given the multifaceted dimensions of trafficking
in persons, including where it is associated with sexual
violence and funding terrorist activities, it is crucial that
the international community mobilize complementary
legal means, where available, to investigate, disrupt
and dismantle trafficking networks. We fully support
the efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and other bodies, as well as bilateral partners, in
providing technical support to Member States to build
law enforcement capacities.
Within the South-East Asian region, our
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
neighbours have demonstrated a unified commitment
to combating and preventing trafficking in persons in
the ASEAN Convention against Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children and its related plan of
action, established in November 2015. We appreciate
the strong support for such regional-level efforts by
East Asia Summit partners, as reflected in the Summit
declarations adopted in September.
Secondly, in maintaining international peace and
security, the Security Council must better utilize its
available tools to monitor trends in human trafficking
in armed conflict, identify perpetrators and hold them
accountable. Information and evidence of acts of
trafficking in persons and sexual violence in conflict
should be made available to the Council and channelled
to the relevant sanctions committees, including the
committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
20/79

20/12/2016

(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities. We support integrating a
focus on trafficking in persons and the use of sexual
violence in armed conflict into the work of the 1267
Monitoring Team and Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, where there are clear linkages
to terrorist activities.
At the same time, the crucial outreach and advocacy
role of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict and of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict must be better leveraged. The
securing of commitments and action plans for parties
to the conflict, so as to end and prevent violations and
abuses associated with trafficking persons, including
sexual violence and recruitment and use of children,
should continue to be pursued. We call for the Council’s
continued engagement with those envoys, including
through the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict and the various sanctions committee.
My final point pertains to the need for victims
and survivors of trafficking and sexual violence to
be supported in returning to a secure and stable life.
Women and children subjected to any violations and
abuses, including trafficking and sexual violence
at the hands of Da’esh and similar groups, should be
considered as victims and given access to funding and
assistance. In that respect, community and religious
leaders are pivotal in ensuring the reintegration and
rehabilitation of survivors and eliminating the stigma
that can be associated with the ordeal that they have
been through. In that regard, we support a continued
partnership with civil society to enable survivors and
communities to heal and renew.
I wish to conclude by reaffirming Malaysia’s
enduring resolve to combat and eradicate trafficking
in persons, and of our equally strong commitment to
continue working with the international community
until we bring an end to those crimes against humanity.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Let me begin
by congratulating the President of the Government of
Spain, Mr. Rajoy Brey, and the Spanish delegation for
this most timely debate and for the successful adoption
of resolution 2331 (2016) today.
Trafficking in persons, like slavery, with which it
is closely associated, used to be regarded as a crime of
an earlier era. Sadly, that is not so any more. Indeed, it
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

S/PV.7847

can be found in many countries, including my own, as
I shall note more fully in a moment. It has reinforced to
my own country that all States Members of the United
Nations must be vigilant in addressing the issue. The
problems and effects of trafficking are exponentially
and despicably worse in conflict situations. That
reality has been brought home through today’s
briefing — and, if I may say so quite graphically and
directly — to the Council in the testimony of Nadia
Murad, the young Yazidi woman who addressed us
last year (see S/PV.7585), as well as in the briefings
of Zainab Bangura, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Under-Secretary-General Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
on the use of sexual violence in the conflicts in Syria
and South Sudan, the Lake Chad region and elsewhere.

engage in the full spectrum of international security
issues, in all their disturbing dimensions.New Zealand
would like to highlight five aspects that we consider
warrant particular attention.

The callous barbarity of the treatment meted out
to innocent people, most often women, girls and young
men, is mind-numbing: being kidnapped, forced into
marriage, raped, sexually molested and abused; sold
into slavery, forced into prostitution; forced to be a
suicide bomber, a combatant, a labourer; and even sent
into battle with your baby strapped to your back. And,
if by some fortunate chance you are able to get free,
there is the risk of being rejected by your own family
and community for the crimes that were done to you.
Listening to those briefings last year were the most
harrowing days I have spent at this table.

Secondly, we need to make active and effective
use of the other international tools at our disposal.
As Ms. Bangura so clearly pointed out today, the
effective use of the Islamic State in the Levant/Da’esh
sanctions regime is an obvious point of engagement.
It was disappointing that we were unable to reach an
agreement for her to brief us and our Committee earlier
this year.

The Secretary-General’s annual report on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2016/361/Rev.1) and the
briefings on specific conflicts on the Council’s agenda
illustrate the ways in which trafficking is both fuelled
by and exacerbates conflict situations. However, the
evidence presented today on how such phenomena
interplay and reinforce each other is deeply troubling.
Terrorist groups will, of course, use whatever means
they can to pursue their objectives. For some, their
motive is profit. In many cases, however, it is about
terrorizing and controlling communities to eliminate
resistance and, above all, to exercise power over people
with no defences. In that regard, those perpetrators are
in essence cowards.
In any event, we need a shared understanding of
that phenomenon and an agreement on collective action
to confront and defeat it. The fact that the issue is
difficult, deeply distasteful and has social and economic
dimensions should not deter the Council from taking it
up or be used as a pretext for leaving the issue for other
bodies to address. The Council has a responsibility to

First, the Council needs to integrate such issues
into our work, wherever relevant. That means ensuring
that the effects of trafficking and sexual violence
against women, men, and children are appropriately
reflected in our consideration of specific mandates and
country situations. That should not depend on mandate
prescriptiveness. Rather, when present, such aspects
need to be considered. To that end, the Secretariat needs
to ensure that such issues are adequately reflected in its
advice to the Council, including its formal reports and
the conflict assessments on which they are based.

As resolution 2331 (2016) adopted today underlines,
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking provides an essential framework for such
efforts, both in terms of international cooperation
and State-level implementation. Within the Plan of
Action, the terrorist financing framework has shown
its effectiveness in following the flow of money to
those responsible and cutting off sources of finance.
Organizations such as the International Organization
for Migration, INTERPOL, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
Egmont Group of Financial Intelligence Units also
have significant expertise and networks that we can and
should be utilizing to their fullest extent.
As resolution 2223 (2016)adopted last week
underlines, challenging cross-border issues such as this
demand cohesion across lines of effort to be effective.
It is important, therefore, that such international efforts
are effectively coordinated. The United Nations system
is well placed to assist. The Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons has a central role
to play, as does the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. We look forward to engaging with Member
States on options for how such coordination can be
further strengthened.

16-4511321/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Thirdly, regional cooperation has a vital role to play
in efforts to confront such issues, given their crossborder nature and scope. New Zealand’s experience
has demonstrated the effectiveness of such approaches.
In our own region, the Asia Pacific, the Bali Process
provides a valuable forum for addressing the complex
challenges of trafficking in persons and related
transnational crime.
Fourthly, States need to pursue those responsible
for such acts at the domestic level. Traffickers profit
from exploiting the weak and vulnerable. All States
need to ensure that they have appropriate criminal
offences that allow such individuals to be brought to
justice. Just last week, a New Zealand court handed
down the first conviction in New Zealand for people
trafficking, imposing a sentence of almost 10 years
in prison and ordering the payment of reparations to
the victims.
Finally, we must not lose sight of the needs of those
most affected by conflict-related trafficking and sexual
violence — the victims and the survivors. In that regard,
Nadia Murad laid down a very specific challenge to the
Council today. To establish an effective mechanism
to gather and protect evidence of the crimes that have
been committed in Iraq and Syria. That is a challenge
that New Zealand will not be able to take up as we leave
the Council in 11 days, at least not in this organ, but we
believe that it is a challenge that needs to be addressed.
In conclusion, we hope today’s discussions will
galvanize our collective efforts to combat and defeat
those interrelated scourges by tackling them at their
source, while bringing those responsible to justice and
providing the necessary support to those affected.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
was deeply shocked by the fatal shooting of the Russian
Ambassador to Turkey and by the terrorist incidents that
have occurred in other countries, including Germany
and Yemen. We offer our deepest condolences to the
victims and strongly condemn those acts of terrorism.
China takes a firm stand against all forms of terrorism
and supports the international community’s counterterrorism efforts and actions.
China commends Spain’s initiative to convene
today’s open debate. We welcome Mr. Mariano Rajoy
Brey, President of the Government of Spain, who is
presiding over today’s meeting. I thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, Executive Director Fedotov,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
22/79

20/12/2016

Bangura, and the representatives of civil society for
their briefings.
Resolution 2331 (2016), unanimously adopted today
by the Security Council, will help the international
community combat trafficking in persons in conflict
areas and protect the rights and interests of women and
children in a joint endeavour. Today, we are witnessing
the swift emergence of problems in regional hotspots, the
start of new conflicts and the continuance of protracted
ones, which all pose a serious threat to the survival and
dignity of the people in conflict situations, in particular
vulnerable groups such as women and children, making
them easier prey to violence and crime. It is incumbent
upon the international community to build synergies
to enhance the protection of the rights of women and
children in areas of armed conflict and strive to end the
trafficking of persons in such areas.
First, we must eradicate the root causes of conflict.
While fighting transnational organized crime with great
intensity and providing safety assurances for women
and children in conflict situations, the international
community should pay close attention to addressing the
root causes of conflict. It should intensify the political
approach used based on the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations in order to resolve
differences through dialogue and consultation. We
should focus on helping conflict torn countries boost
their economic and social development, embark on
sustainable development and steer clear of conflict
and war.
Secondly, we must step up the fight against terrorism
and transnational organized crime. Trafficking in
persons in areas of armed conflict has become the
source of funding for terrorist organizations and
transnational organized crime groups. The international
community should take coordinated, harmonized
action, apply uniform standards and employ political,
economic and cultural means in an integrated manner
in order to obstruct the channels of financing for
terrorist organizations and firmly suppress all forms of
terrorism and transnational, organized crime.
Thirdly, we should help conflict-torn countries
to strengthen their capacity-building. They bear the
primary responsibility for protecting the safety of their
women and children and combating human trafficking.
On the other hand, they are likely to be dealing with
practical difficulties such as a lack of resources and
capacity. While respecting national sovereignty,
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

S/PV.7847

the international community should provide these
countries, at their request, with constructive support,
focusing on assisting their capacity-building in the
areas of the fight against terrorism and border control.

of transnational organized crime and terrorism.
In December of last year, the Council adopted a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/25) on the issue of
combating human trafficking.

Fourthly, we should deepen international
cooperation. The issue of human trafficking in conflict
situations involves countries of origin, transit and
destination. Those concerned should improve their
cooperation in areas such as border enforcement,
financial regulation and judicial assistance. The
United Nations and its subsidiary bodies, including the
Security Council, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, should all leverage their
particular advantages, strengthen their coordination
and work together to address the issue.

We have taken note of the efforts of the United
Nations, including its Office on Drugs and Crime, to
prevent and combat human trafficking, including by
providing States with assistance through its agencies.
That work deserves all possible support. Russia has
traditionally supported consolidating the efforts of
States, United Nations entities and international and
regional anti-trafficking organizations. The Russian
Federation is party to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its Palermo
Protocol, and is a member of the Group of Friends
United against Human Trafficking. We have supported
the development of the Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons since its beginnings and taken
an active part in it. The international community
has established a number of mechanisms capable of
helping to qualitatively improve States’ cooperation in
preventing and combating human trafficking.

China will continue to strengthen its cooperation
with Governments and the relevant international
organizations in order to effectively protect the rights
and interests of women and children, to combat
human trafficking in conflict situations and to jointly
safeguard international and regional peace, security,
stability and development.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to express my deep
appreciation to the President of the Government of
Spain, the Secretary-General, the members of the
Security Council, every Member of our Organization
and the staff of the Secretariat, who have voiced
their outrage and sympathy over the terrorist act that
killed Ambassador Andrey Gennadievich Karlov
of the Russian Federation. We greatly appreciate
their solidarity.
The crime of human trafficking has been a
dangerous element in a number of current conflicts,
and its link to terrorism is particularly worrying.
One of the most shocking examples of it has been the
violence inflicted by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant on ethnic and religious minorities, including
Yazidis. Terrorists have captured thousands of Yazidis,
enslaved their women and children, forced them into
marriage and abused them sexually. Yazidis and other
minorities fleeing terrorist oppression and atrocities
have been forced to abandon their homes, and many
have been killed. Through, for instance, its resolutions
2195 (2014), 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015), the Security
Council has repeatedly called attention to the closely
interlocking relationships between the various forms

The transnational groups involved in this criminal
activity today are constantly adapting their methods and
in many cases working with the terrorist underground,
for which the proceeds from human trafficking are
now a source of funding. This is often accompanied
by kidnappings, sexual violence and drug trafficking.
Partly for that reason, States have decided, during the
seventy-second session of the General Assembly, to
conduct an assessment of the progress that has been
made in implementing the Global Plan of Action. We
hope that the review will enable us to update it in
the light of the new challenges and threats that have
emerged, including the issue of human trafficking
in armed conflict. In that regard, we would like
to emphasize that when considering this topic it is
important to keep to the established purviews of United
Nations entities. For instance, based on its mandate for
the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council should deal with the issue of human
trafficking only as it relates to situations on its agenda.
If not, such efforts might lead to the creation of parallel
mechanisms that could end up having a negative impact
on the effectiveness of international efforts in that area.
There are no universal recipes for combating
human trafficking, and every State must decide its own
policy and come up with the best possible measures at
the national level. Technical assistance with capacity-

16-4511323/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

building in this area is particularly important for
countries in situations of armed conflict. In that regard,
one particularly topical issue is protecting the victims
of human trafficking in armed conflict situations and
assisting them with particular regard for their age and
gender. That means providing social, psychological,
economic and medical help, as well as access to justice.
The crimes committed by terrorist groups result
in the most disgusting kinds of human trafficking.
We would like to once again strongly condemn the
barbarism of such radicals and affirm our solidarity
with the victims of terror. We once again urge the
international community to jettison its short-term
geopolitical interests and unite firmly in the fight
against terrorism under the coordination of the United
Nations. That is the only way we can defeat terrorism
in all its manifestations, including human trafficking.
We reject the insinuations in the Ukrainian
delegation’s statement as inappropriate, unfounded and
in some places simply ridiculous.
Ms. Mendelson (United States of America): I
would like to begin by expressing our condolences to
the friends, family and colleagues of Andrey Karlov
and all those affected by yesterday’s attacks.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General, the
President of the Government of Spain, Mr. Rajoy Brey,
Executive Director Fedotov, Special Representative
Bangura and, of course, Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan
and Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha for their dedication
to combating trafficking in persons in all its forms.
We particularly appreciate Spain’s leadership on the
issue and its initiative in introducing today’s historic
resolution 2331 (2016).
A year ago, as many today have noted, the Council
met for the first time in its 70-year history to discuss the
issue of human trafficking in conflict (see S/PV.7585).
Before that meeting, and again today, some argued that
the subject did not belong in the Security Council and
was not really a security issue. Yet those of us who
were in the Chamber a year ago, and again today, will
never forget Nadia Murad’s testimony about Da’esh’s
institutionalization of slavery and sexual violence,
and the nihilistic use of Yazidi women as “trafficked
flesh” to recruit male fighters. It is an honour to know
Nadia. Her testimony bears witness in a way that not
only moves the human spirit but provides the sort of
gripping, empirical account of how Da’esh functions
that was heard at the Nuremberg trials. Her very being
24/79

20/12/2016

is a reminder of the resilience, bravery and strength that
some, including her, are capable of.
Thanks to the tenacious efforts of civil
society — non-governmental organizations, journalists,
religious leaders and survivors — we have seen
progress. Governments, the United Nations and other
organizations have elevated attention both in the public
consciousness and political discourse to the horrors of
modern slavery and the duty we have to respond. A year
on, I wish we could say that, thanks to advocacy and
collective action, the exploitation of human beings in
times of conflict has abated.
Unfortunately, that is not the case. In 2016, children
were still lured by human traffickers from refugee
camps, and young boys were forced to pick up guns and
become soldiers. In Da’esh-held territory, the depravity
of sexual slavery has continued to shock. Thanks to the
courageous work of Special Representative Bangura
and her staff, the United Nations has incontrovertible
proof that young women are bought, sold and
horrifically abused on a daily basis. The United States
appreciates the initiative of the United Kingdom in the
pursuit of justice for Da’esh’s victims, and is working
with it and Iraq to explore the best ways to hold Da’esh
accountable, including gathering and preserving
evidence of its crimes.
Although much recent attention has focused on
human trafficking in situations of conflict in the
Middle East we know that trafficking in conflict
zones is not a new phenomenon and that researchers
and activists, myself included, have documented it
in many conflict and post-conflict situations, from
Bosnia and Kosovo to Nigeria and Afghanistan. Yet
despite increased attention and outrage, we still face
critical gaps in our understanding of human trafficking
in the context of conflict and post-conflict situations.
Where we know that trafficking is taking place, our
ability to stop the abuse, hold traffickers to account and
deliver assistance to the victims is often non-existent or
woefully inadequate.
That is why the resolution that the Council adopted
today is so important. By articulating the nexus
between conflict, sexual violence and trafficking in
persons, we can take practical action. Together, we can
get Governments, civil society and the United Nations
system to begin to systematically monitor for signs of
trafficking in conflict, to train relevant humanitarian
personnel and all peacekeeping personnel in how to
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

recognize and respond to victims, to analyse financial
flows — follow the money — in order to identify where
terrorist and armed groups are profiting from the
proceeds of human trafficking, and to share information
on and to seek justice for those crimes.
While it is critical to close the information gap — let
me note that too few people know and understand this
issue, including too few inside ministries of
defence — knowledge is but one critical aspect. The
resolution also calls on all members to criminalize
and vigorously prosecute the individuals and groups
that facilitate and profit from human trafficking. It
encourages the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Special
Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, to brief sanctions committees
on identified trafficking patterns and perpetrators. It
provides arms committees with a mandate to sanction
perpetrators, as part of established sanctions regimes.
Within the context of emergency humanitarian
operations, resolution 2331 (2016) underscores the
importance of humanitarian actors identifying and
providing services to trafficking victims during and after
humanitarian crises. Those services must be resourced
by Member States and, again, the humanitarians must
be trained to identify possible victims.
Finally, the resolution recognizes that individuals
who are subjected to sexual violence and human
trafficking at the hands of terrorist groups are also
victims of terrorism and should be provided with the
same restorative services and support available to
other such victims. Since 2000 and the adoption of its
Trafficking Victims Protection Act, the United States
has been a leader on this issue. The United States is
proud to support resolution 2331 (2016). Consistent with
our dedication to ending trafficking in persons in all its
forms, we look forward to strengthening international
cooperation in combating trafficking.
Mr. Martins (Angola): Let me too join other
colleagues in presenting our most heartfelt condolences
to the Russian Federation for the terrible act that ended
the life of the Russian Ambassador to Turkey.
Let me welcome and thank the President of the
Government of Spain, His Excellency Mr. Mariano
Rajoy Brey, for presiding over this very important
debate, and the Spanish delegation for selecting this
critical issue of contemporary life as a central theme in

S/PV.7847

the programme of work of its presidency in the month
of December.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General; the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura; the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov; and our
two briefers and activists for Yazidi women’s rights,
Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan and Ms. Nadia Murad Basee
Taha, for their poignant testimonies on an issue in which
the Council sometimes needs to hear directly from
the people involved in order to more clearly seize the
importance of taking measures on time and measures
that take action and count in combating such practices.
Trafficking in human beings is clearly a gross
violation of human rights and an infringement on the
dignity and integrity of human beings. This type of
crime is on the increase, having become a large source
of income for organized crime worldwide, in parallel
with drugs and arms trafficking. The basic approach to
countering the phenomenon involves the commitment
of countries and the international community to
improving the socioeconomic conditions of the most
vulnerable and guaranteeing the fundamental rights
of all of their citizens. A collective effort is crucial in
order to upgrade the fight against trafficking in persons
by gathering the support of all nations, communities,
institutions and individuals as an essential prerequisite
to successfully addressing the problem.
Trafficking in human beings in conflict situations
leads to sexual slavery, to the trade in women and girls,
to forced marriage and to the most appalling human
rights violations. Those tactics are used by terrorist
groups such as Al-Shabaab in Somalia, Boko Haram
in Nigeria, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in
Syria, the Lord’s Resistance Army and other armed
and terrorist groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Modern slavery is one of the most significant
human rights tragedy of modern times, with multiplying
effects in conflict situations, particularly in Africa and
in the Middle East.
The Security Council, as we are doing today
through this debate and the adoption of resolution 2331
(2016), decided to continue sending a strong message
concerning that egregious violation of human rights, by
qualifying the trafficking and the issue of enslavement
as war crimes and crimes against humanity and
broadening the jurisdiction covering that type of

16-4511325/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

time. In addition, the United Nations system has been
mobilizing and coordinating efforts to combat modern
day slavery in conflict situations.
Trafficking in persons takes place in countries and
regions of Africa and the Middle East, Latin America
and the Far East, with people being recruited for a
life of exploitation and slavery in Europe, the United
States of America and elsewhere. Moreover, criminal
networks recruit desperate people, including children,
in search of a better life, thereby raising the imperative
need to consider the phenomenon as an issue related
to international peace and security, as expressed in the
fourth preambular paragraph of the statement by the
President of the Security Council, adopted 16 December
2015, which notes that
“trafficking in persons undermines the rule of
law and contributes to other forms of transnational
organized crime, which can exacerbate conflict
and foster insecurity” (S/PRST/2015/25).
Responding to increased awareness of the
phenomenon, Angola has adopted legislation related
to criminalizing trafficking in human beings by
developing specific mechanisms to prevent and combat
that type of crime. The aim is to step up the fight
against trafficking and ensure assistance, recovery,
rehabilitation and reintegration for victims. In addition,
justice reform, executive programmes and legislative
measures have been adopted to support victims.
Legislation has been updated, including the adoption
of new penal code provisions to respond to Angola’s
current problems in this area.
Effective partnerships among agencies responsible
for preventing and combating this scourge are being put
into place, while the Minister for Social Reinsertion has
created shelters throughout the country for the victims
of human trafficking. Angola has acceded to the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Additional Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, as well as other relevant international
conventions and instruments related to the eradication
of child and forced labour and to slavery.
In conclusion, further work is needed in all of our
countries. Without a comprehensive regime to combat
the trafficking in persons and protection of victims,
we need to build on the experience of others who have
made the most progress. To this end, Governments
must deploy efforts to prevent, punish and eradicate
26/79

20/12/2016

trafficking in persons as well as to ensure the physical
safety of victims, while ensuring that legal systems
contain provisions that address the needs and give due
compensation of the victims.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to express my heartfelt condolences
to the delegation of the Russian Federation for the
horrific terrorist act that claimed the life of the Russian
ambassador in Ankara.
I would like to congratulate the Spanish delegation
on its capable presidency of the Security Council this
month, during which it has made valuable contributions
to the work of the Council, the latest of which is
resolution 2331 (2016), adopted today, on trafficking in
persons in conflict situations. I take this opportunity to
express my gratitude to the briefers on their strong and
poignant statements this morning.
Human trafficking is a form of contemporary
slavery and constitutes a grave violation of human
rights. Countering human trafficking is one of the
priorities of the Egyptian Government, owing to the
challenges posed by Egypt’s strategic location as a
transit State. These challenges have been exacerbated
by the armed conflicts that are taking place in the
region and which constitute a environment conducive
to human trafficking and exploitation, especially by
terrorist groups. The situation is further exacerbated by
the fact that Egypt is one of the countries of the region
to receive the largest number of refugees. Egypt was
therefore one of the first countries to endorse the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Palermo Protocol, in 2004. Egypt has
also acceded to an initiative for the establishment of the
Group of Friends United against Human Trafficking.
At the national level, Egypt has established
an institutional and legal framework that serves
as a mainstay for the country’s undertaking of its
international obligations. In 2007, Egypt established
a national coordinating committee for preventing and
countering human trafficking, enacted in 2010 a law
designed to counter human trafficking, and this year
launched its national strategy to this end.
At the regional level, Egypt hosted in Sharm ElSheikh the second African Union Regional Conference
on Human Trafficking and Smuggling in the Horn
of Africa and joined the Arab Guiding Law on
Human Trafficking. We would like to commend the
constructive cooperation between Egypt and the United
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) with
regard to capacity-building in relation to preventing
and countering of human trafficking.
The adoption by the Security Council today of a
resolution on human trafficking in conflict situations is
a landmark in the history of the Security Council. We
would like to shed light on the following points.
First of all, the resolution should be limited to
trafficking in persons related to conflicts, since the
issue of human trafficking falls within the purview of
the General Assembly.
Second, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Palermo
Protocol should serve as the basis for the implementation
of the commitments set forth in the resolution, including
the definition of human trafficking and its key element
of exploitation.
Third, the international community should redouble
its efforts to shut down all sources of financing for
terrorist groups, including human trafficking, and use
all international mechanisms available.
Fourth, we have to distinguish between the crime
of sexual exploitation, which is one of the objectives of
human trafficking, and sexual violence.
Fifth, human trafficking crimes, especially in
women and girls, are not associated with any religion,
nationality or civilization. We have to shed light on the
important role that could be played by men of religion
and traditional leaders.
Sixth, we must abide by the provisions of the
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951
and its Additional Protocol, which is the governing
framework for implementing the provisions of the
resolution that has been adopted today.
Seventh, UNODC has pivotal role to play in the
General Assembly when it comes to human trafficking,
given the experience it has accumulated in this area.
In the meantime, it is very important to provide it with
the financial resources it needs to fulfil its mandate.
In addition, we underline the important role played by
the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner
for Refugees in preventing and fighting human
trafficking as well as by the International Organization
for Migration.
Eighth, we underscore the important role that
should be played by the United Nations and the private

S/PV.7847

sector to break the link between procurement and the
consumption of human trafficking.
Egypt reiterates its full support for the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons which is considered to be the governing
framework for international cooperation in countering
human trafficking. Egypt is providing all forms of
support for the success of the second review of the plan
that will be undertaken next year.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I join others
on this solemn occasion to convey Senegal’s sincere
condolences to the Russian Federation following the
assassination of its Ambassador in Turkey. This is
also an appropriate opportunity for my delegation to
reaffirm Senegal’s firm condemnation of all forms of
terrorism whatever their origin.
The Senegalese delegation welcomes the presence
among us this morning of His Excellency Mr. Mariano
Rajoy Brey, President of the Government of the
Kingdom of Spain, who is presiding over today’s open
debate, which his country has decided to devote to
an important subject, namely, trafficking in persons
in conflict situations. The choice of this essential
topic, as well as the unanimous adoption of resolution
2231 (2016) this morning, are undoubtedly further
illustrations of the outstanding work carried out over
the past two years by the Spanish delegation under the
leadership of Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi,
whom we congratulate, together with the entire
Spanish delegation.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and the other briefers this morning for
the quality of their statements, which have increased
our understanding of the magnitude and gravity of a
scourge that shocks the conscience of everyone.
Multiple conflicts in various parts of the world
are exacerbating emigration and are even forcing the
displacement of populations compelled to flee their
homes, exposing them to numerous threats and making
them increasingly vulnerable, including to trafficking
in persons organized by criminal networks, terrorist
groups or armed gangs. The link between migration
and human trafficking during conflict was highlighted
in the 2016 report of the UNODC on the subject, which
states that 60 per cent of victims of trafficking during
armed conflict are refugees and asylum-seekers who
have fled conflicts in their countries and are simply
seeking better prospects.

16-4511327/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Unfortunately, instead of realizing their dreams,
many of these migrants are abducted and sold or held
captive. The phenomenon becomes an even greater
source of concern because these people are often
subjected to forced marriage or even sexual slavery, for
women and girls, or to forced labour, for men and boys,
including in the mining sector, if they have not already
become slaves or combatants.
I should like to echo the words of the Special
Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, who said that trafficking in
human beings is an umbrella term that comprises a
range of barbaric practices, one more inhuman than
the next. The phenomenon is of even greater concern
when the perpetrators are extremist or non-State armed
terrorist groups who are using the tactic to sow terror
or as a strategy of war, with the aim of consolidating
their ideology or power; strengthening their financial
flows; changing the composition of a community; or
humiliating a given ethnic or religious group.
Even more unacceptable are the various forms of
sexual violence and exploitation, particularly when
they are linked to trafficking in persons in the context
of armed conflict. This is a centuries-old phenomenon
that unfortunately continues, as we have seen with
respect to the fates of the Chibok schoolgirls, abducted
by Boko Haram in Nigeria in 2014, and of the Yazidi
women and the women sold at the Raqqa market by
Da’esh. In addition, such trafficking is facilitated
through social networks.
Senegal reiterates its firm condemnation of all
forms of sexual violence and exploitation. It believes
that in the fight against this scourge, due attention
must be given to the rehabilitation of victims and of the
affected communities. We must wage a resolute fight
against human trafficking during armed conflict, which
not only constitutes a grave violation of human rights
and international humanitarian law but also contributes
to instability and to promoting terrorism.
Resolution 2331 (2016), which we have adopted
today and of which Senegal was a sponsor, is surely a
step in the right direction. The resolution calls on States
to implement the provisions of resolution 2195 (2014), on
the link between terrorism and transnational organized
crime. It is also key to implement the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
We also call for a recasting of the global debate on
the financing of violent extremism. We must combat
28/79

20/12/2016

this scourge in order to address fresh challenges and the
economic and strategic underpinnings of trafficking in
human beings, in particular women and children, in
armed conflict.
Allow me to note here that Senegal has ratified
virtually all international and regional instruments
on migration and human trafficking. Furthermore, my
country has a number of legislative and regulatory texts
that address migration and human-trafficking issues,
including a specific law pertaining to human trafficking
and related practices and victim protection, which was
adopted in 2005 and which supplements our criminal
code. This law criminalizes trafficking in persons and
related practices by highlighting the various forms of
exploitation of vulnerable persons to which it leads
and its transnational organized character. It also
criminalizes organized illegal migration and trafficking
in visas or other travel or identification documents.
In order to better ensure the effective suppression of
trafficking in persons and migrant trafficking, chapter
III of the 2005 law confers two types of jurisdiction
on Senegalese courts: universal jurisdiction, through
article 10, and passive personality jurisdiction, through
article 11. This legal arsenal is further reinforced by a
number of frameworks that have been set up to address
problems related to migrant trafficking and flows.
For example, we have a centre that offers guidance
to children in difficult situations, known as GINDI;
an intersectoral committee to fight child labour;
a directorate of correctional education and social
protection; and a national unit to fight trafficking in
persons, among others.
In terms of migration, Senegal’s strategy is based
primarily on a number of partnership agreements
with countries of destination or transit for Senegalese
migrants. Senegal and France signed such an agreement
in September 2006 to jointly manage migratory flows
between the two countries, and we also signed a
memorandum with Spain on 9 November 2007. Senegal
has devised an integrated national migration strategy,
which has already shown some technical success, so as
to more effectively address this phenomenon.
We wish to reiterate the importance of prevention,
protection, reintegration and accountability in our
tools to fight all of the problems facing humankind.
Cooperation with traditional and religious leaders can
play a significant role in setting up a communications
strategy to deconstruct and counter the terrorist narrative.
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Finally, I should like to recall that parties to
conflict bear the responsibility, with the support of
the international community, to put an end to sexual
violence in armed conflict, through a number of efforts,
including in the areas of prevention, assistance and
protection. Beyond that, we must also deter, detect and
put an end to human trafficking, particularly by violent
extremist groups, as highlighted in the presidential
statement on trafficking in persons adopted in
December 2015 (S/PRST/2015/25).
Human trafficking during armed conflict poses
a threat to stability, peacekeeping and national
reconstruction. We must therefore work together to
put an end to these heinous practices, which will be
possible only if we all make a commitment to that end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
remind speakers that they should limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. The
presidency will use the flashing lights on the collars
of their microphones to prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate the texts thereof in
writing or to upload them to PaperSmart and deliver a
condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Mexico.
Ms. Jáquez Huacuja (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
While the General Assembly has exhaustively addressed
human trafficking, we commend the Security Council
for its efforts to delve into the subject. It is one of the
most shocking challenges facing the international
community and one that affects all regions of the world,
without exception, since every country is, or could
become, the origin, transit or destination country for
victims of this threat. We must emphatically condemn
the fact that, in armed conflict, refugees, displaced
persons and immigrants — particularly women and
girls — are consistently extremely vulnerable to human
trafficking, in addition to frequently being victims of
abduction, sexual violence and abuse.
The 2016 Global Report on Trafficking in Persons,
issued by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, reflects the dismal overall picture of human
trafficking, which continues to claim many victims
every day. The findings of that report must form the
basis of our strategies, programmes and plans for
preventing and combating this scourge. The Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,

S/PV.7847

Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, enables international legal
cooperation and bolsters common efforts to prevent,
punish and investigate this offence.
Similarly, full compliance with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development constitutes another essential
tool to attack the structural factors that contribute to
trafficking, such as extreme poverty, social exclusion,
discrimination and the lack of opportunities. Pursuant
to Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda, we must put a stop to
illicit financial flows and prevent organized crime and
terrorist groups from enriching themselves. We can
no longer allow the trafficking of women and girls to
finance criminal activity.
Finally, we must strengthen the multilateral
framework with national strategies and concrete
measures, with an emphasis on protecting and assisting
victims. For that purpose, my country has taken three
steps. First, we have undertaken legal and institutional
reforms to better address human trafficking in an effort
to identify, investigate and punish its perpetrators and
prevent the commission of this crime. In the past seven
years, 733 people were sentenced in Mexico. Secondly,
we have set up and have put in motion a national
commission on human trafficking to benefit from the
joint efforts of Government authorities, civil society
and the academic sector. Thirdly, we have implemented
a national detection instrument, in collaboration
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), in order to be able to benefit from timely
and reliable information on the trend in Mexico. We
currently benefit from the technical assistance of
UNODC in a national campaign to combat this crime
among vulnerable groups.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I offer my condolences and those of my Government
to the people of Germany, Turkey and Russia for
yesterday’s terrorist attacks. There is no justification
for terrorism.
This debate and resolution 2331 (2016), adopted this
morning, as Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha reminded
us in her moving briefing, takes place 12 months
after the Security Council’s first debate on this item
(see S/PV.7585), convened by the United States. The
holding of this meeting reflects the importance that the

16-4511329/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

international community attaches to the issue, but it also
lays bare the tremendous challenges we still face. As
obvious as it may sound, human trafficking is a crime,
tragic and brutal in its disproportionate effects on the
most vulnerable: women and girls, migrants, refugees
and internally displaced persons. If any conclusion can
be reached today, it is that, as the Secretary-General
said, prevention must be one of our priorities.
Preventive strategies, such as actions to prevent
terrorism and violent extremism, cannot be developed
in isolation. We are facing a phenomenon that requires
joint, collaborative responses based on international
cooperation, with full respect for human rights and
in the framework of agreements on the protection of
civilians, and must be supported by civil society.
With a long internal conflict like ours, we in
Colombia have understood that women and girls play
a fundamental and proactive role in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, as well as in building stable
and lasting peace. That is why we must ensure their
rights in a safe and supportive environment. In the
peace agreement that is starting to be implemented,
with the support of the Security Council, guaranteeing
the rights of women and girls has become a common
purpose in the work of all the institutions that have been
collaborating and incorporating a gender perspective
into their various programmes. Legislation, particularly
law No. 1719 of 2014, condemns and specifically
addresses the crime of human trafficking committed
during armed conflict.
In 2016, the Secretary-General, in his report
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361),
underscored that, of all peace processes referred to in
the report, only Colombia has systematically addressed
gender issues, pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000) and
resolution 1820 (2008). That is especially true regarding
reparations for suffering, particularly providing for
compensation and restitution, but also with regard to
ensuring non-recidivism and to preventive measures,
notably by creating and promoting a culture free of all
forms of violence and discrimination, in keeping with
international obligations.
Colombia is facing an enormous challenge, but it will
continue to make strides towards our common purpose.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
30/79

20/12/2016

Mr. Braun (Germany): At the outset, allow me to
express my thanks to His Excellency the President of
the Government of Spain, in his capacity of President of
the Security Council, for his expression of condolences
following yesterday’s terrorist attack in the German
capital, Berlin. I would also like to thank the members
of the Council for their statements today of solidarity
with my country. I wish to take this opportunity to
thank all other Member States and colleagues who have
sent messages of sympathy and solidarity, which are
much appreciated.
On the topic of this meeting, while aligning myself
with the statement to be made by the observer of
the European Union, I would like to thank Spain for
initiating this debate, and the briefers for their input
and their substantive reports.
Germany co-sponsored resolution 2331 (2016), just
adopted. I would like to underscore three aspects in
particular
First, armed conflict often enables or aggravates
the crime of human trafficking through the breakdown
of law and order, weakened or non-existing Government
structures and incresing levels of violence, for example.
Human trafficking can constitute a war crime and
is often connected to sexual violence as a method
of warfare against civilians. Displaced persons are
particularly vulnerable and prone to becoming the
prey of criminals specializing in human trafficking for
labour or sexual exploitation. It is a shame that civilian
populations are viewed by some armed groups, such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, as a resource
or commodity to be trafficked, thereby lining their
pockets and ultimately prolonging conflicts. Going
after the proceeds of human trafficking will lead us
to those commissioning these crimes. We therefore
welcome that the Monitoring Team is mandated to
investigate the cross-cutting issue of human trafficking
in its threat assessments.
Secondly, I would like to underscore the importance
of one of the questions that you, Mr. President, have
raised in the concept note (S/2016/1031, annex) for this
debate, namely, the risk of procurement and supply
chains contributing to trafficking in persons. Much of
what we all consume every day has come a long way
and has gone through many hands. All of us have a
responsibility to make sure that what we enjoy is not the
end product of the abuse of slave labour and victims of
human trafficking. Germany has placed this issue at the
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

top of the agenda of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) during its chairmanship
in 2016, hosting a conference in Berlin on the issue in
September. In close collaboration with the OSCE’s
coordinator, we strengthen the role of the OSCE as
mediator and pioneer for an internationally coordinated
approach against human trafficking.
Thirdly, people falling prey to human trafficking
in conflict are already among the most vulnerable in
their societies. Those who reach a safe destination often
have lost all their belongings. Their bodies and souls
have endured unspeakable horrors. Minors lose their
parents and are in particular need of responsible care.
The risks of vulnerable persons becoming victims of
traffickers can be reduced by establishing legal and safe
routes. Resettlement and relocation programmes are a
good means to achieve that. Germany’s programme for
Yazidi refugees from Iraq, for example, has reached
a 1,000 victims of the terrorism of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant. The victims and their families
have found a safe refuge in Germany.
The group’s most recognized face and their
loudest voice is Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Goodwill
Ambassador for the Dignity of Survivors of Human
Trafficking and winner of the Sakharov Prize of the
European Parliament. I am glad to see that Ms. Taha
is present in the Chamber. She speaks out against
the horrors the people who endured and calls for the
dignified treatment to which every victim of human
trafficking is entitled. Let us not forget: every bit of
help for the victims is also one step ahead in the long
struggle against human trafficking.
Let us spare no national or international effort to
drain the swamp of human trafficking, both in conflict
situations and beyond. Let us step up efforts to address
conflict and instability as key push factors for human
trafficking and migration. Human trafficking is an
abuse of the human rights of the victims. Let us be
mindful of the victims’ human rights at every stage of
their horrific journeys.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to express my appreciation to Spain for
organizing this debate. Its convening, which coincides
with the official launch of the United Nations Office

S/PV.7847

on Drugs and Crime Global Report on Trafficking in
Persons, should be viewed as an important message
by the United Nations and its States Member that
trafficking in persons will not be tolerated under any
circumstances and should be decisively dealt with.
Today’s debate can enrich the General Assembly’s highlevel meeting planned for October 2017 to review the
progress achieved in the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons. We also underline the leading role of the
General Assembly in considering this subject.
Given the transborder nature of the crime of
trafficking, coordination and cooperation at the
international level are necessary for combating it. The
international community has to further strengthen
and impose effective measures to prevent, combat and
eliminate all forms of trafficking in persons. To that
end, demand for trafficking victims should be addressed
and suppressed, and protection for victims should be
ensured, particularly for women and children, who are
mostly subject to forced labour, exploitation, violence
and sexual abuse.
In
combating
trafficking
in
persons,
one cannot overlook the root causes of the
phenomenon
—
poverty,
underdevelopment,
unemployment, lack of socioeconomic opportunities
and lack of security, especially in conflict situations,
as well as instability caused by different internal and
external factors, including foreign occupation, foreign
intervention and regime-change policies. All those
elements continue to make people victims of human
trafficking. With regard to today’s debate, an increasing
number of armed conflicts and the resulting mass
movements of people have caused an alarming situation.
The indecisiveness of the world community in
fighting terrorists such as Da’esh and the Al-Nusra
Front in Iraq and Syria or Boko Haram in Africa, due
to narrowly defined geopolitical gains, has proved to
be destructive in the global fight against trafficking in
persons. The abhorrent reports of sexual enslavement
of innocent women and girls and other atrocities
committed by those criminals are the tragedies of our
age and of the twenty-first century. Those Governments
and individuals that are supporting those criminals
financially, logistically or ideologically should be held
accountable and brought to justice.
In that regard, takfiri ideologies that justify such
abhorrent acts are to be blamed first, as they provide

16-4511331/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

the necessary mental grounds. The sad trafficking
of women and girls in the Middle East and Africa by
terrorist groups could only have happened within such
horrendous mindsets. Such criminality begins in the
minds of men, and it is in the minds of men that we can
fight them.
The Islamic Republic of Iran, at the crossroads
of drug trafficking, has first-hand experiences on the
deadly nexus that could be forged between human
trafficking networks and other criminal activities,
including money-laundering, prostitution, slavery
and drug trafficking. It is therefore essential that the
international community constantly bear in mind the
existence of links between different forms of criminal
activities and trafficking in persons. We prefer to
address them in an integrated manner.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
begin by thanking Spain for organizing this open debate
and by thanking Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict for
their briefings.
(spoke in English)
We would also like to offer our deepest condolences
to the Russian Federation following the assassination of
Ambassador Andrey Karlov in Ankara yesterday. Brazil
strongly condemns all acts of terrorism, regardless of
their motivation.
Human trafficking is among the most despicable
crimes known to humankind, as it affects the most
vulnerable, such as migrants and internally displaced
persons, especially women and girls. When committed
in conflict situations, human trafficking might even
amount to a war crime. Brazil is particularly appalled
by the incidents of human trafficking committed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko Haram
and other terrorist organizations, which are frequently
associated with sexual enslavement.
Trafficked persons are treated as objects, not
as human beings. They are often subject to organ
harvesting, sexual exploitation, domestic service and
forced marriages. Brazil supports efforts aimed at
recovering the dignity of the victims of this heinous
crime and ensuring that they have access to justice.In
32/79

20/12/2016

that regard, we welcome the appointment of Ms. Nadia
Murad Basee Taha as Goodwill Ambassador for
the Dignity of Survivors of Human Trafficking. By
courageously speaking out and fighting for those who
have endured these unlawful and degrading actions, she
serves as an example for other victims and inspiration
for us all.
The international community can do much more to
combat this scourge. Closer cooperation among States
and international agencies can help rescue victims
and bring traffickers to justice. We must redouble our
efforts to fulfil the Sustainable Developments Goals
pertaining to the issue. We must equally acknowledge
that long-term solutions can arise only from multilateral
approaches to peace and security that set dialogue
and mediation as priorities and place vulnerable
populations at the centre of concern. Insufficient
regard and resources for sustaining peace in crisis or
post-conflict situations, as well as an ill-conceived bias
for military solutions, help fuel rather than mitigate the
instability behind the current movements of refugees
and migrants.
Although human trafficking occurs in scenarios
plagued by armed conflict, there are no intrinsic or
automatic linkages between those two phenomena. As
stated in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/949),
obviously the interrelationship between them may arise
under specific circumstances, but it should in no way be
deemed universal. It is important to acknowledge that
human trafficking is also regrettably taking place in
situations that do not constitute a threat to international
peace and security, such as situations of displacement
following natural disasters. The remedies to overcome
this scourge outside the context of conflict situations
might be different from those to be applied in armed
conflicts.
For the United Nations to effectively address human
trafficking in all its forms, the Security Council should
be mindful of the mandate and technical expertise of the
General Assembly and of the Human Rights Council, as
well as of the crucial role of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime in this realm.
In any case, the international community should
exercise the utmost caution not to confuse the
criminalization of trafficking in persons with the
criminalization of migration itself. Our actions should
aim at protecting the rights of, and providing assistance
to, those people who are forced to leave their homes and
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

fall prey to human traffickers, so as not to victimize
them yet again. In that context, Brazil wishes to recall a
fundamental assertion made by the Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism in
his most recent report, to the effect that
“push-back operations, criminalized irregular
migration and abandoned pledges to accept refugees
... contribute to the establishment of chaotic and
covert movements of people, including through
trafficking, which might ultimately assist those
intent on committing acts of terrorism.” (A/71/384,
para. 11)
The international community has a responsibility
to act to find a solution to the refugee crisis. It is
incoherent to defend the responsibility to protect and
the protection of civilians all the while turning our
backs on those fleeing conflict and persecution. Brazil
also reiterates that the criminalization of irregular
migration is unacceptable, since it ultimately fuels
human trafficking and disrespect for the fundamental
rights of migrants. As my country’s experience in
granting humanitarian visas for Haitians since 2012 has
shown, one of the most effective means of dismanting
criminal human trafficking networks is by providing
regular and safe ways of entry for those forced to move.
Let us all work together towards ensuring that
human trafficking can be brought to a definitive end
and that its victims can resume their lives with dignity
and, most of all, hope.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to Ms. Myria Vassiliadou, Anti-Trafficking
Coordinator of the European Union.
Ms. Vassiliadou: I thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon; the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
Mr. Yury Fedotov; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura; the civilian activist for
Yazidi women’s rights, Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan; and
the Goodwill Ambassador for the Dignity of Survivors
of Human Trafficking, Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha,
for their briefings.
I speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization

S/PV.7847

and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
We would like to congratulate Spain on convening
this open ministerial debate, as well as to commend its
keen commitment to addressing trafficking in human
beings in conflict throughout its mandate as a member
of the Security Council. This may mark the end of
Spain’s term, but it also marks a beginning in this area.
We must build on the momentum.
Trafficking in human beings is a threat to human
and national security, peace, human rights, democratic
governance, the rule of law and socioeconomic
development. Trafficking in human beings is a grave
violation of human dignity, specifically prohibited
under article 5 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights
of the European Union. It is also a form of serious
transnational organized crime, with huge human social
and economic costs. It is driven by the demand for all
forms of exploitation and by very high profits, in both
legal and illegal economies, resulting in a complex
interplay between supply and demand that must be
addressed if the crime is to be eradicated.
We remain strongly committed to eradicating
trafficking in human beings, which requires a
transnational response. The United Nations provides
an excellent forum for that. The European Union has
placed multilateralism at the core of its new Global
Strategy for Foreign and Security Policy. We stand
behind the commitments in the New York Declaration
for Refugees and Migrants to combat human trafficking.
We welcome the reports of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361and
S/2016/361/Rev.1) and on the implementation
of measures to counter trafficking in persons
(S/2016/949). We especially note the nexus between
conflict- and post-conflict-related sexual violence
and human trafficking. In that context, trafficking
takes many despicable forms, from sexual slavery to
labour exploitation or organ removal. The list is long
and gruesome. We are concerned by the references to
armed groups that regard the civilian population as a
resource to be exploited, viewing women’s sexuality
and fertility as commodities to be trafficked and traded
as part of the political economy of war.
Importantly, trafficking is gender-specific.
The most recent EU data show that trafficking for

16-4511333/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

the purpose of sexual exploitation is still the most
widespread form and that the majority of its victims
are women and girls. In that respect, we call for a more
gender-specific, targeted approach in all actions against
trafficking.
It is clear that we must focus on the prevention
of trafficking in human beings in all its forms. Any
other approach will come too late for the victims, as
we have heard today. In that connection, ensuring
accountability for the perpetrators is essential. We
cannot accept a culture of impunity. By cracking down
on the profits generated, we can strike a decisive blow.
In order to do so, we must follow the financial trails
and use all available investigative tools to prosecute the
perpetrators and bring them to justice.
By upholding and promoting international
standards, as enshrined in the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Protocols, in the Convention on the Elimination
of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women, the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and
other international legal instruments, we contribute to
ensuring strong foundations for the rule of law. We are
working closely with UNODC in that respect via joint
programmes. One such action is the joint European
Union-UNODC Global Action to Prevent and Address
Trafficking in Persons and the Smuggling of Migrants,
launched in January in partnership with the International
Organization for Migration and UNICEF, as mentioned
in the report (S/2016/949) of the Secretary-General.
We remain committed to the implementation of
the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse, as defined in the SecretaryGeneral’s Bulletin (ST/SGB/2003/13) on special
measures for protection from sexual exploitation and
abuse.
While recognizing that we are faced with human
displacement on the largest scale in human history,
we acknowledge that the issue of human mobility goes
beyond any one crisis. We live in a world of 7 billion
people, with demographic imbalances and growing
inequalities.
The European Union is honouring its responsibilities.
Since 2015, our vessels have saved thousands of people
in the Mediterranean Sea. Thanks to a mandate from
the Security Council, Operation Sophia is disrupting
traffickers’ and smugglers’ networks.
34/79

20/12/2016

It is well known that Da’esh uses sexual violence
systematically to fund its operations. That includes
kidnapping for ransom and the sale of women and
girls through human trafficking and slave markets. We
recognize that instability creates an ideal environment
for the criminal activities of traffickers. We are therefore
actively supporting all efforts led by the United Nations
to bring an end to the political and security crises in Syria
and Libya. We need to strengthen our comprehensive
policies and strategies aimed at empowering the role of
women in society, and better understand their specific
needs and their role in the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism. Measures need to be taken in order
to prevent and address the use of new technologies as
tools for recruiting victims of trafficking, including in
conflict areas and by terrorist groups.
We emphasize the significant advancement in
international justice made by the International Criminal
Court, as well as by non-permanent international
criminal tribunals, in combating sexual violence
in conflict. Nevertheless, we bear in mind that the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court is
complementary to the jurisdiction of States and that
the primary responsibility for bringing perpetrators
to justice resides with States. At the national level,
accountability and transitional justice mechanisms are
also key.
The EU has built an ambitious, gender-specific
and comprehensive legal and policy framework to
combat trafficking in human beings. Anti-trafficking
actions also form a key part of our external policies and
funding. The EU will continue to develop partnerships
to address trafficking in human beings.
There is a market for trafficked human merchandise.
We need to put an end to traffickers’ impunity.
Effectively preventing this heinous crime necessitates
reducing the demand and incentives for the trafficking
of human beings. Accountability and collective efforts
are needed to put an end to this terrible crime.
A full version of my statement has been submitted
to the Secretariat.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): At the outset, I convey
condolences on behalf of my country and myself to the
families of the victims of the recent horrible terrorist
attacks and the assassination.
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

I thank Spain for convening this very important
Security Council open debate. Trafficking in persons in
conflict situations is still a new matter for the Council.
We would also like to congratulate Spain for initiating
the adoption of today’s historic resolution 2331 (2016),
on this extremely important topic. Hungary was happy
to co-sponsor the resolution.
We are deeply troubled that trafficking in
persons — often but not only for sexual purposes — has
become a recurring feature and by-product of armed
conflicts. In conflict and post-conflict situations, the
level of insecurity, as well as the breakdown in family
and community structures and other safety nets,
increases the exposure of women, men, girls and boys
to diverse forms of human exploitation. In order to fight
trafficking in persons in situations of conflict more
effectively, Hungary proposes the following.
First, the United Nations and its States Members
need to play a more active, leading role in the fight
against human trafficking and other forms of modern
slavery. We encourage the incoming Secretary-General
to place the fight against this global threat, which affects
tens of millions of people, at the top of his agenda.
Second, it is essential to ratify and effectively
implement the relevant international instruments,
such as the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, and the Protocol of
2014 to the Forced Labour Convention, 1930.
Third, strong prevention and protection efforts are
urgently required in order to ensure that those impacted
by conflict situations do not become vulnerable
to traffickers.
Fourth, accountability for trafficking in persons in
conflict is essential. While in specific circumstances
the International Criminal Court and other international
accountability mechanisms could, and should, play an
important role, we must not forget that the primary
responsibility for bringing those responsible to justice
lies with States.
Fifth, Hungary supports the inclusion of
perpetrators of trafficking in persons in United Nations
and unilateral sanctions.
Sixth, Hungary is also of the view that coordination
and cooperation among all relevant United Nations
entities — including the United Nations Office on Drugs

S/PV.7847

and Crime (UNODC), the International Organization
for Migration, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the International Labour
Organization, UNICEF and UN-Women — will also
need to be improved. The new Secretary-General will
need to play a key role in that regard.
Seventh, we need more, and more reliable, data
on the subject. In that regard, Hungary welcomes
the launch of the 2016 UNODC Global Report on
Trafficking in Persons.
I would like to thank the briefers for their accounts,
because they were so important and moving to all of us:
the Secretary-General; Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of UNODC; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Zainab Bangura; and the two
very important activists who have brought this matter
to life for the Council. Hungary is ready to participate
actively in discussions and activities to strengthen the
response of the United Nations to this global threat.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union
and wishes to add the following remarks in its national
capacity, which are also supported by the Kingdom of
the Netherlands, in the light of our cooperation related
to the upcoming split mandate on the Security Council
for 2017-2018.
More than 350,000 people crossed the Mediterranean
Sea in 2016; nearly 5,000 died or disappeared in the
crossing. Italy remains committed to saving lives at sea
and has rescued more than 350,000 people since 2014,
while actively working to disrupt the business model of
traffickers. Italy has provided the bulk of the vessels for
the European Union’s Operation Sophia.
Human trafficking, particularly in conflict
situations, targets the most vulnerable, including women
and children, who often belong to religious minorities.
It must be addressed through a comprehensive approach
at the national, regional and international levels.
At the national level, Italy is focused on prevention,
victim protection, anti-discrimination measures,
strengthened law enforcement and judicial cooperation.
Our legal framework is victim-centred, human-rights
oriented and gender- and child-sensitive. In February,
we approved a national action plan on combating
trafficking in human beings.

16-4511335/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

At the international level, Italy promotes a holistic
approach that focuses on addressing the root causes,
finding political solutions to international crises,
promoting international cooperation and devising
accountability measures.

20/12/2016

to brief the sanctions committees about trafficking and
abuses committed against women and children.

Accountability is fundamental. Italy is committed
to bringing to justice individuals proved guilty of such
crimes. Thanks to victims’ identifications and the
testimonies of survivors, a week ago Italian authorities
convicted the culprits responsible for a shipwreck off
the coast of Libya in April 2015, which caused more
than 700 deaths. The perpetrators were sentenced to 18
years in prison.

Thirdly, we underscore the importance of training
for United Nations personnel in conflict situations.
Peacekeepers and police units must be trained to
rapidly identify situations where there is a heightened
risk of trafficking, especially that involving the most
vulnerable individuals. In that regard, I underscore
our expertise in holding training courses for police
units, with a focus on the protection of human rights
and gender-based violence. So far, we have trained
more than 10,000 units at the Centre of Excellence for
Stability Forces Units in Vicenza.

Italy is also committed to the full implementation
of the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, signed in Palermo, and its Protocols,
including the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, which are key to bolstering international
cooperation. We urge their universal ratification
and implementation.

Lastly, with regard to financial flows from
trafficking, existing mechanisms to curb moneylaundering and terrorism financing can play an
important role in monitoring migration routes and in
pre-empting trafficking, from the outset of conflicts
and regional crises. That, in our view, would improve
our capacity to identify victims, save their lives and
provide them with effective assistance.

Italy welcomes the greater involvement on the
part of the Security Council in this topic. The trends
reported by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2016/949) and the reports of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the International
Organization for Migration and the Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons all highlight the security
implications of the issue. We believe that the time is
right to step up the Security Council’s engagement in
the following directions.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.

First, Italy will follow up on the Spanish initiative
to keep the Security Council alert as to the link between
human trafficking and violations of human rights. We
will encourage efforts by the Council to condemn
the exploitation of women and children, and we will
support its ability to look into the connections with
transnational organized crime and terrorism.
Secondly, we look forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations on strengthening synergies
among United Nations agencies and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. As foreseen in resolution 2331 (2016), which
was adopted today and which we co-sponsored, we
believe that the Security Council should take advantage
of the opportunity for the two Special Representatives
36/79

Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I have the honour
to speak today on behalf of Australia and Switzerland,
as well as on behalf of my own country.
Modern slavery and human trafficking are both
causes and symptoms of instability and conflicts and
a threat to both development and peace and security.
Trafficking in persons is a human rights violation and
can constitute a war crime, a crime against humanity
or even genocide. Modern slavery, often resulting from
trafficking, exists currently on an unprecedented scale.
It undermines the humanity of its victims. The Global
Slavery Index estimates that 45 million people live in
conditions that qualify as modern slavery, more than
ever before, and in spite of the absolute prohibition of
slavery under international law. Every single country is
affected, which is why it is our joint responsibility to
put an end to such crimes.
The 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development
provides us with a new platform to address those
issues. Slavery and trafficking are mentioned in 3
of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals, an apt
reflection of their cross-cutting nature. Fighting human
trafficking is not just a law-enforcement challenge, it is
a prerequisite for sustainable development and human
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

rights protection. Work on that topic must therefore be
pursued with resolve in the General Assembly.
Modern slavery and human trafficking represent
one of the biggest human rights scandals of our time,
but are also among the most lucrative business models
of organized crime, as they help to fund armed conflict.
Forced labour and human trafficking is a $150 billion
industry; that is more than the annual gross domestic
product of 70 per cent of the States Members of the
Organization. One way of combating such crimes is
to follow the money — in other words, to disrupt the
financial flows associated with it. The involvement
of financial institutions, in particular financial
intelligence units, is key in such efforts. We welcome
the fact that resolution 2331 (2016) refers to the need
to use existing criminal laws, including anti-moneylaundering, anti-corruption and anti-bribery laws, to
investigate, disrupt and dismantle trafficking networks.
We are committed to exploring ways to follow up by
using the expertise of our national systems.
The Council can also play an important role by
addressing the protection gap in existing international
response mechanisms. The humanitarian cluster
system in particular does not address several key areas.
Anti-trafficking strategies should be included in the
planning for responses to conflict and humanitarian
crises. The Council should also encourage the relevant
United Nations system entities to carry out targeted
information campaigns to protect civilians vulnerable
to trafficking.
Modern slavery prevails with widespread
impunity. An overwhelming number of cases are never
prosecuted, even though the duty to prevent and punish
slavery is an erga omnes obligation of all States. That
large impunity gap has created the space for human
trafficking and modern slavery to thrive. There is a
clear need for better cooperation among States aimed at
prosecuting perpetrators of such crimes, which are often
transnational. The Palermo Anti-Trafficking Protocol
in particular can make an important contribution to
that end, and we hope that it will be universally ratified
soon. Where national judiciaries have failed, there is a
clear case for involving and making use of international
criminal justice — for example, the International
Criminal Court. Given the universal nature of the
phenomenon of modern slavery, the Court can play a
dual role: creating incentives for States to investigate
and prosecute, and doing so itself where the impunity
gap persists.

S/PV.7847

Although human trafficking affects a cross-section
of the population, some groups are more vulnerable to
it than others. Sexual and gender-based violence are
exacerbated in armed conflict. Trafficking in situations
of armed conflict has a particular impact on women and
girls. Reports from refugees and migrants arriving in
Europe suggest that a vast majority of women and girls
have been sexually exploited during their flight from
conflict. That is something we need to keep in mind in
our humanitarian response, as well as in our migration
and human rights policies.
We need to strengthen our own capabilities
to identify victims and exploitation in migration
movements and ensure that victims receive appropriate
assistance and remedy. We should also, individually
and collectively, assist and protect those vulnerable to,
or victimized by, human trafficking and make sure that
victims in conflict are not prosecuted or punished for
their experience. It is important to note that, without
identification and recognition as victims, their access
to reparations once transitional justice measures are
taken is seriously hampered.
We wish to highlight that men and boys should be
guaranteed the same access to reparations and services.
Recent studies on sexual violence against men and boys
suggest that they also suffer from a non-recognition
of sexual violence committed against them as sexual
violence. That wrong needs to be corrected.
The resolution adopted today is a good start. We
welcome in particular its gender-inclusive language, but
also believe that some paragraphs could have profited
from further strengthening — for example, with regard
to the important role played by the Financial Action
Task Force and regional bodies of that type. We look
forward to a consistent political commitment from the
Council and remain committed ourselves to our efforts
to eradicate this human tragedy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): We thank the delegation of Spain
for organizing this open debate and for sharing its
informative concept note (S/2016/1031, annex). We
appreciate the remarks made by the President of the
Government of Spain and by the Secretary-General and
the other briefers.
Trafficking in persons across borders has been a
cause for concern for some time. The United Nations

16-4511337/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
was adopted by the General Assembly (resolution 55/25)
and entered into force 13 years ago. That Convention
and its subsequent Protocols represent important steps
taken by the international community in its collective
fight against transnational organized crime.
The Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons, which the General Assembly adopted
by consensus in 2010 (resolution 64/293), further
recognized the global scale of the problem and outlines
the coordinated approach required to deal with it. The
Plan of Action reaffirms the central role of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in the
global efforts to deal with the issue. It also recognizes
the work being carried out by other United Nations
entities, such as the International Organization for
Migration, the International Labour Organization, the
United Nations Children’s Fund and the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. Trafficking in
persons is also recognized as a challenge to be overcome
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
India is a signatory to the Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols and
has resolutely addressed various aspects concerning
trafficking in persons through a series of laws and
other measures. Article 23 of the Indian Constitution
specifically addresses the issue. As part of the
continuing efforts to strengthen the relevant legal
frameworks within India, India unveiled, earlier this
year, a comprehensive draft law aimed at the prevention
of and protection from the trafficking in persons and
the rehabilitation of trafficked persons. The draft
legislation aims to unify our existing anti-trafficking
laws and prioritize the needs of victims and protect
them. India continues to work closely with United
Nations agencies, including United Nations Women
and UNODC, on related issues. India has entered into
various agreements with other countries to combat such
crimes. India also works closely with its neighbours
to implement the 2002 South Asian Association for
Regional Cooperation Convention on that issue.
The nexus between organized traffickers and
terrorist networks through illicit financial linkages
is a dangerous phenomenon. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2016/949) notes the low rates of conviction
for crimes of trafficking across countries: that needs
to change. The persistence of transnational organized
crime in that area and its links with terrorist networks
represent a challenge that requires us to step up our
38/79

20/12/2016

efforts and use the existing tools and mechanisms
to counter terrorist-financing, including sanctions
regimes, more effectively in that regard.
Situations of armed conflict provide fertile ground
for trafficking in persons, in particular those belonging
to vulnerable groups such as women, children and
refugees. They are victims of sexual slavery and forced
labour, including in the mining sector or as fighters.
In recent times, the heinous actions of terrorist groups,
such as Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Boko
Haram, specifically target vulnerable groups, such as
women and children, in situations of armed conflict as
a deliberate tactic of war, adding another even more
serious dimension to such crimes. Such terrorist groups
continue to act with impunity.
The primary focus of the Security Council is to
address threats to international peace and security.
While an increased focus on addressing trafficking
in persons and its linkages to terrorism and armed
conflicts is timely, we must strengthen international
collaboration so as to better utilize the various
existing mechanisms, including through more effective
coordination of the various entities of the United
Nations. Those United Nations entities and mechanisms
take a more holistic approach that seeks to address the
legal, social and economic contexts of the problem. They
provide strong legal and practical frameworks that can
enable and facilitate joint responses against trafficking
that involves multiple jurisdictions. Their autonomy of
decision-making needs to be further strengthened.
While the Security Council should retain its focus
on situations of armed conflict, the broader mechanisms
should be more fully utilized to strengthen national
capacity-building, including in criminal-justice
capacities and regulatory frameworks in banking and
financial institutions, so as to disrupt illicit financial
flows and improve research and analysis, as well
as regional and inter-regional cooperation for the
protection of victims.
India remains committed to working with the
international community in our joint endeavour to
eliminate the global challenge of trafficking in persons,
including in situations of armed conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I am
pleased to take the floor on behalf of Argentina, the
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Netherlands, Slovenia and my own country, Belgium.
First of all, we thank Spain and the Security Council for
organizing this ministerial open debate on trafficking
in persons in conflict situations.
Human trafficking is not simply an ordinary category
of crime with transnational dimensions but indubitably
ranks as one of the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community as a whole. In recent
years and in too many parts of the world, widespread
conflict-related sexual violence, enslavement and
other acts of human trafficking have been reported.
This morning we heard the deeply moving testimonies
of two representatives of the victims of those crimes.
Human trafficking nowadays represents the world’s
fastest-growing criminal industry.
We welcome the reports of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361) and on
the implementation of measures to counter trafficking
in persons (S/2016/949).
In this brief intervention, we wish to give some
elements of an answer to two of the main questions
asked in the concept note (S/2016/1031, annex),
including what Members States can do to better prevent
and combat trafficking in persons, particularly as that
relates to conflict-related sexual violence, and how we
can ensure the accountability of those who engage in
trafficking in persons in conflict situations.
Enslavement and conflict-related sexual violence
are forbidden by a number of treaties and by customary
international law. Moreover, in addition to the statutes
and decisions of various international criminal courts
and tribunals, most States Members of the United
Nations, in their national legal frameworks, consider
enslavement, conflict-related sexual violence and other
acts that derive from human trafficking in conflict
situations to amount to crimes against humanity and war
crimes. At this point, it is worth recalling that in most
cases, States have the jurisdiction to prosecute such
crimes, either because the crimes happened fully or in
part in their territory or because they have jurisdiction
over the victim or over the perpetrator. The primary
responsibility to prosecute lies, therefore, with States.
Very often, that proves to be a challenging task.
Owing to the transnational nature of this type of
crimes, suspects and witnesses, evidence and assets
relating to acts of human trafficking will often not be
found in the territory of one single State. That means
that States that wish to investigate and prosecute

S/PV.7847

such crimes will have to rely heavily on full practical
and judicial cooperation from other States to be
truly effective. However, an increasing number of
States share the opinion of practitioners and legal
experts from all regions of the world that the current
international procedural legal framework for mutual
legal assistance and extradition for such international
crimes is incomplete and outdated. They believe that
the most efficient and practical way to fill that gap is to
open negotiations for a new multilateral instrument for
international cooperation.
For that reason, Argentina, Belgium, Slovenia and
the Netherlands have taken the initiative to promote
negotiations on a multilateral treaty for mutual legal
assistance and extradition for domestic prosecution
of the crime of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. Such a treaty would serve as a tool
to facilitate better practical cooperation between States
investigating and prosecuting such crimes, which
would, in turn, enable them to both comply with their
international obligations and empower their national
judiciaries. Ensuring accountability for perpetrators
engaging in human trafficking is one of the most
effective ways to combat and prevent such odious acts.
Looking forward, we believe that the most concrete
and effective way for Member States to act against
that type of crime would be to join the permanent
declaration in support of the opening of negotiations on
such a procedural multilateral treaty, and we encourage
our colleagues here to do so.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): Austria aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union.
We also co-sponsored resolution 2331 (2016),
adopted by the Security Council earlier today. We
welcome the fact that the resolution — alongside
prevention and prosecution — also puts a strong
focus on supporting victims in their recovery and in
overcoming traumatization and stigmatization, or, as
the Secretary-General said this morning, “in helping
victims heal and become agents of change”. In conflict
and post-conflict settings, the risk that civilians
can become victims of trafficking is clear. Those
displaced by conflict, especially women and girls and
minorities, are particularly vulnerable to that form of
crude exploitation.

16-4511339/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Recently, Austria was affected by mass migration
and refugee movements as a transit and destination
country. Close to 90,000 persons applied for asylum in
2015. Most of them came from conflict zones. Aware
that persons fleeing conflict risk becoming trafficking
victims along their migration route or after arrival
in their destination countries, Austria has scaled up
measures to enable the active screening of potential
trafficking victims among migrants and refugees and
to facilitate access to services for identified victims.
We would like to emphasize the important need for
all parts of the United Nations system to work effectively
together in assisting States to tackle trafficking in
persons in conflict zones and also to mainstream the
awareness of such issues in humanitarian response and
protection efforts. We would also like to highlight the
key role and contribution of civil society in enhancing
the identification and referral of victims of trafficking,
including those originating from conflict and postconflict areas.
Austria is currently supporting projects conducted
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and by the International Centre for
Migration Policy Development. The projects aim at
building the capacities of front-line officials and at
improving the identification and integration of victims
of human trafficking along migration routes. We would
also like to take this opportunity to encourage all
States to contribute to the United Nations Voluntary
Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons,
especially Women and Children, as Nadia Murad and
the Secretary-General have also called for today.
Conflict-related sexual violence and sex as payment
for passage for women and girls on the move, as well
as the sexual enslavement of and trading in women
and girls by terrorist groups, are a shockingly common
reality. Austria hosted an international conference in
June this year, entitled “Fighting Conflict-Related
Sexual Violence — Grassroots Women as Agents of
Change”, which focused specifically on the contribution
and the role of women in civil society in Syria and Iraq.
We reiterate our support for the important work on that
topic by the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Sexual Violence in Conflict.
With its portfolio of technical assistance
programmes, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime has been and continues to be a central partner
in assisting Member States in implementing practical
40/79

20/12/2016

measures to combat trafficking in persons. We are also
particularly appreciative of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, which, through its monitoring
and reporting mechanism on grave violations against
children, documents abductions of children and related
violations, including human trafficking.
A substantial number of radicalized foreign
fighters — also from Austria — have joined terrorist
groups in conflict areas and might, among other crimes,
be perpetrators of human trafficking. In that regard, we
fully support the Secretary-General’s recommendation
that Member States consider establishing jurisdiction
to prosecute instances of human trafficking committed
by their nationals abroad.
We would like to emphasize that States have the
primary responsibility for bringing perpetrators to
justice and ending the climate of impunity. In postconflict settings, accountability and transitional-justice
mechanisms are key elements for sustainable peace.
We also call on those States that have not yet done so
to ratify or accede to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its Palermo
Anti-Trafficking Protocol.
With the assumption of the chairmanship of the
OSCE in 2017, Austria will further put a spotlight on
the interlinkages between migration and trafficking
and between radicalization, terrorism and trafficking.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. El Nour.
Mr. El Nour: I am pleased to take the floor on behalf
of the International Organization for Migration (IOM).
I would like to start by thanking Spain and the Security
Council for convening this ministerial open debate on
the topic “Trafficking in persons in conflict situations”.
The international community has increasingly focused
on the topic of human trafficking in the past decade.
However, the crime of human trafficking, which results
in horrendous human rights violations, remains largely
overlooked in emergency situations.
In my brief intervention, I would like to address
the question of how we can work together to confront
human trafficking in conflicts, how to better implement
robust victim identification mechanisms and how
humanitarian action can effectively support the victims
of human trafficking. Research on that topic has
consistently found evidence that emergency situations
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

exacerbate pre-existing risks to human trafficking and
create additional ones that are specific to the crisis
setting. Human trafficking in conflict situations is
often a consequence of the erosion of the rule of law,
the desperation of individuals following the disruption
of economic activities, or the potential intrusion by
criminal networks into refugee camps and camps for
internally displaced persons.
We need to collectively understand that countertrafficking efforts in emergencies are a matter of life
and death. Employing counter-trafficking measures
in crises settings helps to prevent individuals from
falling victim to highly exploitative practices that can
seriously impair their physical or psychological wellbeing and potentially endanger their lives. In that
regard, the International Organization for Migration,
in close cooperation with its humanitarian partners,
has consistently been working on the issue of human
trafficking and exploitation in crisis settings, and
has already operationalized its response through
the integration of the protection and assistance of
crisis-affected trafficking victims into humanitarian
responses as lifesaving measures.
IOM has further made extensive use of its
Displacement Tracking Matrix tool to assess the
exposure to trafficking along migratory routes and
to measure the risk to trafficking faced by actual
and potential victims in camps and crisis-affected
communities. The International Organization for
Migration strongly supports the Council’s efforts to
eliminate human trafficking in conflict situations
and hopes that the Council will take into account
the humanitarian dimension of crisis-induced
human trafficking.
In closing, I want to say that I welcome the adoption
of Security Council 2331 (2016) today, and we stand
ready to support the Council in that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): Let me begin by expressing
our condolences to our German and Russian colleagues
following the tragic terrorist attack in Berlin and the
tragic assassination of Ambassador Andrey Karlov
in Ankara. We ask them to accept our sympathy and
words of condolence.
We thank Spain for organizing today’s important
open debate and for facilitating the adoption of the

S/PV.7847

ambitious resolution 2331 (2016) on trafficking of
persons in conflict situations, which Poland proudly
co-sponsored.
Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union, but
I would like to add some further comments in my
national capacity.
The findings in the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of measures to counter trafficking
in persons (S/2016/949), released in November this year,
are worrisome and alarming. The report acknowledges
various instances of human trafficking, both within
and beyond conflict zones. Civilian populations,
notably women and often children, often war refugees
and migrants, are subjected to a wide range of forms
of exploitation, including sexual violence, forced and
compulsory labour, enslavement, as well as forcible
recruitment into armed services.
Particularly disturbing is the nexus between
conflict-related sexual violence and human trafficking,
acknowledged earlier in the Secretary-General’s report
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361/Rev.1).
Abductions of women and children, systematic and
widespread exploitation and abuse, including rape,
sexual violence, forced marriages and sex slavery,
perpetrated by Da’esh, Boko Haram and other terrorist
and armed groups, are horrifying and deeply deplorable,
and demand our immediate response. We are also
alarmed by the widespread practice of the recruitment
of children by parties to conflicts, including in
Syria. In that context, I wish to reiterate the primary
responsibility of State authorities for ensuring the
safety of its population, especially members of ethnic
and religious minorities.
Twenty years ago, at the fifty-first session of the
General Assembly, Poland submitted the first draft of
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, which was adopted by the Assembly
in 2000 (resolution 55/25). We subsequently also
ratified its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children. We are also a State party to the International
Labour Organization’s Forced Labour Convention
and its Protocol and the Worst Forms of Child Labour
Convention. We join the Council in urging countries
that have not yet done so to embrace the international
legal framework for preventing and combating
trafficking in persons. Adopting appropriate measures

16-4511341/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

within national legal systems is the first step in
efforts to combat and prosecute such crimes and hold
perpetrators accountable.
We must also accelerate the international response
to that dangerous and inhumane phenomenon, which
undermines fundamental human rights and gravely
impacts the lives of victims and affects whole
communities. We appreciate the work of international
bodies such as the International Criminal Police
Organization, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration. We urge Member States to
cooperate even more closely on that common challenge.
Apart from governmental cooperation, building
partnerships with civil society and the private sector
should foster information sharing and the identification
and protection of victims, with the goal of dismantling
criminal networks involved in trafficking in persons.
Cooperation with the private sector is especially
important, so as to cut off funding sources to terrorist
and violent extremist groups, which often profit
from human trafficking. Fighting sexual and genderbased violence must be better reflected in counterterrorist efforts.
Last but not least, we must ensure that the stories
of trafficking not fall into dehumanizing silence by
making the voices of survivors well heard. To conclude,
we once again applaud Spain’s initiative to discuss this
topic in this forum, and we appreciate Spain’s work on
resolution 2331 (2016), which complements the existing
framework aimed at fighting human trafficking in
conflict situations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nicaragua.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): We offer our condolences to the family of
Ambassador Andrey Karlov and the Government and
the people of Russia.
Allow me to congratulate Spain on so efficiently
presiding over the Security Council during the month
of December. At the same time, we would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting on such
an important topic. We agree with the President’s
concept note (S/2016/1031, annex), which reiterates the
importance and need for the United Nations to redouble
42/79

20/12/2016

its efforts to eliminate trafficking in persons in conflict
situations.
However, our approach and contribution to the
debate are focused on the prevention of trafficking
in persons in all circumstances. It should be fought
even when it takes place in non-conflict situations.
Trafficking in persons is a global problem that affects
more than 29 million children, women and men who
are subjected to sexual exploitation, forced labour,
domestic servitude and organ harvesting. It is in itself a
violation of human rights. It is a most abominable crime
that destroys the essence of people, their life, freedom
and integrity. It turns human beings into commodities,
leading to the degradation of the dignity and physical
and mental health of people, leaving indelible imprints
on the social fabric.
Our people, who have experienced the scourge of
war at first hand, today live in peace and reconciliation,
led by Commander Daniel Ortega, who is working
with determination to eliminate trafficking in persons.
Being a small country with limited resources, we are
making our contribution to the international community
in maintaining a firm position of vigilance and in
comprehensively addressing the topic within a legal and
normative framework. We have a nation-wide coalition
to detect, prevent, protect and rehabilitate victims of
human trafficking at the national level and to ensure
that the perpetrators of such crimes are effectively
punished. In January 2015, we adopted Law No. 896
against trafficking in persons, which determines the
aims and modalities of the crime, the protected legal
goods and the criminal classification of the crime. That
instrument is based on prevention, offering individual
recommendations for people and their families.
Our Government is also working with other countries
in our area through a regional system that facilitates
the rescue of victims with a view to strengthening
prevention as well. However, international financial
and technical cooperation are always crucial for us to
be able to combat such scourge. If we want to put an
end to trafficking in persons in conflict situations, we
must begin by looking at the root cause of the conflict.
No country in the international community can claim
the right to use or threaten to use force in international
relations. That form of exceptionalism not only does
not resolve conflicts, it fuels them, just as we have seen
in recent years. Conflicts are resolved through dialogue
and political negotiation, and the United Nations, based
on the Charter of the United Nations, must assume its
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

responsibility and be the main organization to ensure
global peace.
Nicaragua — a small country that bases its policies
on Christian values, socialist principles and solidarity
within this complex global context — has been working
purposefully in the various regional and international
forums to promote policies of peace, unity and
understanding among nations, promoting politically
negotiated solutions to conflicts and the right of our
people to achieve their sustainable development and
well-being. Our country continues to focus its efforts
on strengthening the family unit and education,
important factors in efforts to forge strong societies
that are committed to working, maintaining their wellbeing and developing themselves. Our Government will
continue to bolster its policies to combat the scourge
before us and protect our societies from it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): First of all, I wish, on behalf
of my Government, to express our deepest condolences
to the Russian Federation for the tragic assassination of
Ambassador Andrei Karlov in Ankara yesterday.
The prevalence of human trafficking in conflict
situation is of grave concern and requires collective
and comprehensive efforts and an immediate and
decisive response. We share wth previous speakers the
concern regarding the nexus between conflict-related
sexual violence and human trafficking, particularly
the cases that involve United Nations personnel and
peacekeepers. As a troop-contributing country, the
Kingdom of Thailand welcomes the efforts of the
Security Council and the United Nations system to
address and respond to reports of trafficking in persons,
as well as sexual exploitation and abuse, in the context
of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
My delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution
2331 (2016). We reaffirm our commitment to cooperating
with the international community in combatting all
forms of human trafficking, and we place that agenda
at the top of our national priorities. We are trying to
effectively address this critical issue through a five-pillar
strategy, which is very much in line with the globally
recognized strategy of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in addressing human trafficking.
The five pillars are: policy, prosecution, protection,
prevention and partnership. The implementation of the
strategy focuses on nine key areas, namely, the rule of

S/PV.7847

law, anti-complicity and anti-corruption, expediting
the administrative and judicial process against human
trafficking cases, effectiveness of frontline operations,
reduction of risk for vulnerable groups, improved
victim and witness protection, integrated efforts
against child exploitation, enhanced partnership, and
public awareness and outreach.
Concerning policy, I would like to underline that
our policy focuses on taking steps to ensure the effective
implementation of our international obligations,
particularly the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, and the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons.
The Kingdom of Thailand has made consistent
efforts to strengthen its judicial institutions and improve
its proactive law enforcement, in order to investigate
cases, rescue victims and prosecute those involved with
human trafficking syndicates in a timely and efficient
manner. We place high priority on protection of and
assistance to victims of trafficking by addressing
all aspects of their essential needs. We support the
creation of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund
for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, which provides humanitarian,
legal and financial aid to victims of human trafficking.
We therefore strongly encourage Member States
in a position to do so to contribute to the Voluntary
Trust Fund.
With regard to prevention, the most efficient
preventive measure is to tackle the root causes of
conflict, in order to reduce the risk of conflict-affected
vulnerable groups falling into the hands of human
traffickers. National and local campaigns, as well as
community-based activities, have been carried out to
raise awareness of human trafficking.
Concerning partnership, the Royal Thai Government
attaches importance to forging strategic partnerships
with the private sector, civil society, academia and
the media in the fight against human trafficking. We
are also of the view that close cooperation with key
stakeholders at all levels is crucial for achieving a
sustainable solution to the problem.
The success of our common fight against human
trafficking requires an integrated approach and wellcoordinated efforts of all concerned. The United Nations

16-4511343/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

can play a leading role in that regard. October 2017 will
be an opportune time to strengthen those efforts, as the
international community will be appraising the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons through a mandated high-level meeting of the
General Assembly. We hope that the meeting will help to
identify the challenges and gaps in the implementation
of the Plan of Action and enhance States’ capacity to
put an end to this heinous crime.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me start by expressing
our deepest condolences to the Government and
Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation for the
tragic attack against His Excellency Ambassador
Andrey Karlov. Our condolences also go to the victims
of the Berlin market attack. Our prayers go to their
bereaved families.
I would like to thank Spain for convening this open
debate. I also thank His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon
and the other briefers for their remarks.
All human beings possess fundamental human
rights, which are inherent to their noble dignity and
respect. Trafficking in persons is a wicked crime that
violates those rights. The trafficking of vulnerable
people, especially women and children, who should be
protected in conflict situations, is an even more heinous
crime; they are deceived or abducted into exploitation,
torture and servitude. Indonesia condemns modern
slavery and human trafficking and supports their
elimination. Like others, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 2331 (2016) today.
Recognizing the seriousness of the problem, the
Indonesian Government has taken concrete action
at the national, regional and international levels.
At the national level, the Government of Indonesia
enacted Law Number 21 of 2007, which criminalizes
all kinds of human trafficking. At the regional level,
Indonesia and Australia initiated the Bali Process on
People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related
Transnational Crime, in 2002. Besides effectively
raising regional awareness of the consequences of
people smuggling, trafficking in persons and related
transnational crimes, the Bali Process has also
developed and implemented strategies and practical
cooperation in its response.
44/79

20/12/2016

At the international level, Indonesia has ratified
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. In 2015, we joined the international
community in adopting the Sustainable Development
Goals, which, inter alia, also commit to taking action
against human trafficking.
Despite a strong collective push to raise the bar
in stopping such human exploitation at all levels,
there has been intense defiance from the perpetrators.
However, the international community cannot relent
in discouraging human trafficking in conflict zones.
All methods, including denouncing, disrupting and
protecting should be exercised. But perhaps the best
method would be prevention and protection, which can
be achieved in many ways.
First and foremost, investing in the prevention of
conflict is one of the best protections against human
trafficking. Yet in cases where conflict prevention
may not necessarily be possible, the international
community needs to commit to resolve the conflicts in
which human trafficking thrives.
Secondly, we should more robustly implement
the international Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, including in conflict
settings — be it the trafficking of persons who are
fleeing a conflict or those trafficked into forced military
service and in post-conflict reconstruction work.
Thirdly, the United Nations system’s capabilities
could be enhanced to protect those vulnerable to
human trafficking in conflict. We could analyse
further ways to incorporate humanitarian actions with
human trafficking. From the outset of a conflict crisis,
anti-trafficking measures should be incorporated into
all humanitarian interventions in conflict zones as part
of life-saving protection activities.
It is unfortunate that humanitarian action is intended
in some cases to be a temporary fix for populations that
are experiencing hazardous situations. We should take
a long-term view in terms of empowering vulnerable
populations, so that they can play an active role in
preventing human trafficking. In short, it is pertinent
to employ anti-trafficking strategies in the planning
and implementation of humanitarian responses, so as
to ensure durable solutions.
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Lastly, those who engage in human trafficking
will remain determined to challenge our cause. The
international community must never relent in countering
human traffickers. Let us fight against exploitation and
bring those responsible to account and to justice. We
must preserve the dignity of all human beings.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
thanks Spain for bringing the issue of people trafficking
in situations of conflict to the attention of the Security
Council and for its leadership on the matter.
Trafficking in persons is a sordid crime that deprives
people of their freedom and exploits some of the most
vulnerable members of our societies. It has devastating
effects on the physical, mental and emotional health of
survivors, their families and communities. In situations
of conflict, civilians, particularly women and girls, are
extremely vulnerable to being trafficked and to sexual
violence. The international community must ensure
that the response to situations of conflict, including
those related to terrorist activities, takes into account
the need to prevent trafficking in persons, protect the
victims of that crime and prosecute perpetrators.
Canada has been working to keep the issue of
violence against women and girls, including the
appalling atrocities committed by Da’esh, at the top of
the global agenda. Furthermore, we are committed to
ensuring that Da’esh is held to account for its crimes. In
October, Canada’s Parliament recognized the findings
of the Commission of Inquiry that atrocities committed
by Da’esh against the Yazidis of Sinjar constitute
genocide. Our Parliament unanimously adopted a
motion to provide asylum to the most vulnerable Yazidi
women and girls.
Sexual and gender-based violence is a serious
barrier to the recovery of communities after armed
conflict. In addition to the provision of services to
survivors, the international community must hold
perpetrators to account in order to break the culture
of impunity and provide justice to survivors. Canada
commends the comprehensive approach taken by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, as
well as the work of t the Team of Experts on Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, and UN Action.
We also commend the partnership between UN-Women
and Justice Rapid Response and their work in deploying

S/PV.7847

experts to investigate and document such crimes with
a view to supporting prosecutions by national or
international tribunals.
Human trafficking creates extraordinary profits for
both terrorist and criminal organizations. By employing
the tools developed to combat financial crime, we can
deprive them of funding and access to the international
financial system, making it more difficult for them to
accomplish their destructive goals.
Canada strongly supports the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities to list the financial facilitators of Da’esh,
Al-Qaida and affiliated groups, and the work of
the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) to push all
countries to implement effective, risk-based anti-money
laundering and anti-terrorist financing regimes.
Canada is encouraged by the Security Council’s close
cooperation with the FATF and its regional bodies in
that effort.
Canada is proud to have joined 60 Member States
in co-sponsoring resolution 2331 (2016), adopted earlier
today and we welcome the attention of the Security
Council on this important matter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Koncke.
Mr. Koncke (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
General Secretariat of the Organization of American
States (OAS), I extend condolences to the Permanent
Mission of Russia following the attack that claimed
the life of Ambassador Andrey Karlov, and to the
Permanent Mission of Germany following the attack
carried out in Berlin.
I am honoured to take part in today’s open debate
in the Security Council on behalf of the Secretary
General of the Organization of American States. First,
I thank the Spanish presidency of the Security Council
for its initiative to convene today’s debate to address a
topic of extreme importance and pressing urgency and
that requires shared commitments, multidimensional
approaches and the highest sense of political will of
countries and other actors to combat and eradicate it.
We are fully confident that today’s debate and
the adoption of resolution 2331 (2016) will contribute
decisively to the efforts of the Security Council and

16-4511345/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Member States to establish and empower judicial
systems and other institutional mechanisms aimed at
preventing, criminalizing, combating and eradicating
this scourge, above all when it also serves as a source of
funding for criminal organizations and terrorist groups
in situations of armed conflict.
Human trafficking is one of the most despicable
expressions of human barbarism. In the more than
50 armed conflicts plaguing the world, this crime
intensifies violence and the expressions of terrorism,
prolongs the suffering of its victims and delays or
nullifies the development of communities. In addition,
it is an ongoing violation of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. In many cases,
the underlying link between transnational organized
crime and conflict situations is undeniable.
Human trafficking in our hemisphere focuses
on sexual exploitation, mainly of women and girls or
adolescents. In our region, regional and international
routes have been identified, and in many countries, the
practices used by criminal groups to capture victims
have also been recognized, as well as victims’ places
of origin and destination. Although we now enjoy
unprecedented peace in our region, thanks to the recent
signing of the peace agreement achieved in Colombia,
we cannot give up on the fight against the threat posed
by transnational organized crime, since it is a reality
that is measured in lives and victims, including those
subjected to human trafficking. Let me share some of
the efforts made by OAS to end this crime.
All countries of the hemisphere have committed to
adhering to the terms of the United Nations Convention
on Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. In 2006, 2009, 2012
and 2014, Venezuela, Argentina, Guatemala and Brazil,
respectively, hosted high-level meetings on the subject,
the last of which adopted the Declaration of Brasilia and
the Second Work Plan against Trafficking in Persons in
the Western Hemisphere 2015-2018. These constitute
the framework for guiding efforts in the region.
The Work Plan takes into account the different
manifestations of exploitation considered as human
trafficking, and pays special attention to vulnerable,
at-risk groups and indigenous populations and other
traditional communities, as well as lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex persons groups.
The mandates and guidelines of the Second Work
46/79

20/12/2016

Plan include the establishment of mechanisms for the
periodic monitoring of strategies, the criminalization
of trafficking according to the seriousness of the crime,
special emphasis on minors under 18 years of age,
access to protection mechanisms for victims regardless
of their immigration status and participation in illegal
activities, and capacity-building and the strengthening
of the institutional governance of countries.
Within that framework, together with the
International Organization for Migration and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, and with funding from the European Union,
since 2014 OAS has implemented the Inter-American
Programme for the Prevention of Irregular Migration in
Mesoamerica. The Programme covers eight countries
in the region and has three complementary components:
prevention, confrontation and protection.
In addition, the inter-American crime and violence
prevention programme was launched in 2015. It
includes the prevention of human trafficking. It is
being implemented as a pilot project in Brazil and will
continue in Honduras next year. Recently, the Organized
Transnational Crime Department was created within
the OAS General Secretariat. It seeks to address the
challenges faced by the western hemisphere with regard
to such crimes The efforts made by OAS in that regard
should not be viewed in isolation, but, rather, as being
linked to the four strategic pillars of the organization:
democracy, human rights, integrated development and
multidimensional security — all under the slogan of
“More rights for more people”.
A challenge in the fight against human trafficking
is the existence of networks that corrupt public
authority, built around criminal organizations and
their links with the private sector and terrorist groups
that use human trafficking as a source of financing,
as acknowledged by the fourth Global Survey of the
Implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) by Member States.
To conclude, I should like to share a few thoughts
and suggestions based on experiences in our region.
Combating human trafficking requires a
multidimensional security approach, a combination of
national efforts and bilateral and multilateral measures
and active cooperation with regional organizations.
The legal dimension, through the classification of
crimes related to human trafficking, must be a key
pillar in efforts by Member States, as well as in the
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

development of criminal classifications related to the
fight against money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism in order to combat human trafficking, in
particular in conflict affected areas. Strengthening
capacity-building is an essential tool for improving
border control and management, identifying falsified
documents and prosecuting trafficking networks.
I would like to conclude by expressing the full
confidence of the secretariat of the OAS that today’s
open debate will be an essential contribution to the task
of preventing, combating and eradicating the trade and
trafficking in human beings, to which the organization
I represent is fully committed.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like to begin by
expressing our sincere condolences on the assassination
of Mr. Andrey Karlov, Ambassador of the Russian
Federation to Ankara, and to the loved ones of the
victims of the terrorist attack in Berlin.
I would like to congratulate Spain on its
remarkable and accomplished two-year term on the
Security Council, and to thank the Spanish delegation
for organizing today’s open debate on trafficking in
persons in conflict situations. I commend their efforts
with regard to today’s adoption by the Security Council
of resolution 2331 (2016), of which Romania was
a sponsor.
Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union, to which I
would like to add some remarks in my national capacity.
Conflicts are becoming more closely linked to
terrorist activities, while human trafficking plays
an increasing role in the operations of terrorist
organizations, generating revenue and functioning as
an instrument for eliminating those who oppose them.
It is well known that internally displaced and refugee
women and girls in areas controlled by Da’esh have been
sold or forcibly married to fighters in armed groups. The
horrendous crimes committed against Yazidi women
and girls in particular have generated deep sympathy
worldwide. We must help the survivors to cope with the
long-lasting physical and psychological trauma of the
abuse they have endured. We welcome the appointment
of Nadia Murad Basee Taha, a survivor of Da’esh human
trafficking who presented her testimony earlier today,

S/PV.7847

as a Goodwill Ambassador for the Dignity of Survivors
of Human Trafficking.
Prevention is key in both conflict and non-conflict
situations. The role in prevention of personnel deployed
in United Nations peacekeeping operations should be
enhanced. Developing predeployment curriculums
that emphasize the specifics of trafficking in persons
would help to increase peacekeepers’ knowledge of the
problem in order to help them better identify and combat
it. Everyone with access to areas of conflict, including
representatives of civil society and humanitarian actors,
should also receive this type of training.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/949)
identifies the complex nexus that exists between
trafficking in persons, organized crime, corruption,
armed conflict and terrorism. But it requires further
mapping. We cannot successfully combat human
trafficking at the national level alone, for cooperation
at the regional and international levels is also key. Civil
society, the private sector and the media should be
major partners in that regard. Ensuring the continued
use of mechanisms to combat money laundering
and the financing of terrorism, including sanctions
regimes, will contribute further to tracking and halting
the problem. We believe we should also make use of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which gives
us a clear mandate for taking immediate and effective
measures to eradicate modern slavery and human
trafficking. After drug trafficking, human trafficking
is the world’s single-largest criminal enterprise. Its
commodity is human beings, bought and sold with no
consideration for human dignity. Today there are more
slaves in the world than there have ever been in the
history of humankind — an estimated 27 million adults
and 13 million children.
Romania’s national anti-human-trafficking agency
coordinates the activities of the authorities dealing with
human trafficking, as well as protecting and assisting
victims. It is currently cooperating with 64 different
partners, including some from civil society. There is
a dedicated unit within the Romanian national police
of 15 regional teams of specialized officers, totalling
250 operational staff. Our police border department has
400 officers attached to Frontex, the European Border
and Coast Guard Agency, working with European
border and coast guard teams fighting human and drug
trafficking. Twenty-two Romanian debriefing experts
are also helping to identify trafficking victims among
immigrants. Romanian personnel in United Nations

16-4511347/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

peacekeeping operations receive predeployment
training on how to identify and protect victims of
human trafficking.
Finally, Romania remains fully committed to the
global efforts to deal with this issue. The fight is part of
our collective sense of humanity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Israel joins the many
delegations here that have condemned the terrible
terror attacks in Berlin and in Turkey on the Russian
Ambassador. Terror is terror, and we are united with
the rest of the international community in condemning
and opposing such terrible crimes.
Every year, hundreds of thousands of people,
mostly women and children, are trafficked across
borders worldwide, in a crime of humankind against
humankind. It should outrage every person because
it debases our fellow human beings. It should outrage
every community because it erodes societies. And it
should outrage every nation because it funds organized
crime and terrorist groups and threatens international
peace and security. It is worth emphasizing that human
trafficking is a multibillion-dollar industry. While in
the past trafficking in persons, like drug and arms
trafficking, was mostly run by organized criminal
groups, in today’s world we are witnessing an alarming
increase in the involvement of terrorist groups such as
Da’esh and Boko Haram.
A year ago, we all had the chance to hear in person
the horrific story of Nadia Murad, a Yazidi refugee
and victim of trafficking, in the first-ever Security
Council debate dedicated to trafficking in persons (see
S/PV.7585). In October, in an effort to raise awareness
of the dire situation of Yazidi women and girls, the
Israel Permanent Mission to the United Nations hosted
an event focused on trauma treatment for refugees who
manage to escape the bloodshed in Syria and Iraq. At
that event, we had the opportunity to hear from a young
woman named Marwa Al Aliko, a Yazidi refugee from
Iraq who was captured and trafficked by Da’esh and
forced into slavery before she was able to escape. In
that meeting, Marwa said that
“the Da’esh fighters took us captive and put us in a
small room. Every night the men would come to us
and do as they pleased. After a few days one of the
men bought me and my two sisters and took us to
48/79

20/12/2016

Syria. Ten days later, they separated us and I was
all alone.”
Unfortunately, it seems that the international community
has failed Marwa and her family and friends.
In recent years the Syrian conflict has turned
the Middle East into a breeding ground for human
traffickers. Unfortunately, that is not limited to Da’esh
alone but also extends to the Syrian regime. According
to the 2016 report of the United States Department
of State on trafficking in persons, the actions of the
Syrian Government, as well as Hizbullah, continue to
worsen the problem of human trafficking crimes. We
must condemn those acts and demand that the Syrian
Government uphold its international obligations by
refraining from using child soldiers, protecting women
who have been sold as sex slaves and prosecuting
traffickers, whether they are Government officials
or terrorists.
Israel shares fully in the global concern about this
issue and in the commitment to continuing to fight to
eliminate trafficking in persons. Combating human
trafficking is a high priority for our Government. We
are a party to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Palermo
Protocol on trafficking in persons. In fact, we are fully
engaged in the fight against trafficking in persons
through all four Ps — prevention, prosecution,
protection and partnership.
The first is prevention. We introduced a
comprehensive anti-trafficking law in 2006 and adopted
national plans of action. Eradicating the plague of
trafficking and slavery requires partnership at all levels.
To achieve that, we appointed a national anti-trafficking
coordinator to coordinate efforts between the
Government and non-governmental organizations.
The second is prosecution. We have invested in our
intelligence and law enforcement agencies in order to
identify trafficking networks, prosecute perpetrators
and enforce tough sentences. The third is protection.
We have introduced a network of services to help locate
trafficked persons and provide victims with support.
They are given a safe place to stay in a Governmentfunded shelter, free legal aid, a work visa and the medical
and psychological support they so desperately need to
begin rehabilitation. Recently, the special forfeiture
fund for the rehabilitation of victims of trafficking was
activated and allocated funds to more than 45 victims
and five non-governmental organizations (NGOs) for
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

various rehabilitation purposes, including recovery and
reintegration. And the fourth, and last, is partnership
among all stakeholders, namely, Government, civil
society and the private sector. Our success is largely
due to the valuable partnerships we have formed with
NGOs. They are critical in every phase of the process.
Each one of us has a responsibility. Every nation
must take action by adopting strong anti-trafficking
laws, strengthening enforcement mechanisms and
introducing tougher penalties. Trafficking preys on
those without a voice, and therefore we must be the
voice ourselves. We must be the voice of the man who
is lured by the promise of a higher-paying job, but ends
up toiling in hard labour in horrific conditions under
the threat of violence. We must be the voice of the child
who is told she would have a better life, but is raped and
forced into prostitution. We must be the voice of women
such as Marwa and Nadia and so many others. We must
show them through our actions that they are not alone.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I wish to express my condolences
to the Government of Germany and the Government of
Russia for the tragic events that took place recently.
Unfortunately, terror and madness are just around the
corner and can affect us all.
Moving on to today’s topic, I would like to thank the
Kingdom of Spain for convening this important open
debate on trafficking in persons in conflict situations.
Argentina would like to point out that, while the
threat of trafficking in persons may in fact increase
in conflict situations, it is important to bear in mind
that the United Nations has already developed a
sophisticated system to fight trafficking, which has been
designed through resolutions of the General Assembly,
in particular under the agenda items entitled “Crime
prevention and criminal justice” and “Advancement
of women”.
Indeed, the General Assembly has discussed this
issue and adopted resolutions on combating trafficking
since the forty-ninth session, through annual resolutions
that have fed into and promoted the negotiation and
adoption of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, and in particular its
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, to

S/PV.7847

supplement the Convention. Also, in 2010, the General
Assembly adopted the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, and since
2014 has observed the World Day against Trafficking
in Persons on 30 July.
Those instruments have also provided a clear
mandate for the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in the framework of the fight against trafficking.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has
developed extensive experience in implementing
appropriate mechanisms and tools to address the issue,
including, among other initiatives, the Voluntary Trust
Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons and the
provision of technical assistance to States. Argentina
values and acknowledges those efforts.
In that context, it is important to note that Goal 8.7
of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) expressly
refers to the problem of combating forced labor,
modern slavery and trafficking in persons. Moreover,
its implementation, review and monitoring is carried
out under the framework of the mechanisms established
by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Under the coordination of the International Labour
Organization, Argentina has played an active role in the
development of Alliance 8.7, in order to achieve that
Goal. Argentina has long been committed to combating
trafficking in persons as one of the worst forms of
violence against human beings, which endangers the
dignity of all people. Our commitment has always
placed priority on preventing this crime and punishing
its perpetrators, while improving the Government’s
ability to assist and protect its victims.
At the national level, we established an executive
committee on combating the trafficking and exploitation
of persons and protecting and assisting the victims,
as well as a federal council on combating trafficking.
The executive committee, set up in September 2013,
is tasked with implementing a national programme to
combat human trafficking and exploitation and protect
and assist victims. It includes representatives from
the Ministry of Security, the Ministry of Justice and
Human Rights, the Ministry of Social Development
and the Ministry of Labour, Employment and Social
Security. The executive committee develops and
implements awareness-raising campaigns and is in
charge of training civil servants to address the problem
of trafficking in persons, sexual exploitation and
related crimes in order to understand the complexity

16-4511349/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

of the crime and its direct links to drug trafficking and
organized crime.
For its part, the federal council on combating human
trafficking, set up in July, is responsible for designing
a federal strategy to combat human trafficking and
exploitation and promote the adoption by various
jurisdictions of standards of conduct, protocols and
intervention networks to ensure effective protection
and respect for the rights of victims of trafficking and
exploitation. The federal council is made up of national
ministries, Government agencies and representatives of
civil society.
We therefore believe that it is important that the
Security Council, as the principal organ of the United
Nations, be sensitive to the problem of trafficking.
However, we must not lose sight of the fact that the
issue as such falls under the purview of the General
Assembly and that the Organization has developed
a sophisticated mechanism for addressing the legal
framework provided by the Palermo Convention and
its Protocol, with the guidance provided by the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons as a fundamental tool for the implementation
of national public policies on this issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate your friendly
country, Sir, for presiding over the Security Council
during the month December. We also thank you for
convening this important debate. We also welcome the
fact that His Excellency the President of the Government
of Spain presided over the meeting this morning. We
also welcome the Council’s adoption of resolution 2331
(2016), which we co-sponsored.
Moreover, I would be remiss not to associate
myself with the statement to be delivered by the
representatative of Bahrain on behalf of the Group of
Friends United against Human Trafficking.
The reports presented include appalling statistics
on the spread of human trafficking. They also bear out
the causal relationship between conflict and the spread
of human trafficking. A look at the ongoing conflicts all
over the world and their abhorrent repercussions, leads
us to conclude that forced migration is fundamental
to those conflicts, which have pushed hundreds of
thousands of people to flee their homes in search of
50/79

20/12/2016

greater security and a life of dignity. We have all seen
the painful images of those who have paid their lives
due to the exploitation of refugees by human traffickers.
While we highlight the important measures
undertaken by the international community to address
trafficking in persons, the real challenge facing us is
not limited to promoting frameworks and means to
combat the phenomenon. Instead, we should address
the root causes that have led to such exacerbation. We
are talking about protracted and new conflicts that have
pushed innocent civilians to seek safety and peace. They
are therefore prone to danger in their own countries,
which are suffering from poverty and conflict, or are in
situations of displacement or are seeking asylum or are
migrating to other countries in order to flee death and
destruction. Adding to the dangers associated with the
phenomenon of human trafficking is the use by terrorist
groups of young people who are recruited to carry out
terrorist operations.
While referring to the horrific repercussions of
conflicts and policies that violate the fundamental
rights of individuals and peoples, we would also like to
stress that conflict provides an environment conducive
to human trafficking. The international community has
failed to address those conflicts and crisis that indirectly
contribute to the further spread of this phenomenon.
The friendly people of Syria have paid a very high
price owing to the failure of the Security Council to
save civilians and reach a solution to the crisis in their
country, which is now in its sixth year. The appalling
and unprecedented humanitarian crisis in Syria has
unfortunately been exacerbated in Aleppo, where
an increasing number of civilians find themselves in
situations of forced migration. The many security and
other repercussions of this situation will have an impact
on regional and international peace and security.
Furthermore, we would like to stress that, should the
international community should succeed in putting an
end to human trafficking, we would still need to address
the root causes and find just solutions to conflicts and
crisis, fight impunity and ensure accountability.
The State of Qatar has supported the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons
since its inception. We have enacted many legislative
measures aimed at combating trafficking in persons. We
have also cooperated internationally and promulgated
laws
that
criminalize
the
human-trafficking
phenomenon. In 2015, we hosted the thirteenth United
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Nations Conference on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice. The Doha communiqué that was issued
following the Conference endorsed a comprehensive
approach to combating the crime of human trafficking.
We are also one of the major supporters of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which is the
primary United Nations agency operating in this field.
In same vein, we have been one of the main contributors
to the United Nations Trust Fund for Victims of Human
Trafficking since its establishment.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar will spare no effort
to support the efforts of the Security Council to put an
end to the phenomenon of human trafficking and to all
conflicts and crises and bring about peace and security
in our region and the world at large.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Wilson (Australia): I will start by joining
others in expressing our condolences to Russia for the
shocking attack on its Ambassador in Turkey yesterday.
Our thoughts and sadness are with family and loved
ones and the Russian people at this terrible time.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Liechtenstein.
Australia is deeply concerned about trafficking
in persons. We know that armed conflict and
instability
—
and
the
resulting
economic
desperation — amplifies the risk of human trafficking
for vulnerable people, especially women and children,
people with disabilities, migrants and displaced people.
Sadly, refugee and internal displacement camps are
particularly fertile ground for human traffickers. With
the highest-ever number of people displaced in the world
today, there are now a great many who are particularly
vulnerable to trafficking, and we must work to protect
them from this scourge.
We have a shared responsibility to disrupt this
evil trade and address its root causes. No one State
or organization can do it alone. Australia encourages
United Nations efforts to strengthen coordination to
develop a more strategic and coherent international
response. We consider that Alliance 8.7 is a useful
vehicle for bringing key United Nations agencies,
Member States and non-governmental stakeholders
together, to accelerate efforts to effectively combat
trafficking. We should also ensure that the 2017 review

S/PV.7847

of the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons makes a practical contribution.
Preventing and combating human trafficking and
slavery is a priority of the Australian Government. We
are working with countries in the Asia-Pacific region to
stamp out these barbaric and criminal practices and to
find innovative development approaches that stimulate
opportunity and hope for people as close to their homes as
possible, in order to reduce their vulnerability. Through
the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in
Persons and Related Transnational Crime, Australia is
working with Indonesia, with which we co-Chair the
Process, to reinvigorate efforts to establish regional
cooperation on these issues. In March 2016, we adopted
the Bali Declaration, which represents strengthened
political commitment to protecting vulnerable people
who are on the move in our region.
In May, the Bali Process held a regional forum on
using financial investigation tools and techniques to
investigate, disrupt and prosecute human-trafficking
cases. In terms similar to those set out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2016/949), it highlighted the
benefits of using “follow the money” techniques in
human-trafficking cases.
In May next year, we will launch the Bali Process
Business Forum, which will highlight the importance of
involving business in addressing and preventing human
trafficking. The Forum will bring together private
sector leaders from the 45 member countries of the Bali
Process to focus on best practices in eradicating human
trafficking and slavery and to make recommendations
to ministers.
We must remain focused and continue to work
together diligently to stamp out trafficking in persons,
prosecute those who perpetuate this heinous crime,
address the needs of victims and protect those who are
most vulnerable.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of the Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza: Trafficking in persons is at
the heart of the Holy See’s preoccupations. People of
goodwill, whatever their religious beliefs, can never
allow women, children and men to be treated merely
as objects, or to be deceived, violated, often sold and
resold for profit, leaving them devastated in mind
and body only to be finally eliminated or abandoned.

16-4511351/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

20/12/2016

Such treatment is shameful and barbaric. It must
be condemned unequivocally. The full force of the
law must be brought to bear upon those who commit
such crimes.

persons poses is immense, and all must assume their
respective responsibilities and collaborate with one
another. The Holy See is committed to playing its part
in meeting this challenge.

The Holy See notes that the report (S/2016/949)
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
measures to counter trafficking in persons includes
a wealth of statistics and highlights the many issues
that are involved in this villainous practice. The report
clearly shows the complexity of trafficking in persons
as an international phenomenon and illustrates the
multifaceted nature of the problem, whose resolution
will require the collaboration of all, including in
particular faith-based and faith-inspired organizations
and other civil-society groups, which are very much
present on the ground.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.

Pope Francis, who has made the fight against
trafficking in persons and other forms of modern
slavery a high priority, declared that modern slavery
in the form of human trafficking, forced labour,
prostitution or trafficking in organs is a crime against
humanity. Among the many causes and factors that
abet contemporary forms of slavery like trafficking
in persons are poverty, underdevelopment and
exclusion, especially when combined with a lack of
access to education or scarce, or even non-existent,
employment opportunities, as widespread corruption
and unrestrained greed rob the human person of a
dignified life.
At present, however, the biggest single factor that
facilitates trafficking in persons is war and armed
conflict. Trafficking in persons is flourishing alongside
today’s refugee and migrant crisis, which has been
primarily provoked by wars and conflicts. It is therefore
pertinent that the Security Council examine the plague
of trafficking in persons in conflict situations.
If the fight against trafficking in persons is to
be effective, the international community must unite
in the common commitment to put an end to the
fighting, hatred and violence, and to pursue peace and
reconciliation. The Holy See remains firmly convinced
that the way to resolve open questions such as that of
trafficking in persons must be that of diplomacy and
dialogue, in order to resolve conflicts and end wars.
The Holy See encourages the Security Council to
continue fighting against the scourge of trafficking
in persons, primarily through preventing and ending
armed conflicts. The challenge that trafficking in
52/79

Mrs. Boura (Greece): I would like to join others
in expressing condolences to Russia in connection with
the assassination of its Ambassador in Ankara, and to
Germany in connection with the victims of the terrorist
attack in Berlin.
I wish to congratulate Spain for having organized
this open debate. Greece aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
wishes to add the following from a national point
of view.
Over the past two decades, the ground-breaking
work of the United Nations bodies, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Council
of Europe, the International Organization for Migration
and regional initiatives such as the European Union
Network of National Rapporteurs has consolidated an
important legislative framework for eradicating human
trafficking. Yet despite the efforts made, the official
statistics on human trafficking remain comparable to
those of a “rare crime”, with just a small percentage of
perpetrators convicted and only a few victims saved.
We are firmly convinced that the international
community should focus on strengthening law
enforcement, establishing a proactive and inclusive
identification regime for victims and a comprehensive
awareness-raising campaign. At the same time, we need
to step up efforts to crack down on the enormous profits
generated by traffickers by following financial trails,
and use all available investigative tools to prosecute
the perpetrators.
The unprecedented levels of human displacement
have also revealed the increased vulnerability of
potential trafficking victims in refugee and migratory
flows. Irregular undocumented migrants are particularly
vulnerable to exploitation and abuse, making the nexus
between trafficking and irregular migration more
relevant than ever. While some countries increase
border controls to curb migration flows, many migrants
turn to organized criminal networks to arrange their
border crossing.
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Trafficking in women and girls has become a tactic
of terrorism, with terrorist groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and Boko Haram openly
and systematically promoting the trafficking and sexual
enslavement of women and girls. To address the nexus
between human trafficking, conflict, sexual violence
and violent extremism requires a holistic approach.
Trafficking as a financial resource for terrorism must
not be underestimated.
Greece is a transit country for thousands of migrants
and refugees who attempt to cross the Mediterranean
and flee war, violence and persecution. As the first
entry point for migrants and refugees arriving in
Europe, Greece is very well aware of the challenges and
of its pivotal role in combating such phenomena.
In this context, we have established a national
coordination mechanism as well as a national
identification
and
referral
mechanism.
Both
mechanisms are coordinated by the Office of the
National Rapporteur at the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and operate as a hub for partnership-building among all
relevant stakeholders. The comprehensive protection
of vulnerable persons, including women, girls and
unaccompanied children, figures high in our priorities.
Increased emphasis placed on extending identification
procedures in the context of mixed migration and
refugee flows.
Human trafficking, this modern form of slavery,
has no place in the twenty-first century. We hope that
today’s debate will mark a flagship event that will urge
all competent stakeholders to deploy the imperative
human, legal and financial resources to effectively
eradicate this heinous form of human rights violation
and organized crime. We need to work closely together
to promote multilateral cooperation, enhance earlyidentification procedures and establish robust referral
mechanisms, so that victims can address the protection
services they so need and deserve.
A consistent human rights and cross-sectoral
approach can lead to positive results in countertrafficking. To that end, we must identify the
partnerships to be employed, aiming at protecting
vulnerable groups at risk of being exploited or traded.
At the same time, we must combat the culture of
impunity regarding the high levels of “demand” for
“services” related to trafficking.
Let us not forget that the task before us is not merely
about implementing laws and penal codes. We aim first

S/PV.7847

and foremost to uphold human dignity amid a world
of conflict, poverty and desperation, with vulnerable
groups of women and children at high risk of being
manipulated, exploited and savagely abused for profit.
Traffickers and warlords are relying on our failure to
protect vulnerable people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I join other
representatives in condemning the terrorist attacks that
took place yesterday in Russia and in Germany.
Trafficking and forced labour constitute a “heart
of darkness” in our world. It is evident that some
international terrorist groups are resorting to trafficking
in persons to bolster their power, recruitment base and
finances. We are concerned that certain State authorities
also remain complicit with human trafficking networks
to add to the precarious situation of civilians subject to
forced displacement.
The nexus between trafficking in persons and other
types of organized crime is becoming increasingly
manifest. A sustained, coordinated and coherent
response by the international, regional and national
entities concerned is required to effectively pre-empt
and disrupt that nexus, especially when it involves
women and children.
To this effect, we take note of the comprehensive
resolution 2331 (2016) adopted by the Council today.
We would have preferred an inclusive, participatory
approach to the draft, considering its importance to the
wider membership.
From our national perspective, we wish to underline
four points.
First, despite robust counter-trafficking legislations
and action plans, prosecution and conviction in
trafficking-related cases remain low. There is no
alternative to regional and international cooperation
in information-sharing and mutual legal assistance.
We urge all source, transit and destination countries
to accede and adhere to the relevant international
legal instruments.
Secondly, human traffickers tend to benefit from
the divergences between and discrimination in the
systemic and policy responses to immigration and
asylum in different countries. The global compact for
safe, regular and orderly migration should promote a

16-4511353/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

regular flow of migration and a sound, global migration
governance system that is based on a set of legally
binding and non-binding norms and approaches.
Thirdly, the stigma of human trafficking must
be shifted from the victims to the perpetrators.
Accountability and justice for victims should remain
above undue politicization, and the Trust Funds
established by the United Nations to support victims
must see an enhanced flow of resources.
Fourthly, training and sensitization concerning
trafficking in persons in conflict situations would
indeed add value to the relevant United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Any possible linkage with
trafficking in case of allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse by peacekeepers must be based on credible
information and evidence.
In the aftermath of the Andaman Sea refugee crisis
in early 2015, we saw that sustained surveillance and
awareness-building at the community level are some of
the most effective tools against trafficking in persons.
Bangladesh remains committed to international efforts
to combat that scourge, pursuant to the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, and the South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Convention
on Preventing and Combating the Trafficking in Women
and Children for Prostitution, among others.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Eloumni (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me to extend the heartfelt condolences of the Kingdom
of Morocco to the Government and the people of the
Russian Federation, as well as to the family of the
deceased, Ambassador Andrey Karlov, and to express
our outrage against the despicable criminal terrorist
attack of which he was the victim, in flagrant and
unacceptable violation of human values.
Morocco also condemns the attack yesterday in
Berlin, the cowardly 11 December terrorist bombing of
a Coptic cathedral in Cairo, as well as the 18 December
terrorist attack in the Karak province of Jordan. The
Kingdom of Morocco strongly denounces terrorism in
all of its forms and manifestations, and reaffirms its
unswerving commitment to fighting that scourge.
54/79

20/12/2016

Allow me to thank Spain for having convened
today’s debate on this topic, which is a dire one but
is timely and topical. Human trafficking is one of the
gravest attacks on humankind and a phenomenon that
undermines the dignity and value of the human being.
It occurs not only during tragedy and disaster, although
it is a direct consequence of such events, which also
lead to damage to infrastructure, loss of life and lack of
food, consequences that receive more attention.
Armed conflict is a breeding ground for human
trafficking. During conflict, traffickers take advantage
of the lack of normalcy and the rule of law to exploit
the existing vulnerabilities of people and act with
impunity to finance war, provide sexual services and
reduce, if not eliminate, ethnic or religious minorities.
Despite efforts deployed to curb the phenomenon, it
has reached alarming dimensions in past years. Indeed,
well-structured groups run human trafficking using
networks that are often hard to dismantle, profiting
from the vulnerability and fragility of its victims, most
frequently women and children.
While it is true that non-State armed groups have
long exploited vulnerable people for sexual purposes,
military service and forced labour, those groups,
particularly Da’esh and Boko Haram, encourage and
run a slave trade of unprecedented dimensions. They
openly organize slave markets, using the most modern
and sophisticated techniques, notably electronic social
networks, to auction off the victims of their trafficking.
In December 2015, the members of the Security
Council made human trafficking one of its concerns,
under the presidency of the United States of America.
Members heard, for the first time, the poignant testimony
of Nadia Murad Basee Taha, a Yezidi survivor of sexual
slavery at the hands of Da’esh. Today, we should heed
her distress call and her appeal for concrete actions to
be taken.
The December 2015 presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/25 was an important step in that regard.
Resolution 2331 (2016), submitted by Spain and
adopted this morning and co-sponsored by Morocco,
is a historic step for the Council. The Council now has
powerful means to reverse that pernicious trend and to
help States punish such crimes. We must continue to
work on identifying individuals and groups that fund
terrorist groups through their sexual trafficking and
violence. Recognizing the need to combat that type
of crime, Morocco has ratified several international
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

conventions on the subject, including the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.
In the meantime, the Government of Morocco has
undertaken a number of legislative and institutional
reforms aimed at providing the Kingdom with a legal
arsenal and specific means for strengthening its actions
aimed at combating various forms of organized crime,
particularly human trafficking, illegal immigration and
terrorism. Morocco recently adopted a law on human
trafficking, with the aim of adapting national legislation
to international standards, particularly the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. That law includes sentence
guidelines and preventive measures to protect victims,
as well as provisions on institutional measures aimed at
combating the phenomenon through the creation of an
advisory commission to the Head of Government.
On the other hand, the Kingdom was one of the
few countries to have pursued a courageous and
proactive policy aimed at regularizing the status of
clandestine migrants fleeing conflicts or precarious
economic situations. Its policy, based on an integrated
and comprehensive humanitarian approach, made it
possible for more than 25,000 migrants to integrate
socially and economically in Morocco over the past
year. On 12 December, King Mohammed VI ordered
the immediate launch of the second phase of the efforts
to integrate undocumented migrants.
In conclusion, allow me to emphasize the following
points. First of all, an effective response to human
trafficking must include preventive measures to limit
the potential pool of victims. Secondly, we must
identify measures to prevent trafficking in persons
fleeing conflicts, including the establishment of
regular migration channels, respect for the principle of
non-refoulement and, where appropriate, a study of their
ability to access the labour market in the host country.
Thirdly, we must create a human registry, including
for those living in camps for displaced persons and
refugees, as a means of combating the risks of human
trafficking. Finally, we must effectively implement
relevant commitments under Goals 5.2, 8.7 and 16.2 of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

S/PV.7847

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to express our condolences to the Russian
Federation and the family of the Russian Ambassador,
a victim of terrorism, as well as to Germany and the
families affected by yesterday’s attack there.
We thank Spain for its efforts as President of
the Security Council and for having convened this
important debate. We wish them every success. We
also thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his report on the implementation
of measures to counter trafficking in persons
(S/2016/949). With the end of his mandate approaching,
I thank him for all of his efforts over the past 10 years
and wish him every success in the future.
We welcome the Special Rapporteur on trafficking
in persons, especially women and children, and her
report to the Human Rights Council (A/HRC/32/41), in
which she stresses the importance of the fight against
human trafficking, particularly in conflict zones.
We also welcome Mr. Fedotov, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and
Ms. Bangura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Nadia
Murad Basee Taha and Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan, for
their briefings.
Last year, we firmly condemned human trafficking
in zones affected by armed conflict. Today, the Council
adopted resolution 2331 (2016) on that heinous crime,
and we hope that it will spearhead international efforts
to address human trafficking by terrorist groups. It is
certain that human trafficking is the object of attention
on the part of the international community because it
is an attack on the fundamental rights and dignity of
humankind. Terrorist groups carry out the worst forms
of slavery. We have heard alarming accounts today of
those practices, which are contrary to all our values
and principles. The international community must
confront that phenomenon, mindful of the fact that such
acts lead to disparity and strife, and create a vicious
circle of violence.
The large-scale movement of refugees, now an
unprecedented flow, is directly related to trafficking in
human beings. The United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime 2016 Global Report on Trafficking in Persons
clearly indicates an increase in the number of victims
resulting from the conflicts in Somalia, Syria, the

16-4511355/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Middle East and other regions of the world. For that
reason, there is a need to put an end to violence, so as to
preserve the dignity of populations as we put an end to
the phenomenon of trafficking.
As an international community, it behooves us to
consider the problem in a comprehensive manner. We
have faced this challenge for the past few years. A great
many of us have focused on certain specific areas and
criminal organizations, but what about other terrorist
organizations, such as Boko Haram or Al-Shabaab?
What we require is a comprehensive, holistic approach
that focuses on development in order to ensure that we
can pool our efforts to stand behind the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and thereby build a world
of peace that is safe and free from violence.

20/12/2016

My country has legislation that criminalizes
trafficking in human beings. My country is also a party
to numerous United Nations instruments for the fight
against transnational organized crime. We have spared
no effort to suppress such crimes by working with all
of the relevant parties, as well as through our national,
regional and international policies of cooperation. All
bodies can contribute to the fight against trafficking in
human beings, as well as the protection and rehabilitation
of the victims. For example, Jordan, through its
coordination with several United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations, has created
an association for Syrian refugee children, aimed at
promoting their education and at providing them with
the necessary psychological and social services.

Terrorist groups such as Da’esh, Boko Haram
or the Lord’s Resistance Army abduct women and
children, and force them to become combatants or sell
them as slaves. All such actions can be characterized
as trafficking in human beings. Today, as we consider
the violence carried out against the Yazidis in Iraq by
Da’esh, Jordan believes that we need to step up our
efforts to fight against trafficking in human beings,
especially by terrorist organizations. That will require
multifaceted action on all levels — local, regional and
international. Within the framework of a strategy for
prevention, I would like to mention a few elements.

Finally, Jordan will continue to spare no effort to
fight against trafficking in human beings, especially
that carried out by terrorist groups. We will continue our
cooperation aimed at eliminating that phenomenon and
at supporting protective measures against that scourge.

First, there is a need to confront extremist thought.
Da’esh is not a Muslim group. It is a terrorist group, and
as such needs to be eliminated. There is a need to spread
the values of tolerance and dialogue among religions
and faiths, and to disseminate the concept of the
Muslim religion as a religion of tolerance. His Majesty
King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein has always stood as a
champion and advocate of those values. There is also a
need to promote the inclusion of youth in efforts to forge
peace and fight against violent extremism. They must
also be stakeholders in any decisions that are taken.

I now give the floor to the representative
of Paraguay.

Within the framework of the fight against impunity,
we welcome the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral and urge all States that have not yet done so
to ratify all the protocols and necessary instruments
to ensure that we are in a position to fight against
trafficking in human beings through strategies that
can face up to the challenge. To that end, we should
align the existing criteria and create a database on the
phenomenon in areas of conflict. In addition, we should
also mobilize all the necessary resources to do so.

We express our gratitude for the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2016/949). We welcome the initiative of the
Spanish presidency to convene this open debate on
trafficking in persons in conflict situations. We believe
that this open debate will make it possible to become
familiar with the opinions of Member States, as well
as to try to determine the nexus between that scourge
and violent extremism. That information will allow the
Organization to design policies to confront those issues
in an appropriate and effective way.

56/79

The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to the next speaker, I would like to inform
those present that, at the present time in our debate,
we still have to hear more than 20 people on the list
of speakers. I would like to remind speakers to limit
their statements to four minutes. I thank them for
their cooperation.

Mr. Scappini Ricciardi (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): Paraguay expresses its deep sadness and
heartfelt condolences to the people and the Government
of the Russian Federation in connection with the
assassination of Ambassador Andrey Karlov in Ankara,
and to the people and the Government of Germany for
the attack perpetrated in Berlin. We hope that such
terrible acts will not happen again.

16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

The Security Council, as well as all States Members
of the Organization, must contribute to establishing
an effective system for the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts. That system must also take into
account mechanisms for dealing with and combating
the trafficking in persons and sexual violence in its
broadest sense, as well as violent extremism in relation
to situations of armed conflict.
We believe that the Security Council must include,
in a clear and explicit way, the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. In situations in which, owing to the
nature of the conflict, those scourges pose significant
threats, the mandates must incorporate both preventive
mechanisms and protocols to take care of the victims
and to ensure the surrender and accountability of
the perpetrators.
It is crucial to recall that such violent deeds are
exacerbated by restrictive and exclusionary migratory
policies, which not only increase the vulnerability of
victims but also prevent their identification and access
to the medical and psychological services required.
In that respect, Paraguay emphasizes the value of
the appropriate education and training of contingents
in peacekeeping operations, before and after their
deployment, on aspects of preventing and combating
such problems, as well as on the care for the victims
of those crimes. It is critical to prevent the double
stigmatization of the victims.
We must collaborate on the system for preventing
and combating those scourges. At the same time, we
need to provide care for the victims and to ensure
the prosecution of those responsible, in a coordinated
fashion and with full respect for States’ sovereignty and
for the principle of non-intervention in domestic affairs
and in accordance with international law. Paraguay
understands that it is also necessary to address the
trafficking in persons in conflict situations within the
framework of the General Assembly and in connection
with the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
specifically Goals 5.2, 8.7 and 16.2.
Finally, my country believes that Member States and
the United Nations system must cooperate with States
in conflict and post-conflict situations so as to reinforce
their institutional capacities to effectively confront the
challenges involved in combating such scourges.

S/PV.7847

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): In a few days, millions
of people will celebrate the holiday season with
families and friends, joyously giving and sharing.
Just yesterday, the Security Council was able to
adopt unanimously resolution 2328 (2016) to deploy
observers to Aleppo — one of many steps to be taken
to give millions of refugees and people in need the best
gift, namely, a decent life in peace. Only several hours
later, we heard about the terrible attacks in Berlin,
Istanbul and Zurich. Our feelings and thoughts are
with the families and friends of those who perished in
those horrible attacks. Our sympathy goes out to our
colleagues from Russia, Germany and Switzerland. But,
honestly, the four minutes allotted for my intervention
will not be enough to name all the countries that have
had to experience terrorist attacks just this year.
Yet today we are discussing another phenomenon
that is taking, or severely affecting, millions of lives,
mostly young ones. Modern slavery is happening all
around us in various forms, both in developed and in
developing countries, affecting rich and poor societies,
albeit in different ways. Human trafficking is the thirdlargest international criminal industry. It reportedly
generates a profit of $32 billion every year. In next
four minutes of my statement, it will have generated
approximately $250,000. Of the sum total of revenue
generated, $15.5 billion is being made in industrialized
countries. According to the International Labour
Organization, forced labour in the private economy
generates an estimated $150 billion in illegal profits
annually, which is approximately twice the gross
domestic product of my country for 2015.
For every minute that we speak, at least one person
is trafficked across international borders. Between
600,000 to 800,000 people are trafficked every year. Of
those, 80 per cent are female or children. Trafficking for
forced labour or sexual exploitation or for harvesting
tissue, cells and organs represents the cruellest type
of international organized crime and is well fuelled by
poverty or conflict. We must do more than express our
strong condemnation of trafficking in persons. Modern
slavery undermines human dignity and human rights
and affects human development. Let me make several
points — seven, to be exact — that Slovakia considers
important in effectively handling this crime.

16-4511357/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

First, we need to make better use of the existing
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. The need to promote the universal
ratification of the Convention and to adopt effective
national plans and strategies for its implementation is
a must.
Second, the Sustainable Development Goals
specifically address human trafficking in the targets of
Goals 5, 8, and 16. That gives hope that confronting the
grave human rights violations that we are addressing
today will become a priority for all the countries in
the world.
Third, the nexus between trafficking and conflictrelated sexual violence is evident. Armed conflict leads
to increased trafficking in women and sexual assaults
on women and girls. It is crucial that all countries fulfil
their international obligations concerning women and
armed conflict, such as the commitments in the 1995
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the
milestone resolution 1325 (2000).
Fourth, protecting trafficking victims and saving
lives should be of the utmost priority for the entire
international community. As stated in the Council’s
presidential statement issued in December 2015,
“The Security Council urges relevant United
Nations agencies operating in armed conflict and
post-conflict situations to build their technical
capacity to assess conflict situations for instances
of trafficking in persons”. (S/PRST/2015/25).
In the post-conflict context, we should be able to
better protect, assist and support victims. In a postconflict environment in which law enforcement and the
justice system are dysfunctional, the United Nations
should take effective measures, while respecting
national ownership and the specificities of the country
concerned, aimed at offering technical and planning
expertise in reforming security and judicial institutions.
Fifth, close cooperation between the United
Nations, subregional, regional and cross-regional
bodies and initiatives should aim at the establishment
of a global and efficient cooperation framework.
Sixth, highlighted by the Secretary-General in
his report,
58/79

20/12/2016

“Escaping from a conflict zone or arrival at
a sought-after destination does not always shield
those fleeing conflict from becoming victims of
trafficking” (S/2016/949, para. 5).
Enhanced attention should therefore be paid to the
international protection of refugees and to addressing
the special needs of migrants in vulnerable situations.
At the same time, we need to step up international
efforts to combat the multidimensional root causes of
the current refugee and irregular migration crisis and
broader forced displacement.
Seventh, the United Nations must seize every
opportunity to contribute to conflict resolution. In order
to counter the spread and intensity of conflict, renewed
commitment to prevention and mediation is needed.
Preventive diplomacy and mediation efforts must be
stepped up across the whole United Nations system.
Today’s adoption of resolution 2331 (2016), which
my country co-sponsored, and the adoption, just over a
week ago, of resolution 2322 (2016), aimed at enhancing
and fortifying judicial cooperation worldwide, are,
in our view, necessary steps towards confronting
the interrelated global challenges of terrorism and
trafficking in persons in conflict situations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Braun (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the presidency of Spain for having taken the initiative
of organizing this important open debate. I welcome
the adoption of resolution 2331 (2016), which was the
culmination of broad consultations outstandingly led
by the Spanish delegation. The resolution ensures that
this meeting will not be without consequences and that
human trafficking in the context of conflict situations
will remain a priority for the Council and every State
Member of the United Nations.
Luxembourg aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union by Ms. Vassiliadou,
the Anti-Trafficking Coordinator of the European
Union. I would like to make four points.
First, at the United Nations level, we must strengthen
the link between combating human trafficking and
the implementation of efforts to end sexual violence
and grave violations of children’s rights in conflict
situations. Resolution 2331 (2016) recognizes that
link, and we encourage the Security Council and its
sanctions committees to implement the provisions
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

of that resolution, in particular by strengthening
information-sharing with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, so as to be able to
more effectively punish individuals involved in human
trafficking in conflict areas.
At the European Union level, my country is
committed to combating human trafficking, which
affects vulnerable groups, such as migrants and
refugees. Since 16 July 2015, we have provided a naval
surveillance plane to Operation Sophia, the European
naval force authorized by the Security Council,
which contributes to the European Union’s efforts
to dismantle the economic machinery of trafficking
networks and human traffickers in the southern part of
the Mediterranean Sea.
At the regional level, in the framework of our
chairmanship of the Economic Union of Belgium,
the Netherlands and Luxembourg (Benelux), we
have endeavoured to bring together relevant actors,
including non-governmental organizations, with a view
to better caring for the victims of human trafficking.
In particular, we signed a declaration confirming
the resolve of the Benelux countries to strengthen
cooperation among accommodation and assistance
centres for victims of human trafficking, judicial
authorities and police agencies, among others.
Finally, at the national level, we are in the process
of completing our legislative arsenal. A bill is currently
before Parliament that proposes in particular to punish
any client soliciting the services of a sexually exploited
victim of human trafficking. In the humanitarian area,
we ensure that the protection of vulnerable people,
including victims of human trafficking, will be included
in the programmes that we support in conflict areas.
The poignant account of the victims of human
trafficking must motivate all of us to do more at all
levels to end that scourge, which is fuelled by war and,
in turn, fuels organized crime and terrorist networks.
Last Thursday, our Minister for Foreign and European
Affairs, Mr. Jean Asselborn, had the honour of
welcoming Nadia Mourad and Lamiya Aji Bachar to
Luxembourg. Those two Yezidi persons, who had been
relegated to the status of slaves by Da’esh, managed to
escape from that hell. Today they bear witness to the fate
of too many civilians — men, women and children — in

S/PV.7847

Syria and Iraq, but also in Nigeria, Somalia and Central
Africa. Let us hear their call.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan) (spoke in Russian): Let me
start by conveying my condolences to the delegation
of the Russian Federation following the tragic death of
Ambassador Andrey Karlov, which took place as the
result of a terrorist attack in Ankara.
(spoke in English)
We also express our sincere condolences to the
delegation of Germany in connection with the barbaric
terrorist attack that took place yesterday in Berlin,
which claimed the lives of innocent people.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Spanish
presidency for convening this open ministerial debate
on trafficking in persons in conflict situations, in
connection with the agenda item “Maintenance of
international peace and security”, as well as for
the concept note on the topic (S/2016/1031, annex).
Azerbaijan is strongly committed to combating
trafficking in persons and other related criminal
offences. We share the concern over the scale and
number of such challenges. The situation has recently
deteriorated owing to increased violence, terrorist
activities and humanitarian crises.
Azerbaijan is a party to the relevant international
and regional instruments, including the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children
and the Council of Europe Convention on Action
against Trafficking in Human Beings. In implementing
its international obligations, Azerbaijan has adopted
a comprehensive legal framework for effective action
against human trafficking and has developed a national
action plan aimed at defining the key responsibilities
of the competent State bodies and at strengthening
and facilitating their coordination. Furthermore, an
inter-agency task force, led by a national coordinator,
and a specialized police unit within the Ministry of
Internal Affairs have been created. Additionally, the
national system for the identification of and support to
trafficking victims has been established.
In recent years, the need for more international
attention and redoubled efforts aimed at combating
trafficking in persons has significantly increased. In

16-4511359/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Member
States committed to taking immediate and effective
measures aimed at eradicating and ending modern
slavery and human trafficking. In its presidential
statement of 16 December 2015 (S/PRST/2015/25), the
Security Council particularly noted that trafficking in
persons undermines the rule of law and contributes to
other forms of transnational organized crime, which
can exacerbate conflict and foster insecurity. We are
concerned that civilian populations are often viewed
by armed groups as resources or commodities to be
trafficked in, according to the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2016/949) and the presidency’s concept
note. As the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially women and children, noted in his
latest report (A/HRC/32/41), conflicts are prolonged by
actors who take advantage of situations of lawlessness
to reap personal gain through lucrative activities, such
as trafficking.
The international legal framework for combating
human trafficking is based on the rules operating
within the relevant branches of international law that
ensure protection in all situations, including in armed
conflicts. Success in fighting criminal activities during
conflicts, including human trafficking, requires, first
and foremost, strong commitment to the relevant
binding obligations, as well as resolve to put an end
to unlawful situations and to ensure that dispute
settlement and conflict resolution do not serve to
prolong and sustain such trafficking. Dispute settlement
and conflict resolution must be based on respect for
and strict compliance with international law. It is also
essential to address conflict-related violations and
abuses of human rights through all available means.
Strengthening both international and national justice
responses are critically important in order to ensure
accountability for human trafficking in armed conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the 24 States
members of the Group of Friends United against
Trafficking in Persons.
We would like to thank the Spanish presidency
for organizing this important open debate and for the
opportunity to have a genuine and productive dialogue
with Member States. We would like to express our
particular gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Mariano
60/79

20/12/2016

Rajoy Brey, President of the Government of Spain,
for presiding over this meeting. We also welcome the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury Fedotov. We
commend the work of many United Nations entities,
including the leading role played by UNODC, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the International Labour Organization,
as well as the work of other international bodies,
including the International Organization for Migration,
whose work has clearly revealed the methodology and
motivation of traffickers and the demographics of those
who are vulnerable to trafficking. They also gave us an
indication of the scale and location of this most serious
current problem.
All those present today are united in the conviction
that trafficking in persons in armed conflicts is an evil
that must be faced and overcome through effective
international cooperation. Recent years have made
very clear how armed conflicts not only create flows
of vulnerable people who are at risk of trafficking, but
also spawns terrorist and criminal groups that view
people in such situations as resources to exploit and
traffic in, so as to bring in revenue and gain power.
The peaceful settlement of armed conflicts is
necessary in order to create the proper environment
for addressing human rights violations and restoring
the physical integrity of the victims of trafficking.
That should also be a cornerstone of the mandate of
peacekeeping operations. It should be one of the
pivotal prerequisites for protecting civilians and
combating human trafficking. The Group of Friends
United against Trafficking in Persons encourages the
strengthening of cooperation between the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons and
other international organizations, as well as among
Member States. The Group of Friends does that through,
inter alia, its role in coordinating and cooperating
with the Global Programme against Trafficking in
Human Beings.
The Group of Friends believes that stronger
cooperation between Member States and the relevant
agencies would result in more effective and rapid
responses to the evolving challenges relating to
trafficking in persons. By working together and
implementing and improving the global strategy for
collecting, analysing and sharing data, we can make it
easier for countries, non-governmental organizations
and international agencies to share accurate information
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

on a timely basis. That would enable all parties
concerned to target resources more effectively in their
responses to trafficking — in terms of increasing
awareness, investigations and prosecutions and victim
identification and support. In that regard, the Group of
Friends also encourages the international community,
especially donor countries and international financial
institutions, to provide the necessary financial resources
to the UNODC Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of
Human Trafficking in order to help it continue with
its operations.
The Group of Friends is committed to working
together with its partners around the world to eliminate
the scourge of human trafficking. We are convinced
that the upcoming review of the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, which
will take place in 2017, represents a critical moment in
analysing and improving shared international efforts.
The international community can be assured of the full
support and cooperation of the Group of Friends for an
effective review of the Global Plan of Action. We hope
that resolution 2331 (2016), adopted today, will provide
a strong impetus for establishing counter-trafficking
measures in situations of armed conflict, especially
the trafficking in persons that is being carried out by
terrorist groups.

S/PV.7847

2331 (2016). We also welcome the participation of
the President of the Government of Spain, Mr. Rajoy
Brey’s, in today’s discussion.
Human trafficking constitutes a violation of human
rights and an offence to the dignity and integrity of
human beings. It is also a form of serious transnational
organized crime, which bears immense costs on the
social and economic fabric of our societies. The grave
scale of the humanitarian emergencies, the majority
of which are man-made conflicts, is increasing the
number of vulnerable people. The rising trends in forced
displacement is heightening the risks for the human
trafficking of those displaced. Women and children are
particularly more affected by these developments.
Meanwhile, the expanding human mobility,
which is essentially a positive contribution to our
globalized word, brings together new challenges and
responsibilities. For this we should better coordinate
our efforts against migrant smuggling and human
trafficking. The use of human trafficking by terrorist
organizations, such as Da’esh, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab in conflict zones, is truly worrying. In
connection to this, the nexus between conflict-related
sexual violence and human trafficking needs to be
better understood.

Mr. Begeç (Turkey): At the outset, let me reiterate
once again our words of condemnation, condolence and
solidarity to the Russian and German delegations with
regard to the latest terrorist attacks.

Turkey remains strongly committed to eradicating
human trafficking. As a transnational threat, it requires
a commensurate and collective response. To this end,
Turkey introduced numerous administrative and legal
measures in combating human trafficking through
prevention, protection, prosecution and cooperation.
At the international level, Turkey is a party to the
Palermo Convention and its supplementary protocols.
At the domestic level, our efforts are focused on two
tracks: enhancing our legislation and improving the
implementation of our obligations. The National Task
Force on the Fight against Human Trafficking was
established in 2002, and so far two national action plans
in the fight against human trafficking were developed
and put into practice. These plans aim to achieve the
implementation of international standards in the fight
against human trafficking, eradicate the phenomenon
in Turkey and strengthen relevant institutions
through enhancing harmonization with the European
Union acquis.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/949) and our briefers for their presentations.
Turkey welcomes the adoption today of resolution

More recently, a regulation on combatting human
trafficking and the protection of victims was published
in the Official Gazette in March. In order to implement

Despite the important role that the Security Council
can play in countering trafficking in persons in armed
conflict, we still believe in the leading role of the
General Assembly in all matters related to trafficking
in persons.
In conclusion, we affirm the commitment of the
members of the group to the obligations under the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.

16-4511361/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

this in a more effective way, the Department for the
Protection of Victims of Human Trafficking was
established under the Ministry of the Interior. The
Department is responsible for combatting human
trafficking and the protection of victims through the
implementation of various projects. One example is
a helpline for victims of human trafficking, which
was developed in cooperation with the International
Organization for Migration. Another example is the
dual services, entitled “Victim Support Programme”
and “Voluntary and Safe Return Programme”, which
aim to better assist the victims of human trafficking.
In order to address trafficking in the context of
displacement, we should recalibrate our ongoing efforts
in line with the commitments that we have undersigned
in the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants.
As the biggest refugee hosting country, with over
3 million Syrians and Iraqis, Turkey is undertaking
the necessary measures to prevent human trafficking
among those who already fled the horrors of conflict.
We welcome the strong condemnation in today’s
resolution of the activities of Da’esh related to human
trafficking and sexual and gender-based violence.
Turkey remains one of the primary targets of Da’esh’s
threat and recently faced the most ruthless form of its
terrorism. In line with relevant Council resolutions, we
have taken comprehensive and effective measures to
combat Da’esh’s finances and disrupt and prevent this
Organization from raising, moving and using funds.
We thank Spain for contributing to the Council’s
work on trafficking in persons by organizing this
debate. Due to its unique geographical location and the
proximity to today’s conflicts, Turkey will continue
to display a decisive and progressive approach to
human trafficking.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria.
Mr. Onyeama (Nigeria): I would like, at the outset,
to express my sincere condolences and total shock at
the dastardly assassination of the Russian Ambassador
in Turkey. I think this highlights again what we all have
to do at the international level to really tackle these
terrorist crimes.
The Nigerian delegation thanks you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate and for the wellresearched concept note (S/2016/1031, annex) provided
62/79

20/12/2016

to guide our discussion. We also would like to thank
our briefers for sharing their perspectives on this
important subject.
Conflict situations expose civilians, especially
women and girls, to grave dangers, such as human
trafficking, sexual violence and slavery. Terrorist
groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
and Boko Haram, operating with complete disregard
for international law and international humanitarian
law, have introduced a new dimension to trafficking in
persons and the sexual exploitation of women and girls.
Their outrageous acts of depravity have shocked
the world and drawn unprecedented attention to the
plight of women and girls in conflict situations. The
war crimes and crimes against humanity that they
commit must not go unpunished. We are pleased to
state that Boko Haram has been militarily defeated and
while some success has been achieved in liberating a
good number of the women and girls they held hostage,
we shall not relent until all of their hostages are freed
and reunited with their loved ones. We acknowledge
the important role our neighbours — Benin, Cameroon,
Chad and the Niger — are playing in the fight against
Boko Haram.
The concept note raises very significant issues and
I am pleased to share our perspectives on some of them.
With regard to how the Security Council can better
integrate the issue of human trafficking in conflict
situations in its work, we in Nigeria believe that this
could be achieved through enhanced engagement of the
Council with the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the International Organization for Migration, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and other relevant actors.
With regard to how the United Nations can work
closely together to fight human trafficking in conflict
situations and in the context of terrorism while
delivering its respective mandates, our view is that
this could be facilitated by improved coordination. As
different agencies have different capacities in terms of
expertise, a coordinated approach would enhance the
overall effectiveness of the United Nations in the fight
against human trafficking and terrorism.
Concerning how Member States can better
implement applicable legal obligations to combat human
trafficking, we see aneed for greater commitment
to the implementation of relevant international
instruments. The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children is a case in point. It not only provides the
first agreed international definition of trafficking in
persons, but also establishes a framework of obligations
and standards for Member States to elaborate national
responses to fight human trafficking. Applying those
international instruments and relevant domestic laws is
crucial to ensuring accountability for those who engage
in human trafficking in conflict situations.
If humanitarian action is to effectively support
the victims of human trafficking and sexual violence,
we see a need for humanitarian agencies to engage
the services of relevant experts, while paying special
attention to the gender dimension of the problem.
The fight against human trafficking in conflict
situations is beyond the capacity of any one State. It
requires concerted action at the global and national
levels, complemented by the strong leadership of
the Security Council. We seize this opportunity to
reaffirm our commitment to continuing to work with
all stakeholders at the multilateral and bilateral levels
in our common fight against human trafficking.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Ms. Yparraguirre (Philippines): I wish to thank
Spain for convening this open debate on trafficking in
persons in conflict situations. I also thank the briefers
for their informative presentations.
I share the messages of sympathy expressed in the
Chamber today for the victims of the terrorist attacks in
Berlin and Ankara.
In the interests of time, I will read an abridged
version of the Philippine statement. The complete text
will be circulated in due course.
The problem of trafficking in persons in conflict
situations is multifaceted as it cuts into other equally
pressing issues, such as migration, counter-terrorism,
gender-based violence, money-laundering, poverty
alleviation and the protection of children. It therefore
requires a multifaceted response that seeks to understand
the problem from a political, socioeconomic and even
cultural perspective, and brings together Governments,
civil society and the private sector on both the domestic
and international fronts.
The Philippines considers trafficking in persons,
including in conflict situations, to be a core national

S/PV.7847

concern. Allow me to share some initiatives that we
have undertaken in that area:
First, the Philippines has made the protection of
Filipino migrants one of its foreign policy pillars. We
endeavour to protect our migrant workers from human
trafficking and exploitation by utilizing a victimcentred and human rights-based approach. Recently,
we have worked with the United States of America and
other partners on the Migrants in Countries in Crisis
initiative to improve responses for migrants in countries
experiencing conflict or natural disaster.
Second, a solid legal framework, coupled with
strong institutions capable of implementing the
relevant regulations, is also essential. The Philippines
National Strategic Action Plan Against Trafficking in
Persons uses a migrant-centred approach to the entire
migration cycle — from pre-employment, transit and
on-site employment to return migration and eventual
reintegration — which has resulted in successful
prosecutions of perpetrators of human trafficking.
Third, adopting a one-country team and
multi-stakeholder approach that consolidates the
mandates, efforts, resources and interests of the dutybearers and stakeholders to come up with a robust
response, has proven to be effective. It has resulted in
the mainstreaming of interventions down to the grassroots level and in promoting awareness.
Fourth, in the context of counter-terrorism, it
is important to examining trafficking corridors and
the business flow of trafficking. That has enabled
the Philippines to strategically locate victims and
traffickers in the entire process, especially at critical
points of intervention where victims are the most
visible and can be rescued; to identify critical points
in the business flow to deal the strongest blow to the
operations of trafficking syndicates; and to expose
and develop strategies to block new means employed
by traffickers.
Fifth, in the socioeconomic context and as a
prevention measure against violent extremism,
poverty alleviation programmes targeting conflicttorn areas should integrate trafficking in persons as
an indicator and ensure access to economic services
and opportunities, making the victims less vulnerable
to trafficking.
Sixth, armed conflict, unstable peace and other
situations increase the vulnerabilities of children

16-4511363/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

and youth to recruitment into civilian armed groups
and rebel groups. Government efforts are focused on
preventing the recruitment and use of child soldiers,
vigorously investigating allegations, holding the
perpetrators accountable and training front-line officers
on appropriate methods to assist children apprehended
from armed groups.
Seventh, to mitigate the vulnerabilities of women
and children in conflict situations to sexual violence
and trafficking, the Philippines has instituted a genderbased violence cluster composed of law enforcers
and social welfare service providers that specialize
in gender issues. The clusters facilitate access to
protective information, psychosocial and traumainformed care, protective custody, and rehabilitation
and reintegration through social programmes, such as
education, employment and enterprise.
One challenge today is the lack of accurate data
to measure the extent of trafficking in persons in
conflict situations. We welcome the recommendations
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/949) on the
development of a data-collection system, whereby
Member States can benefit from an international
structure that integrates and shares intelligence,
studies and mechanisms that would help identify,
quantify and assess the prevalence of trafficking in
persons in conflict areas, and provide expert advice and
technical assistance in the formulation, implementation
and validation of programmes, such as the National
Action Plan, so that national initiatives are responsive
and effective.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Tenya Hasegawa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, the delegation of Peru expresses its strongest
condemnation of the attacks that took place yesterday in
Ankara and Berlin, while also offering its solidarity to
the peoples and Governments of Russia and Germany.
Peru commends the Government of Spain on the
welcome initiative to organize this open debate and for
the submission of resolution 2331 (2016) calling on us
to strongly condemn and combat trafficking in persons
in conflict situations.
As a democratic State, Peru is respectful of human
rights and thus of the supreme value of human life and
liberty. That is why, for Peru, human trafficking or
slavery in the twenty-first century is a horrendous crime
64/79

20/12/2016

in all circumstances, such as conflict situations. To
that end, we must on the one hand prevent such crimes
while addressing the ongoing situation by dismantling
transnational organized gangs and punishing criminals
severely; and on the other, support the physical and
emotional rehabilitation of persons affected and restore
their freedom, integrity and dignity, with a special
focus on the most vulnerable groups, such as children,
girl children, adolescents and women.
In that spirit, Peru has been implementing its
regulatory framework and public policy to address
this crime through, inter alia, a law against trafficking
in persons and the illicit migrant trafficking, which
criminalizes the practice in its penal code and establishes
responsibilities; the National Plan of Action against
Trafficking in Persons, which constitutes a public
policy instrument; and the National Policy against
Trafficking in Persons and All Forms of Exploitation,
which has four main pillars: implementation targeted
and customized to the local and regional realities of the
country; attention to the social and cultural factors that
lead to trafficking in persons and the exploitation of
individuals; the efficient prosecution and punishment
of the crime; and care, protection and comprehensive
rehabilitation for the victims.
Nevertheless, we are of the view that any national
effort will have limited results if States do not cooperate
with one another. Because it is a transnational crime,
we believe that prudent, coordinated and integrated
approaches among neighbouring States, in particular.
As stipulated in paragraph 17 of resolution 2331 (2016),
one way to do that is by sharing useful and timely
information in order to achieve the desired results.
Another approach to international cooperation that
could be considered is the one that we refer to as building
legal safety belts, based on a set of bilateral agreements.
Peru’s Foreign Ministry has been employing that
approach with our neighbours; to date we have reached
agreements with Colombia, Bolivia and Ecuador and
we are currently in talks with Argentina, Brazil, Chile
and Paraguay.
By the same token, we believe that that cooperation
must be a corollary to the relations that States could
develop with the different entities of the United Nations
system. In that regard, we highlight the important role
played by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and we hope that that cooperation will continue
and extended if possible, in particular in the areas where
there have been requests for this crime to be combated.
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Peru reaffirms its commitment to combating human
trafficking and, in that regard, we have co-sponsored
trafficking in persons in conflict situation presented
by the Spanish Government as a way to continue to
support the various efforts and initiatives to address
that important issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Roux.
Mr. Roux (spoke in French): Let me begin by
reiterating our support to the Russian delegation and
extending our sympathy and solidarity following
yesterday’s events.
On behalf of INTERPOL, I thank Spain for having
convened today’s very important meeting and for
allowing us to speak on a subject that is one of our
main priorities. INTERPOL is a global institution for
police cooperation that is dedicated to supporting its
190 member States in combating the hateful atrocities
that violate fundamental human rights. To that end, we
have built a dedicated team focused specifically on all
aspects of human trafficking. It offers many support
and cooperation services in the areas of prevention,
protection, prosecution and partnership, both as the
central level in Lyon and at regional offices. Our
support to member States is above all operational by
assisting their police forces in dismantling criminal
human trafficking networks that are very active in
several regions.
Field operations are preceded by preparatory
workshops to ensure that operatives have the skills,
qualifications and key resources, as well as the national
partnerships and partnerships with non-governmental
organizations required to lend support to victims.
Between 2009 and 2016, such operational activities
have enabled over 3,000 victims to be saved, more than
320 people smugglers to be arrested and over 1,500
police officers and public officials from member States
to be trained.
With regard to specific tools and capacities,
INTERPOL offers a wide range of services to its member
States such as a regularly updated training manual for
investigators, red notices for tracing criminals and
suspects, locating victims and for collecting information
that could be useful in investigations and finally,
nominal databases containing information on stolen,
lost or forged travel documents, digital fingerprints
and an image databank for investigators. Such tools are

S/PV.7847

accessible at border crossings and 24 hours a day, seven
days a week.
Finally, with regard to coordinating partnership
efforts, INTERPOL leads two dedicated working
groups: the Group of Experts on Human Trafficking
that meets annually and the Specialist Operational
Network against Migrant Smuggling. We also organize
an annual conference on human trafficking open to
both private and public sector stakeholders. The most
recent conference was held in Lugano in October and
brought together 213 participants. Our 2017 programme
is already quite heavy and is focused on training
and operational support, in particular in conflict
areas, in order to dismantle criminal networks that
are operational. We will always be at the service of
the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I have the honour to
make this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own
country, Norway.
Trafficking in persons is one of the greatest human
rights challenges of our time. Such crimes are committed
by organized criminal networks and armed groups on
an increasingly large scale, sometimes supported by
State actors, often with impunity. Billions of dollars
are generated each year — money that fuels conflict
and hampers development. Human trafficking takes
on various forms of exploitation. We know that women
and children are particularly vulnerable. Armed groups
and criminal networks abuse women and children for
sexual slavery, forced labour or as child soldiers. For
terrorist groups like the so-called Islamic State, Boko
Haram and Al-Qaida, trafficking and slavery are tools
to humiliate and frighten enemies and to make money
for their operations. We have all seen the horrific
reports of abuse from the areas where they operate.
The Secretary General’s report on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2016/361/Rev.1) documents that
smugglers are requiring sex as payment of passage.
The report confirms that there is an evolving criminal
infrastructure designed to exploit refugees and
migrants through human trafficking and sexual slavery.
It will require a strong and concerted international
effort to oppose such powerful criminal networks.
International organizations and instruments such as
the United Nations Convention against Transnational

16-4511365/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Organized Crime must be better utilized to ensure
effective international cooperation across borders and
regions. Civil society also has a key role to play. As
human trafficking and armed conflicts are converging
and becoming global security challenges, we need
to develop combined tools from the security and
development communities.
We need to improve cooperation through datasharing and monitoring between countries and across
United Nations entities. We need better gender
aggregated data and documentation in order to develop
effective responses and services for victims of sexual
exploitation. The Secretary-General’s reports and
today’s open debate are important steps forward. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development also gives
us an important platform to tackle trafficking in a more
holistic manner. Sustainable Development Goal 16 on
peaceful societies specifically calls for the end to abuse,
exploitation, trafficking and all forms of violence and
torture against and of children.
The Nordic countries are strongly committed to
tackling all forms of trafficking and organized crime.
We are already deeply engaged in anti-trafficking
programmes, in partnership with developing
countries and regional organizations. We believe that
strengthening multilateral cooperation and partnerships
are the only way to put an end to the deadly business of
human trafficking.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Bellerive (Haiti) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to extend my condolences to the Russian
Federation and to Germany following the tragic
events in Ankara and Berlin. We firmly condemn such
unspeakable crimes.
On behalf of the President and Government of the
Republic of Haiti, I thank the Spanish presidency of
the Security Council for convening today’s high-level
debate on human trafficking in conflict situations. I take
this opportunity to commend the Spanish presidency
of the Council and to offer congratulations on today’s
highly inspired initiative.
Just a year ago, the Security Council highlighted
the adverse effects of human trafficking. Trafficking
undermines the rule of law. It promotes other forms of
transnational organized crime, exacerbates conflicts,
66/79

20/12/2016

fuels insecurity and accentuates vulnerability. In a word,
it attacks fundamental freedoms and human rights.
The intolerable images that reach us from the main
theatres of conflict, particularly Syria, but also from all
over the Middle East and Africa, speak volumes about
the dreadful suffering and vulnerability of children,
refugees, displaced families and people uprooted from
their homes — potential victims who often become
prey to organized criminal intermediaries. The moving
testimony this morning from Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan
and Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha brought home to us
the daily tragedies of people such as the Yazidis in Iraq.
Armed conflicts, whether the product of civil war or
regional or local conflicts related to terrorism, can result
in extreme versions of the consequences of the kind of
coercion usually associated with human trafficking.
Even peacekeeping operations are not exempt from
human trafficking. Among others, my country — where
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) mandated by the Security Council has
been deployed for 12 years — has been targeted by the
Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, who has strongly condemned the
rise in cases of violence, abuse and sexual exploitation
involving women and children directly related to the
deployment of peacekeeping forces in conflict zones. A
number of voices have already been raised, particularly
in organizations devoted to the defence of human rights,
to highlight the inadequacy of stakeholders’ responses,
including the United Nations, to victims of exploitation
in assistance programmes and conflict, post-conflict
and reconstruction situations. The intolerable violence
done to the victims of trafficking in persons in conflict
situations is especially tragic and demands broad,
urgent and effective action.
Even if we rightly consider that armed conflicts
exacerbate the factors that leave people vulnerable to
human trafficking, we must not lose sight of the fact
that its underlying causes are poverty, unemployment,
the absence of socioeconomic prospects, genderbased violence, discrimination and marginalization,
as emphasized in the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons. The answer
to the problem therefore depends largely on the creation
of a secure environment and conditions conducive to
the socioeconomic development, growth and expansion
of individuals and communities. We must therefore
tackle the source of the problem.
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

That is why the Government of Haiti believes
that in combating human trafficking, in general, and
in conflict situations in particular, it is essential to
act simultaneously on two major tracks: accelerating
development and strengthening world security, two
pillars that are also mutually reinforcing. The Republic
of Haiti supports the United Nations in its indefatigable
search for solutions to long-standing regional conflicts
and to ongoing and potential local clashes that add to
the flow of uprooted and displaced persons, refugees
and migrants and, as a result, fuel human trafficking.
We are in favour of any measure that is likely to
contribute to international humanitarian intervention
in conflict zones by ensuring better care and protection
for the most vulnerable groups, those likely to be
prey to organized crime. We particularly support the
importance of taking a more realistic approach that
focuses on preventing trafficking and exploitation
where they are likely problems in areas of transit, crisis
or actual or potential conflict.
Similarly, Haiti intends to be fully involved in
global action against trafficking in persons, as well as
in international and regional mechanisms countering
terrorism and organized crime. Over the past few years,
in accordance with the Global Plan of Action and the
Work Plan to Combat Trafficking in Persons in the
Western Hemisphere of the Organization of American
States, Haiti has enacted a range of measures designed
to prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in persons,
particularly women and children. With the help of the
United Nations, including MINUSTAH, the Haitian
authorities have implemented various programmes
aimed at improving the protection of human rights,
including strengthening its judiciary and security
forces, which have borne fruit. At the same time, other
efforts, focused on reducing poverty, marginalization,
exclusion and discrimination have helped to mitigate
some of the factors that leave various groups vulnerable
to trafficking.
But we are aware that much remains to be done to
increase the effectiveness of the fight against human
trafficking and protect its victims. Happily, Haiti
has just reached an important stage in the process
of consolidating democracy and the rule of law with
its holding of legislative and presidential elections in
November and the forthcoming announcement of a
new President of the Republic. The renewed stability
of Haiti’s institutions is opening new horizons for its
people. At this historic turning point, the Government

S/PV.7847

of Haiti hopes that the United Nations will continue to
be at its side in order to help it acquire the necessary
public infrastructure to pull itself out of the gutter and
focus resolutely on growth, sustainable development
and improving its living conditions.
Trafficking in persons is a serious threat to
humankind and to human dignity and development.
I hope that the dialogue begun today in the
Security Council will result in concrete, practical
recommendations, whose implementation will make
a major contribution to intensifying the fight against
every aspect of this scourge, one of the worst forms of
modern slavery.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Panama.
Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
I would first like to express our solidarity with the
victims of yesterday’s attacks in Germany, Turkey and
Yemen, and to offer our sympathies and condolences to
our colleagues from the Russian Federation.
I would like to welcome Mr. Mariano Rajoy Brey,
President of the Government of Spain, to today’s open
debate and to commend his country for its commitment
to bringing to this important forum subjects that are
so pertinent to human rights, particularly the one
under discussion today, trafficking in persons, on
which the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2331 (2016) this morning. We also thank
the Secretary-General and the briefers for their
important contributions and the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
for her thematic report (A/71/303), aimed at raising
the international community’s awareness of the forms
and nature of trafficking in persons in situations of
conflict and particularly its effects on women and
children. Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha, the Goodwill
Ambassador for the Dignity of Survivors of Human
Trafficking, is a living example of that.
Panama fully supports international actions
based on the commitment of the Palermo Protocol
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, which, in defining
trafficking in persons, provides us with a common
basis for preventing it, punishing offenders and taking
measures to protect its victims, with a view to dealing
with the challenges that this particular kind of organized
crime poses for us.

16-4511367/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Conscious of its vulnerabilities as a transit route
and migration destination, Panama now has a crosscutting national commission against trafficking in
persons that has authority to act in the various different
areas where victims need help. We have also worked to
make the changes needed to update our legislation so
that it can work more effectively to prevent, punish and
eradicate trafficking in persons. In November, President
Varela Rodríguez renewed Panama’s firm commitment
to combating what we term modern slavery, which
includes human trafficking, after our ratification of the
2014 Protocol of the Forced Labour Convention. It is
unthinkable that in the twenty-first century more than
20 million people are victims of this scourge — often
double victims, at the mercy of both organized crime
and drug trafficking.
The work of international agencies such as the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
and the International Organization for Migration is
no less important. Their support to States in drafting
legislation, building national strategies and assisting
with resources for implementing them is very valuable
and increasingly necessary. UNODC’s Blue Heart
Campaign against Human Trafficking, launched in
March 2009, has made a positive contribution to
raising awareness, encouraging participation and
inspiring action.
One of the significant challenges to prosecuting
and punishing this crime is the collection of data
and evidence, on which we can share best practices
with the goal of defeating this increasingly worrying
reality that connects us across our borders. Our
national commission has reported that in the past two
years Panama has dismantled 13 human trafficking
organizations, rescued 121 victims and detained 20
traffickers. In addition to strengthening institutions in
order to combat trafficking and improving coordination
between Government agencies that deal with trafficking,
Panama has also conducted awareness-raising and
prevention activities, including seminars, workshops
for officials and journalists and debates with experts.
Panama believes that the United Nations has a critical
role to play in the prevention and ultimate elimination
of trafficking. We recommend strengthening the joint
work of the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council, for example, using tools such as the Universal
Periodic Review to monitor the implementation of
the legal framework for the prevention, treatment and
elimination of trafficking in persons in armed conflict.
68/79

20/12/2016

Finally, it is also timely for us to review preventive
action in keeping with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Our country is one of the 40 countries
that next year will submit its voluntary national review
in the framework of the High-Level Political Forum on
Sustainable Development, a platform that we consider
essential in reporting not only on human trafficking,
but also on human slavery in conflict and postconflict situations affecting women, children and other
minorities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Montenegro.
Mr. Perović (Montenegro): I would like to thank
the Spanish presidency for organizing this timely open
debate on trafficking in persons in conflict situations and
for preparing an informative concept note (S/2016/1031,
annex). Allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for the
manner in which you have conducted the affairs of
the Council. I also thank the briefers for their input in
the debate.
Montenegro welcomes the adoption today of
resolution 2331 (2016) and associates itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I would like, however, to make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.
We have seen how ever country is affected by
trafficking, whether it is a country of origin, transit
or destination for the victims. The latest report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/949) and the briefings
have painted a disturbing picture. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s report, which notes the linkages
between conflict situations and trafficking in persons.
It is unfortunate that women and children account for
the vast majority of trafficking victims, which also
include boys and men, as human traffickers target
the most fragile, exhausted, desperate and vulnerable
societal groups.
Human trafficking in conflict is a growing
concern, particularly in the context of the current
migration crisis but also due to the increased use of
social media platforms and new technologies to recruit
victims. Institutionalized sexual slavery and the forced
recruitment of children as suicide bombers and the
victims of organ traffickers have become horrifying
spirals within this negative phenomenon. The use
of slave by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Boko Haram is not the problem of only certain
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

countries. Like today’s conflicts, the problem has
become international and no region is immune.
It is unacceptable that this crime has become one of
the fastest-growing activities of transnational criminal
organizations, with widespread violations of human
rights that are not condemned while those responsible
are not held accountable, despite the efforts of the United
Nations and other international bodies, Governments
and civil society groups. We have to enforce the law
and pursue the criminals who exploit victims in a brutal
manner. This is a global threat that can be found in
many conflict areas and, as such, requires a response at
the national, regional and international levels.
In Montenegro, our focus has been on prevention
and education, criminalizing trafficking in persons,
disrupting criminal and terrorist networks and
addressing related crimes. In that regard, we are
working closely with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and in partnership with the
International Organization for Migration, UNICEF and
the European Union.
We support international peace operations as an
efficient and dynamic instrument to promote respect
for human rights and build sustainable institutions in
conflict areas. In today’s conflicts, United Nations
peacekeeping operations are more involved in protecting
civilians than monitoring ceasefires. That is why peace
operations should use new technologies to strengthen
their intelligence-gathering capacities. In preparing
Montenegrin soldiers to take part in peace operations
and activities, the Government office for the fight
against trafficking in human beings, in cooperation with
the Ministry of Defence, conducts regular trainings on
the fight against human trafficking.
Montenegro strongly condemns cases of sexual
exploitation in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
as such criminal activity and abuse have no place
under any circumstance in the United Nations flagship
activity. It is our collective duty to ensure thorough
investigations into those cases, as well as accountability
and justice for the victims. Zero tolerance and zero
impunity must prevail as our only options in order to
avoid tarnishing the credibility of the United Nations
once again.
Counter-trafficking activities should start at the
outset of any crisis and before evidence of trafficking
and exploitation appears. Increased regional and
international cooperation and sharing of information

S/PV.7847

are also vital to block criminals from finding
safe haven. In that regard, Montenegro has signed
cooperation protocols with neighbouring countries
Albania and Kosovo.
At the international level, the Security Council’s
role is highly important, including through the sanctions
regime against the Islamic State and Al-Qaida. As
the Secretary-General has made clear, the trafficking
of women and girls and their sexual enslavement
are a source of financing for the Islamic State and a
recruitment tool. Every Member State needs to play its
part in updating the list of designated individuals and
entities that are engaged in trafficking activities.
All victims should see an end to their suffering.
They deserve protection and support, as well as justice
and opportunity. We therefore need to redouble our
efforts at all levels and address that pressing issue in a
way that will provide real results on the ground.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We would like to join
others in condemning the terrorist attacks that took
place in Ankara and Berlin yesterday. We express our
deep condolences to the Russian Federation and to
Germany.
Kazakhstan aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Kingdom of
Bahrain on behalf of the 24 States members of the
Group of Friends United against Human Trafficking.
We commend the tireless efforts and special
expertise of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and other relevant United Nations
system organizations. We also value UNODC’s able
coordination of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group
against Trafficking in Persons and sound management
of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for
Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. We support strengthened coordination
between the Inter-Agency Coordination Group and
Member States to enhance the effectiveness of the
response to the current challenges of human trafficking.
We reaffirm our commitment to the landmark
United Nations Global Plan of Action against
Trafficking in Persons, as well as the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and

16-4511369/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Children, supplementing the Convention to direct
coordinated and inclusive responses. We therefore call
upon Member States to universalize the ratification of
all relevant anti-trafficking legal instruments.
The threat posed by terrorist organizations is a
matter of special concern for Kazakhstan. General
Assembly resolution, 70/291 on the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy review, recognized
the nexus between trafficking in persons and
terrorism. Human trafficking is a critical component
of the financial flows of terrorist groups and moneylaundering by organized crime networks, which pose
a threat to international peace and security. Hence, we
urge States to mobilize a stronger and more vigilant
global response.
We believe that it is critical and mandatory to
train all peacekeeping and other personnel deployed in
conflict and post-conflict zones to respond effectively
to trafficking in persons, with training in gender
sensitivity and prevention of sexual exploitation and
abuse, especially those perpetuated by peacekeepers.
Peace and development are the foundations of stable
society and human well-being, and need enormous
resources for poverty eradication, education,
employment and provision of services. Kazakhstan
has therefore proposed that Member States consider
allocating annually 1 per cent of their defence budget
to the United Nations Sustainable Development
Goals Fund.
At the national level, Kazakhstan is addressing
human trafficking by accelerating the work of
its interagency commission, in close interaction
with non-governmental organizations and relevant
international organizations as part of the fourth cycle
of its 2015-2017 national plan.
At the regional level, we interact in an effective
manner with the Commonwealth of Independent States
through its 2014-2018 regional programme and with
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) as a part of the OSCE Alliance against
Trafficking in Persons. Kazakhstan has also initiated
the Almaty Process, which serves as a platform for
nine countries of the region to annually step up their
response and enhance cooperation with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration.
As an incoming non-permanent member of the
Security Council for 2017-2018, Kazakhstan is pleased
70/79

20/12/2016

to support resolution 2331 (2016) and reaffirms its
strong commitment to reaching visible results in
combating trafficking in human beings.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Mendonça e Moura (Portugal): I would
like to thank the Spanish presidency for convening
this ministerial open debate and congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the adoption of the first Security
Council resolution on trafficking in human beings in
situations of conflict, which my country is proud to
co-sponsor (resolution 2331 (2016)).
I thank the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
and Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, for their briefings.
Trafficking in human beings is one of the most
serious violations of human rights and constitutes an
offence to the dignity and integrity of the human being.
Every year, millions of men, women and children
are victims of human trafficking for exploitation,
which includes prostitution and other forms of sexual
exploitation, forced labor and services, slavery and
similar practices, involuntary servitude, and removal of
organs and other forms of exploitation. It is a complex
reality, transnational in most cases, often committed
within the framework of criminal organizations, which
prey on vulnerabilities and weaknesses of trafficked
persons. Trafficking in human beings is often
exacerbated in situations of conflict and humanitarian
crisis and aggravated by factors such as poverty,
unemployment, weak rule of law and poor governance.
We note with concern that trafficking in persons
in situations of conflict-related sexual violence has
become a war tactic by violent extremist groups. It
turns individuals into commodities, dehumanizes them
and exacerbates the multiple and protracted harmful
effects of conflict-related violence on victims. And it
must be stressed that a consistent mark of this crime is
that most victims are women and girls.
Any intervention, to be effective, must be based
on common and coordinated efforts in the fields of
prevention, awareness-raising, support, research and
repression at the international, regional or national
levels. Bilateral, regional and international cooperation
among countries of origin, transit and destination, as
well as effective information-sharing, are crucial to
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

addressing human trafficking resulting from conflict.
It is a global issue that demands collective action, not
only from national Governments, but also from the
international community, civil-society organizations,
media, academia and other stakeholders.
The crime of trafficking in persons is generally
underreported and underrecorded. The overwhelming
majority of victims of trafficking never see justice for
what they have endured, nor receive the assistance
and support they need. We must fight the culture of
impunity for those who commit these crimes; those
responsible must be brought to justice. To this end, lawenforcement and other officials need to be trained to
identify and protect victims, and traffickers and their
accomplices need to be prosecuted, and justice for
victims needs to be secured.
Portugal urges all delegations that have not yet
done so to accede and ratify the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime. The Protocol provides a broad basis for policies
to address the issue and requires countries to take
action against the traffickers, protect and assist the
victims and help prevent trafficking. My delegation
looks forward to the high-level review of the Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, set to
take place in 2017.
In 2007, with the involvement of several sectorial
ministries, the private sector and civil-society
organizations, we in Portugal developed its first
National Plan against Trafficking in Human Beings.
In 2008, we created the Trafficking in Human Beings
Observatory with the goal of collecting and analysing
data on trafficking. Our third National Plan against
Trafficking in Human Beings, for 2014-2017, is currently
being implemented and entails 53 policy measures
focused around five strategic areas: first, prevention,
awareness-raising, information and research; secondly,
education and training; thirdly, protection, intervention
and capacity-building; fourthly, criminal investigation;
and fifthly and finally, cooperation. The third National
Plan against Trafficking in Human Beings reflects
my country’s commitments, in particular within
the framework of the United Nations, the Council of
Europe, the European Union and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries. The national efforts
developed by Portugal in combating trafficking in
human beings have been recognized in several forums,

S/PV.7847

and most recently by the Council of Europe’s Group of
Experts on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings.
In conclusion, trafficking in human beings is one
of the most heinous crimes against human dignity.
Preventing and punishing trafficking in human beings
is crucial to achieving a future of dignity, freedom for
all and sustainable development, in line with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and our collective
efforts aimed at consolidating peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): Human trafficking is not
always the first thing that comes to mind when we
think about violent conflicts. Often our news stories
and our attention spans are consumed with images
of bombings, tanks and refugee camps. But the link
between trafficking and conflict is a major issue in
need of our attention.
Last
December’s
presidential
statement
S/PRST/2015/25,on trafficking in persons in situations
of conflict, was an important achievement. First, it
reaffirmed that human trafficking must be considered
in the context of threats to international peace and
security. Secondly, it asserted a role for the Security
Council in consolidating the international response to
this challenge.
We thank Spain for organizing today’s important
debate and align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. We also join with
all delegations in expressing solidarity with the victims
of yesterday’s terrorist attacks. In my national capacity,
I will outline four areas of opportunity for a stronger
international response to trafficking in conflict.
The first area is the pursuit of accountability for
conflict-related sexual violence. The link between
human trafficking and conflict-related sexual violence
is irrefutable. We have seen it in horrific cases
involving the trafficking and sexual abuse of women by
the so-called Islamic State and Boko Haram. There are
also less reported cases, including many on the sexual
exploitation by illegal traffickers of those who are
fleeing war zones. In addition to being linked through
causes, or points of origin, there are more invidious
links, ones that we can do something about. One link is
accountability, or the lack thereof. A clear thread exists
between conflict-related sexual violence and human

16-4511371/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

trafficking because impunity for one allows the other
to flourish.
The Security Council can act as an important
accountability mechanism in this respect. At its most
simple, let us have incidents of trafficking called out in
this Chamber where we see them occurring. In addition,
the Council can serve to bolster other accountability
measures, for example, by supporting Special
Representative Bangura, by active deployment of
women-protection advisers in peacekeeping missions,
by referring cases to the International Criminal Court,
and by supporting regional and national systems
of accountability.
The second area is preventing the conditions
conducive to human trafficking. We have seen clearly
that war acts as a potent catalyst to human trafficking.
It breaks down institutional and social protections, and
it leaves masses of people vulnerable to traffickers. It
is startlingly obvious, therefore, that greater focus by
the international community on preventing conflicts
and stopping their reoccurrence would have a direct
impact on human trafficking. Prevent the conflict and
you prevent the trafficking.
We call for increased momentum in putting our words
about conflict prevention and peacebuilding — which
are often heard in this Chamber — into practice.
We welcome a stronger role for the Peacebuilding
Commission and regional institutions in informing
the Security Council about human trafficking in
conflict situations, and we look to the SecretaryGeneral-designate to maximize his good offices in
advancing conflict prevention.
The third area involves partnerships that extend
beyond the Security Council. Trafficking has mobility
at its core. It transcends borders and jurisdictions. It
presents far too big a challenge for any one entity to
confront. Although the issue of human trafficking in
conflict should indeed be addressed by the Security
Council, we will also need to look beyond the Chamber
to find a comprehensive solution. The implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals will be crucial in
this regard. It will mean a focus not only on target 8.7,
which addresses modern slavery and human trafficking
directly, but also on Goal 5, to ensure women’s
empowerment, and Goal 16 to prioritize the building of
strong and inclusive institutions.
To achieve this, partnerships must be fostered
between the United Nations and regional systems, many
72/79

20/12/2016

of which have developed comprehensive strategies
on this issue. For example, as Member States work to
implement the Palermo Protocols and the New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, they will play
a crucial role in comprehensively addressing human
trafficking. Trafficking is an egregious violation
of people’s human rights and we are encouraged
that the United Nations human rights bodies are
taking an increasingly comprehensive approach to
human trafficking.
Finally, a stronger response needs to place the
needs of the most vulnerable at its core. Through our
support to Justice Rapid Response and UN-Women, we
heard last year harrowing accounts of investigations
into sexual violence and human trafficking by Boko
Haram. Many victims were too traumatized to speak
to interviewers about their ordeals. In some cases,
they were more concerned about shelter, food or their
own personal safety than about the investigation. For
them, justice meant more than a prison sentence for
their abusers.
Uncomfortable though it may be, we need to hear
these accounts. We need the participation of those who
have survived or who are most vulnerable to human
trafficking in conflict, and in crafting our response we
need to put them at the centre. This applies in particular
to women, but also to young people, including former
child combatants. The participation of civil society,
academia and the private sector will also be crucial to
stemming flows of human traffic.
We are grateful to Spain for working to ensure that
the Council remains focused on this issue. However, as
we have noted, our response must include and extend
beyond the Security Council if we are to finally end
human trafficking in conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al Saad (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to extend the condolences of my
country to the Russian Federation and Germany for
the unfortunate incidents that took place recently. We
resolutely condemn those terrorist attacks.
I would like to thank the President of the
Government of the Kingdom of Spain, Mr. Mariano
Rajoy Brey, for organizing this important open debate.
I should also like to extend our thanks and appreciation
for the President’s efforts in ensuring the success of this
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

important debate on trafficking in persons in conflict
situations. We appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations and its agencies to eradicate this crime by
enacting relevant laws and regulations and mobilizing
international efforts to combat this phenomenon. Our
meeting today to discuss this topic is a clear reflection
of those efforts. We are hopeful that this debate will
help us find solutions to this problem, address its root
causes and put in place a future plan to ensure its
full eradication.
Our meeting is taking place to discuss a crime
that is condemned by the entire world. It is a blatant
violation of human rights. Regrettably, the majority
of its victims are women, girls and children. Almost
all countries around the world are affected by this
phenomenon — whether as countries of origin, transit
or destination. Owing to the numerous conflicts around
the world, this crime has been on the rise recently
and has taken on various forms. Countries around
the world and specialized international organizations
have sought to develop their tools and enact laws to
deter this crime and reduce its social, economic and
psychological impact.
At the national level, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
has sought to combat trafficking in persons at the
legislative, organizational and institutional levels,
in addition, to other national efforts and measures to
prevent crimes of trafficking in persons, prosecute
and punish its perpetrators, protect its victims and
enhance international cooperation with countries and
relevant regional and international organizations. A
law to combat trafficking in persons was promulgated
in my country in 2009. That legislation constitutes an
important step forward in our efforts to combat these
types of crimes. Countries around the world know full
well how important it is to enact legal texts that prohibit
those practices and punish its perpetrators.
My country has also established a standing
committee for combating trafficking in persons under
its human rights commission. Its members include
representatives from Government bodies to coordinate
national efforts to combat trafficking in persons and put
in place plans to address them, as well as put forward
recommendations that ensure that no violations are
committed against categories targeted by trafficking in
persons. The commission is tasked with following up
on the implementation of the recommendations.

S/PV.7847

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has ratified many
relevant international instruments, notably the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its two Protocols — the Palermo Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, and the Protocol
against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and
Air — as well as other International Labour Organization
conventions, in particular Conventions No. 182 and No.
209. Furthermore, we have ratified the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination and the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, as well as the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and the Slavery Convention of 1926 and its
subsequent protocol.
The number of conflicts throughout the world has
increased, especially in the Middle East. That has led
to a significant rise in crimes related to the trafficking
in persons, especially against displaced Syrians fleeing
conflict zones. Unfortunately, human traffickers have
exploited the dire need and the desperate humanitarian
situation of victims, who are often forced to compromise
their dignity and their humanity and who fall prey to
criminals who exploit their bodies for financial gain.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia would
like to stress its firm rejection of all forms of trafficking
in persons under any pretext. We have stepped up
our national efforts to fully eradicate that crime by
enacting relevant laws and regulations, cooperating
tirelessly with the international community to
eliminate trafficking in persons, and ratifying relevant
international instruments and conventions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uganda.
Mr. Nyago (Uganda): I shall begin by expressing
Uganda’s condolences to the Permanent Missions of
Russia and Germany for the tragedies that befell their
nationals yesterday.
Furthermore, I bring warm greetings from His
Excellency President Museveni of Uganda, who has
sent his apologies for not being able to come and
participate personally in this important debate due
to other, previously planned duties. He extends his
greatest appreciation to you, Sir, for the honourable
invitation extended to him to participate in this debate
on a topic that is so critical to Uganda.

16-4511373/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

My delegation also appreciates the briefings
delivered by the Secretary General, Mr. Ban Ki-Moon,
and other briefers.
Trafficking in persons in conflict is perhaps one of
the most challenging evils that the world is currently
confronted with, and the organization of this debate
is very timely in providing an opportunity to Member
States to share insights into how the challenges
being encountered in countering this scourge can be
effectively addressed.
Uganda happens to be in a region that has
experienced a lot of conflict, which has exacerbated
the problem of human trafficking in our region. The
conflicts in our region have made the majority of our
people, particularly women and children, vulnerable to
organized criminal networks that take advantage of our
weak institutions in immigration and the judiciary to
engage in the trafficking mainly of women, children
and other vulnerable people across borders to far
distant places. The conflicts in the Central African
Republic, the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Somalia and, more recently, South Sudan
continue to expose the most vulnerable sections of our
population to the criminal networks that traffic in them
for mainly cheap labour, sexual exploitation and, in
other cases, slavery.
A number of reports have recently revealed some
of the most horrific experiences that the children and
women who have been trafficked go through in some
of the countries where they end up being sold as
objects. Uganda itself has been a victim of this scourge,
whereby some our children, particularly girls and young
women, who have been trafficked have endured torture
and sexual abuse at the hands of their tormentors.
Our Government recently set up an interministerial
committee, coordinated by the Ministry of Gender,
Labour and Social Development, to investigate these
abuses and to devise appropriate measures that can
be undertaken to effectively address the problem.
This is in addition to various other interventions
that the Government has made in the past to address
this challenge.
One of the major steps that needs to be undertaken
by Member States, with the support of the international
community, is the harmonization of legislation that
comprehensively provides for judicial mechanisms
to harshly punish and deter offenders and would-be
offenders, and for there to be a coordination mechanism
74/79

20/12/2016

for their enforcement. Such efforts will require the
strong support of this organ.
Given the transnational nature of this crime, it
requires the combined efforts of the international
community to decisively address this problem. As ably
amplified in the concept note provided by the Spanish
presidency for this debate (S/2016/1031, annex),
trafficking in persons in conflict is closely intertwined
with other transnational organized crimes, such as
money-laundering and international terrorism. The
financial resources that accrue from human trafficking
enable money-laundering to thrive and in turn largely
contribute to funding terrorist activities. And the
cycle continues.
It is therefore evident that this requires a holistic
approach that addresses the interconnectedness of
these vices in our societies. Working together through
the Security Council by adopting a resolution with
effective measures that address the vices of human
trafficking, money-laundering and terrorism in a
holistic manner would help to send a strong message
to the perpetrators of these crimes and to undermine
and curtail the capabilities of their networks to execute
these criminal activities.
In the same vein, the efforts of the international
community aimed at addressing the root causes
of conflict would help to deny these networks the
conducive environment in which they thrive. That is
why Uganda continues to play a key role in the region in
fighting terrorism in Somalia and the Central African
Republic, and in engaging with partners to address the
conflicts in our neighborhood. Uganda continues to be a
champion of pan-Africanism, with a strategic objective
of eliminating conflicts and associated vices in our
region so that we can embark on the road to peace,
peaceful transformation and prosperity for our people.
Uganda associates itself with the efforts of this
organ to address the problem of trafficking in persons
in conflict, and pledges to work together with our
international partners in supporting measures aimed at
eradicating it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Ms. Bakurmutsa (Rwanda): At the outset, I
express Rwanda’s deepest sympathies to Russian
Federation for the heinous assassination of Ambassador
Andrey Karlov.
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Let me thank the Spanish presidency for convening
this important debate and welcome the purposeful
adoption today of resolution 2331 (2016), which we
co-sponsored.
The trafficking in persons in conflict situations is
a problem that magnifies the necessity for international
peace and security in both conflict and post-conflict
situations. Human trafficking is a global security threat
that directly affects the vulnerability of displaced
people and refugees. It is compounded by conflicts, civil
unrest, persecutions and human rights violations. We
must not lose sight of its expansive nature and recognize
that most countries of destination for trafficked victims
are not enduring conflicts. Therefore, it is important
to combat this crime in the countries of origin, transit
and destination. The victims, especially children and
women are targeted by criminals, many of whom belong
to transnational organized crime networks, for sexual
exploitation, slavery and other forms of exploitation.
Rwanda has developed national legislative and
institutional measures and is taking an active role
regionally in the East African cooperation framework
commissioned to devise mechanisms to prevent human
trafficking, protect victims and bring perpetrators to
justice. This is a laborious undertaking, for Rwanda
is susceptible to human trafficking by being situated
in a region experiencing sustained armed conflict.
At the international level, Rwanda is a State party to
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplementing the Convention.
Rwanda co-sponsored General Assembly resolution
71/19, on Cooperation between the United Nations
and INTERPOL.
Before concluding, I would like to make two
final points.
First, we must do more on at the local, regional
and international levels to combat human trafficking
by working closely with partners across the spectrum
to strengthen legislative and punitive measures that
efficiently target the speed and scope of the network
of traffickers we are up against. The reality before
us is that we cannot afford to stand idle in the face of
human trafficking.
Secondly, and I think most importantly, we
encourage all Member States, civil institutions and

S/PV.7847

the private sector to support the fight against human
trafficking on all fronts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Eritrea.
Mr. Giorgio (Eritrea): Allow me at the outset
to convey my deepest sympathies to the Permanent
Mission of the Russian Federation on the assassination
of Ambassador Andrey Karlov in Ankara, and to the
Permanent Mission of Germany on the tragic attack on
innocent civilians in Berlin. Our thoughts are with the
bereaved families.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Bahrain,
who spoke on behalf of the Group of Friends United
against Human Trafficking.
My delegation wishes to thank Spain for organizing
this open debate of the Security Council on trafficking
in persons in conflict situations, in connection with
the agenda item “Maintenance of international peace
and security”. Trafficking in persons is a transnational
crime that affects almost every nation, given its negative
implications for peace and security and its contribution
to grave violations of the basic rights and dignity of the
victims. Therefore, Eritrea views today’s open debate
as giving important impetus to the global fight against
the scourge of human trafficking.
It is clear that this is limited in its scope.
Nevertheless, we would like to see it as part of national,
regional and global efforts to address trafficking in
persons. Resolution 2331 (2016), adopted today, decides
“to take decisive and immediate action to
prevent, criminalize, investigate, prosecute and
ensure accountability of those who engage in
trafficking in persons” (resolution 2331 (2016),
para. 2 (b)).
This particular paragraph points to the direction of
what Eritrea has been asking of the United Nations for
the past few years, since 2013. It is critical, however,
that the investigations carried out be independent
and transparent.
Given the complex and multidimensional nature
of the crimes of human trafficking, strengthened
coordination among the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons, Member States
and other stakeholders would contribute to the muchdesired outcome.

16-4511375/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

It must be underscored that human trafficking
has recently become more acute along migration
routes, where vulnerable communities and individuals
continue to be subjected to sexual violence, degrading
treatment, organ harvesting, murder and kidnapping
for ransom. This highlights the fact that the problem
of trafficking has further evolved. In this regard, as
the United Nations is about to embark on the review
of the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, Eritrea believes that, with the much-improved
understanding and experiences gained over the past 10
years, the Global Plan of Action will play a stronger
and more critical role in harnessing collective action to
advance the fight against human trafficking.
Mindful of the gravity and urgency of the problem,
Eritrea has acceded to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
Convention. Eritrea is also taking concrete steps to
contribute to the fight against human trafficking
by establishing a legal and institutional framework,
including by dismantling criminal networks. Moreover,
it is also actively involved in the Khartoum process
and other projects to address the scourge, including in
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime.
Recognizing that trafficking in persons is a
transnational criminal enterprise with annual revenues
amounting to about $150 billion, it is imperative to flesh
out the underlying causes and intertwined dimensions
of the problem in order to find effective and durable
solutions to the crime.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña (Chile) (spoke in
Spanish): It is a pleasure, Sir, to see you presiding over
this meeting. I would like to convey our condolences
to the Russian Federation. Chile deeply deplores the
events that took place.
This
complex
and
diverse
transnational
phenomenon should be addressed from a holistic,
coordinated perspective through the system, including
in the Council and its subsidiary bodies, as it is
linked to the central themes of its agenda, such as the
protection of civilians in armed conflict; women and
peace and security; children and armed conflict; and
the financing of terrorism.
76/79

20/12/2016

The use of victims of trafficking in combat, sexual
exploitation and forced labour has very much become
a hallmark of armed conflict and humanitarian crises.
The link between sexual violence and trafficking is
plain to see. We have watched with horror how armed
groups use sexual violence, the commercialization
and the enslavement of girls and women as a tool of
terrorism and a source of financing. Our repudiation
of these acts must be unequivocal and compelling and
must be backed up by measures to prevent them and to
provide rehabilitation and reintegration to the victims.
The exponential growth of migratory flows and
internal displaced people — the figures today are
higher than at any other time since the Second World
War — has been fuelled by humanitarian crises
associated with the worsening of existing conflicts and
violent actions by non-State groups. In that respect, as
part of the Arria Format meeting organized by Australia
and Chile in 2014, we identified the need to urgently
promote political solutions to the challenges that
States and the international system face in addressing
migratory governance and the situation of vulnerable
groups exposed to trafficking, such as internally
displaced persons. This debate is a response to this call.
It is vital to create and raise awareness of this
scourge to prevent it, prosecute traffickers, protect the
victims of trafficking and rehabilitate and reintegrate
them, as we said earlier, and finally to eradicate humantrafficking in conflict situations.
The Council has the ethical and political
responsibility to firmly support the efforts of the
international community to that end, including
compliance with the relevant conventions and protocols,
as well as with resolutions 2195 (2014) and 2253 (2015),
which address the relationship between organized
crime, including human trafficking, and terrorism. We
are in favour of better coordination and cooperation
between national judicial systems and the United
Nations system in order to dismantle criminal networks
and bring to justice those who profit from trafficking.
With respect to specific measures to meet the
aforementioned goals, together with supporting those
measures contained in resolution 2331 (2016), which we
co-sponsored today, we propose the following.
First, we must promote exchanges between
specialized agencies, peacekeeping operations and
United Nations peacebuilding stakeholders so as to
address the fragmentation that exists in this sphere.
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Secondly, we must address human trafficking
linked to the exploitation of mineral resources and
promote effective measures relative to the supply
chain, such as the commercial due-diligence guidelines
on minerals from conflict zones, where many women,
boys and girls are forcibly employed.
Thirdly, we must incorporate the issue of the
trafficking of women and girls in conflict in the agenda
of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security, known as the 2242 Group, created by
Spain, since this is considered to be a challenge in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Fourthly, we must ask the groups of experts of the
sanctions Committees to include human trafficking in
their reports to those Committees in order to assist with
the work of the Council in the event of the adoption
of the targeted sanctions included in resolution 2331
(2016).
Finally, and fifthly, I ask the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict to tackle this
scourge in their reports to their respective subsidiary
bodies, given, inter alia, that these components can
constitute an early-warning sign that can help to detect
and prevent future crimes against humanity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): I would like to thank the
Spanish presidency for convening today’s open debate
on a topic of crucial importance, which demands the
urgent attention of the international community.
Human trafficking constitutes a grave violation of
international law, including international humanitarian
law. It violates the fundamental values and principles
we hold dear, such as justice, equality and human rights
for all. Over the past several years, the world has seen
human trafficking continue unabated in different parts
of the world, especially in countries stricken by conflict
and facing violent extremism. That has many causes:
to generate illegal profits in the criminal economy; to
enlist people in illegal armed groups; and to impose
forced labour and slavery upon the innocent and have
them carry out terrorist attacks in different parts of
the world.
Human trafficking is particularly prevalent in
countries stricken by conflict and strife, especially

S/PV.7847

those that continue to suffer at the hands of terrorists
and extremists. We have witnessed a continuing trend
where many terrorist and extremist groups — such as
the Taliban, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/
Da’esh and Al-Qaida, among others — increasingly
resort to human trafficking to advance their evil
agendas. In our region, as well as in Africa and the
Middle East, extremist groups have abducted men,
women and children as a means to finance and conduct
their criminal activities. In many cases, women and
girls in particular have been put up for sale to mobilize
financial resources and fund military operations.
Such despicable activities represent the most evil of
human actions.
The inextricable link between human trafficking
and terrorism remains a serious source of concern
that demands urgent attention by the international
community. We believe that addressing some of the
underlying factors driving violent extremism should
not be separate from ending the problem of human
trafficking. In various conflict situations, especially
in our region, a multitude of terrorist and extremist
groups, including the Taliban, its Haqqani Network
and Al-Qaida, still enjoy sanctuary and safe havens,
alongside material and financial support, which have
reinforced their operational capability to continue their
reign of terror against innocent people.
One of the best ways to address human trafficking
is to prevent conflict from arising in the first place and
to resole them wherever they occur. In doing so we will
avoid the enabling environment that fuels the problem
of human trafficking. The Security Council should
take necessary measures to identify and address the
lingering problem of continued support for extremists
as a means to advance political objectives. More focus
should be placed on ensuring that States comply with
their counter-terrorism commitments and obligations
on the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
As a front-line State in the fight against global
terrorism and extremism, we assure the Council and
the international community at large that our struggle
against those twin menaces will continue unabated, and
with firm resolve. As we speak, our national security
forces are engaging a multitude of international
extremist groups that pose a serious threat to the
civilized world.
The United Nations Global Plan of Action to
Prevent Trafficking in Persons and the United Nations

16-4511377/79

S/PV.7847

Maintenance of international peace and securit

Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, remain the overall international framework
for decisive action to combat human trafficking in all
its aspects. Afghanistan is a party to the Convention
and has put in place several pieces of legislation to
criminalize various forms of human trafficking. In
addition, we are grateful to the United States Agency
for International Development for its project on
combating human trafficking in Afghanistan, which
is co-funded by the International Organization for
Migration. The project works with our Government to
effectively prevent trafficking, prosecute traffickers,
protect victims and improve regional coordination to
combat cross-border trafficking.
The problem of human trafficking is wide-ranging
and has various components. The unprecedented flow
of migrants and refugees, mainly from countries facing
conflict, has left millions of people vulnerable to human
trafficking throughout the world. In that context, we
are pleased that the joint declaration adopted at the
conclusion of the summit meeting on migration here in
New York in September placed due focus on preventing
human trafficking.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council highlights
the fact that the trafficking of persons constitutes
a crime against humanity and that any individual
or groups involved in that heinous practice must be
brought to justice. We hope this meeting will also serve
as a reminder for all that additional progress is required
to implement their commitments and obligations, not
only as matter of legal responsibility but also as a
moral imperative.
Finally, we concur with previous speakers that the
problem of human trafficking in conflict situations
should not be seen in isolation from the global fight
against terrorism. Hence, it is imperative that States
spare no effort whatsoever to implement the relevant
counter-terrorism resolutions of the security Council
and of the General Assembly. In that context, the
relevant States must prevent the cross-border movement
of terrorists and cut off the flow of financial resources
and other enablers that have thus far sustained extremist
activity. We hope the outcome of today’s meeting
will revitalize the global fight against a menace that
constitutes a crime against humanity and a challenge
confronting us all.
78/79

20/12/2016

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Gone (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
First and foremost, allow me begin by conveying the
deepest condolences of the Ivorian Government to the
Governments and the peoples of Germany and Russia
for the terrorist attack in Berlin and the assassination of
Ambassador Andrey Karlov, respectively.
I would like to congratulate the Spanish presidency
on convening this high-level open debate on the
important issue of trafficking in human beings in
times of conflict. Allow me also to extend my thanks
to the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict for their contributions to
today’s debate.
The news today, as well as the poignant testimonies
we heard this morning, reveal the extent to which
trafficking in persons in times of conflict, owing to its
magnitude, crimes and irreparable trauma it causes,
constitutes a genuine denial of human rights, and must
as such serve to mobilize the attention of the entire
international community.
Resolution 2331 (2016), which the members of
the Security Council adopted today, is a particularly
relevant instrument to combat this scourge, while it also
serves to bolster existing initiatives such as SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon’s zero-tolerance policy.
In addition to the efforts of the the Security Council,
the international commitment against trafficking
in human beings in times of conflict must also be
translated into vigorous regional and national initiatives
based on existing multilateral legal frameworks. Since
2002, the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), to which my country belongs and which
is affected by this phenomenon, has regularly adopted
several action plans, the latest of which covers the
period 2016-2020. Those plans propose, inter alia, the
adoption of national legislation penalizing trafficking
in persons, measures to protect and assist victims and
public awareness campaigns. It should be emphasized
that the strategic and operational support of UNODC
to ECOWAS has made a significant contribution to the
prevention and suppression of trafficking in persons in
West Africa. This is an opportunity for my delegation
to thank the United Nations for its multifaceted support
16-45113

20/12/2016

Maintenance of international peace and securit

through UNODC in the implementation of the ECOWAS
Plan of Action against Trafficking in Persons.
In line with that regional strategy, on 25 October
2012 Côte d’Ivoire ratified the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and endorsed the Additional Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons. It also
adopted Law 2010-272 on the prohibition of trafficking
in persons and the worst forms of child labour and the
September Law on combating trafficking in persons.
The Ivorian Government also believes that the fight
against trafficking in persons in times of conflict and
in times of peace must be a holistic one. To that end, my
country has set up a national multisectoral committee to
combat human trafficking and has drawn up a national
strategy, accompanied by a five-year national action
plan for the period 2016-2020.
Although the correlation between epicentres of
conflict and the surge in trafficking in persons appears
to be undeniable, it is important to bear in mind the
economic and social dynamics that fuel this scourge,
including poverty, unemployment, the lack of prospects

S/PV.7847

for young people and the shortcomings of judicial and
police institutions. Such deficits call for greater and
more vigorous action on the part of the United Nations
to support the improved coordination of national
and regional strategies and the strengthening of the
human and operational capacities of judicial and police
institutions. It is also important to support the affected
States in the creation of databases to better identify
the phenomenon of trafficking in persons, on the one
hand, and on the other to develop appropriate strategies
for dismantling the criminal networks involved and
improving the assistance given to victims.
In closing, I would like to state that accountability
must be the international community’s best response
to grave human rights violations in order to prevent
future abuses.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no more
speakers inscribed on the list. I thank representatives
for their support and, in particular, for the kind words
to the presidency of the Council.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

16-4511379/79
