S/2017/252*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 March 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Colombia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2261
(2016), by which the Council established the United Nations Mission in Colombia
and requested that I report to the Council on the implementation of the mandate of
the Mission every 90 days after the start of monitoring and verification activities.
The report covers the activities of the Mission and related developments from
24 December 2016 to 24 March 2017.

II. Major developments
2.
The reporting period witnessed significant developments in the implementation
process, including the movement of approximately 6,900 members of the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia-People’s Army (FARC-EP) to 26 local
agreed zones and points. The laying down of arms process has started in these areas,
and the process of reintegration of FARC-EP combatants should begin soon. This is a
major step towards the consolidation of the ceasefire, the reintegration of the
members of FARC-EP into civilian life and the transformation of the armed group
into a political party. Notwithstanding delays in implementation overall, the parties
have reiterated their determination to complete the process of the laying down of
arms by the end of the 180-day timeline established in the peace agreement, together
with the advance of key measures regarding legal, security and socioeconomic
matters that are critical to the success of reintegration and the consolidation of peace
beyond the phase of the laying down of arms.

Legislative and institutional implementation of the peace agreement
Key legislation
3.
The amnesty law was passed on 30 December 2016 under fast-track legislative
procedures for peace implementation. It is a critical piece of legislation: it provides
de jure amnesty for FARC-EP members accused of or sentenced for political crimes
* Reissued for technical reasons on 28 March 2017.

17-04472* (E)

290317

*1704472*

S/2017/252

(such as rebellion, sedition, conspiracy and connected crimes). It also provides for
conditional release or parole for imprisoned members of FARC -EP who have served
five years or more of their prison sentences for crimes that do not fall under the
amnesty provisions, upon their signing a commitment to become subject to the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace in Colombia. In addition, the law provides that
FARC-EP members sentenced for crimes that are not subject to amnesty and who
have not yet served five years of their sentences will be transferred to alternative
facilities located in some of the zones where FARC-EP has regrouped. Such
facilities are in the process of being established and will be certified as adequate by
the tripartite Monitoring and Verification Mechanism before FARC -EP members are
transferred to them.
4.
The amnesty law further provides for different modalities that will apply to
members of the public security forces who are accused of or prosecuted or sentenced
for crimes associated or in connection with the armed conflict with FARC -EP.
5.
Throughout the reporting period, concerns were expressed about the slow pace
of implementation of the amnesty law. On 17 February, the Government issued a
decree aimed at expediting the application of the law. However, other actors,
including within the judiciary branch, have expressed their own misgiv ings about
the practical implementation of the law. At the time of writing the present report,
only 72 FARC-EP members have benefited from the provisions of the amnesty law.
At least some 1,000 requests under the amnesty law are currently being processed.
In addition, since 15 December 177 FARC-EP members have been freed as a result
of pardons issued by the President of Colombia, Juan Manuel Santos Calderón,
rather than the amnesty law.
6.
On 19 December 2016, the Government submitted to Congress, under
fast-track legislative procedures, a draft law with constitutional scope to establish
the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparations and Non -repetition,
provided for in the peace agreement. This includes the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, consisting of a distinct judicial system and procedures under which crimes
committed during the armed conflict and the rights of victims will be addressed.
7.
The draft legislation was the subject of protracted debates in Congress, owing
in part to the fact that the Special Jurisdiction for Peace was at the centre of
concerns expressed by the groups that supported the “no” vote during the plebiscite
of 2 October 2016. The debates resulted in many amendments to the legislation,
notably with regard to the armed forces and civilian third parties that may have been
involved in the conflict. The law on the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice,
Reparations and Non-repetition was adopted by Congress in mid-March, with those
amendments. The Constitutional Court will subsequently review it. Congress is now
expected to consider laws regulating this transitional justice system.
8.
On 26 January, my Special Representative confirmed the designation, endorsed
by the two parties, of Néstor Correa as the temporary Executive Direc tor of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace. On 27 January, I designated Diego García Sayán to be
part of the selection committee tasked with choosing magistrates and other officials
for the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparations and Non -repetition over
the coming months. All other designating entities (the Criminal Chamber of the
Supreme Court of Colombia, the International Center for Transitional Justice, the
Standing Committee of the State University System in Colombia and the President of

2/16

17-04472

S/2017/252

the European Court of Human Rights) had completed their appointments by
14 February. The members of the Committee met in Bogotá on 7 March.
9.
On 1 February, the Government presented to Congress a draft law of
constitutional scope on the political reintegration of FARC-EP. It concerns
financing, political guarantees and minimum representation during the next two
legislative election cycles (2018 and 2022). On 14 February, Congress adopted a
law regulating the participation in congressional debates o n peace-related legislation
of six observers on behalf of FARC-EP.
10. Other peace-related legislation was also introduced during the reporting
period, such as legislation with constitutional scope aimed at ensuring that State
institutions implement in good faith the content of the peace agreement, legislation
on norms applicable to State agents in the context of the finalization of the armed
conflict and a law on the status of the opposition.
11. On 24 March, the Permanent Representative of Colombia to the United
Nations delivered to me the peace agreement signed on 24 November, which, in
accordance with the agreement, I will transmit to the Security Council for its
subsequent circulation as a document of the Council.
Key implementation bodies
12. On 3 February, President Santos announced the formation of a post-conflict
cabinet comprising the Ministers of the Interior, Finance, Health, Agriculture, Mines,
Energy and Labour and the Minister Counsellor for Post-Conflict. The cabinet is
tasked to oversee the Government efforts of implementation of the peace agreement
and achieve effective linkages between the Government and State institutions
responsible for implementing post-conflict programmes and projects. It has focused
initially on humanitarian demining, illicit crop substitution and regional development.
Overall implementation
13. The body responsible for overall supervision of peace implementation, the
Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation
of the Final Agreement, was created on 2 December 2016. The Commission is
composed of three Government officials, including the High Commissioner for
Peace, the Minister of the Interior and the Minister Counsellor for Post -Conflict, as
well as three high-level members of FARC-EP — Iván Márquez, Victoria Sandino
and Jesús Santrich. During the reporting period, the Commission focused, among
other things, on progress in the zones and points, passing and implementing the
amnesty law and other peace legislation, reaching agreement on crop substitution
and designing development programmes in rural areas.
Electoral matters
14. On 17 January, President Santos established the special electoral mission
envisaged in the political participation chapter of the peace agreement, in order to
enhance autonomy and independence in the organization of elections, and requested
it to present its recommendations as soon as possible.

17-04472

3/16

S/2017/252

Reintegration
15. A national reintegration council was formally established on 2 December
2016, bringing together Government officials and representatives of FARC -EP to
address the political and socioeconomic reintegration of FARC-EP members. The
council has discussed a workplan and is considering the modalities for FARC-EP
reincorporation into civilian life. During the reporting period, it focused its attention
on the situation of children in the ranks of FARC -EP.
16. On 26 January, the national reintegration council activated the protocol on the
separation of children upon entry of FARC-EP forces into zones and points, and
adopted guidelines for a special reintegration programme for children separated
from FARC-EP. The issuance of those procedures followed a period of incr easingly
vocal appeals from the Government and civil society for FARC -EP to comply with
the commitments it had made on 15 May 2016 to separate children from its ranks.
As decided by the council, children arriving with FARC -EP to the zones and points
are transported by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
accompanied by two civil society representatives, to transitional accommodations,
where the United Nations Children’s Fund, with the support of the International
Organization for Migration and in collaboration with the Office of the Presidential
Adviser on Human Rights, initiates the restitution of their rights. The
implementation of the programme began on 3 March. As agreed by the parties,
ICRC is responsible for reporting on this issue. ICRC reported on the reception of
the first groups of children on 4, 10 and 15 March.
Security guarantees
17. On 3 February, President Santos signed a decree setting up the national
commission on security guarantees to design and monitor public and crimi nal policy
related to the dismantlement of criminal organizations. The commission is chaired
by President Santos and includes the Ministers of the Interior, Defence and Justice,
the Attorney-General, the Ombudsman, the Inspector General and the Director of a
dedicated special unit of the Office of the Attorney -General. It also includes
representatives of human rights non-governmental organizations and experts. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in
Colombia was invited to participate. On 23 February, President Santos formally
established the commission in Cauca department, one of the departments most
affected by violence. This body seeks to address the actions of groups responsible
for homicides and/or massacres targeting individuals involved in the
implementation of the agreements and the construction of peace. This includes
organizations termed as successors of former paramilitary groups and their support
networks. As noted in paragraph 24 of the present report, the p ersistence of attacks
against community leaders and human rights defenders in conflict -affected areas has
been a prominent source of concern, including owing to its implications with regard
to the upcoming reintegration of FARC-EP.
Participation
18. On 31 January, the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification Commission
established a high-level consultative entity to ensure coordination between the
parties and civil society organizations representing ethnic groups. In addition, a

4/16

17-04472

S/2017/252

total of six women’s organizations will participate in discussions with the
Commission, in order to guarantee that a gender approach is maintained in the
implementation of the peace agreement.
Political context
19. Implementation of the peace agreement has been unfolding in a political
environment increasingly marked by the next general elections, which will take
place in May 2018. All Government officials who intend to participate in next year ’s
electoral contest are expected to resign from their positions. The current Vice President will be succeeded by General Oscar Naranjo, the former Director of the
National Police and one of the Government’s plenipotentiary negotiators in the
Havana peace talks.
20. In mid-January, at a meeting of its Central Command held in the Llanos of the
Yarí region of Meta department, FARC-EP leadership reaffirmed its commitment to
transform into a political party and stated its intention to hold a “foundational
congress” at the end of May. FARC-EP leader Rodrigo Londoño (also known as
Timoleón Jímenez or Timochenko) also indicated that the group did not intend to
field a presidential candidate in the 2018 election, but rather it aimed to promote
national consensus around a candidate guaranteeing continuity in the
implementation of the peace agreement.
21. During the reporting period, President Santos reiterated his call for an
inclusive political compact on the implementation of the peace agreement.
However, leaders of political parties who opposed the terms of the peace agreement
during the plebiscite of 2 October 2016 have expressed their intention to review
aspects of the agreement if elected to office in 2018.
Security context
22. Confirming the commitment of the Government and FARC -EP to the
definitive end to their conflict, the bilateral ceasefire and cessation of hostilities
between the Government and FARC-EP held and no casualties were registered
during the reporting period.
23. At the same time, concern continued to be expressed over the presence and
actions of non-State armed groups, including in areas of former deployment of
FARC-EP. These include the National Liberation Army (ELN) guerrilla group,
successors of former paramilitary groups such as Clan del Golfo, Popular Liberation
Army (EPL) and other groups linked to organized crime, and in particular a variety
of groups operating at the local level that vie for the control of illegal mining, drugs
and extortion activities.
24. Civil society organizations have denounced the presence of these non -State
armed groups, which they hold responsible for a number of attacks and acts of
intimidation against communities and their leaders. Threatening leaflets have been
circulating in several departments, including close to zones and points where
FARC-EP are concentrated, calling for the assassination of community leaders and
human rights defenders. There has been particular concern over attacks against and
intimidation of community leaders and human rights defenders. The Ombudsman
has called for improvement in protection measures. OHCHR has to date verified 60
cases of killings of human rights defenders in 2016. Civil society organizations have

17-04472

5/16

S/2017/252

reported higher figures that include the killing of a wider category of community
leaders. According to all sources, this worrisome trend has continued in the first
months of 2017.
25. The Government has taken measures aimed at preventing other armed groups
from developing a foothold in zones vacated by FARC -EP, focused initially on 160
municipalities. At the inauguration of the commission on security guarantees on
23 February, President Santos strongly condemned all attacks against community
leaders, and committed in particular not to allow the repetition of such tragedies as
those that befell Unión Patriótica, the party established by FARC -EP, whose
membership was decimated in the 1980s and 1990s. By virtue of its high-level and
multidimensional composition, the commission would appear to be ideally
positioned to ensure that all of the responsible State entities work effectively
together to combat violence and to ensure cooperation with civil society. This is not
a short-term endeavour, but it is hoped that the work of the commission will soon
have an impact on reducing levels of violence, in particular in conflict areas.
26. An additional concern has been the desertion of a number of FARC-EP
members, although the phenomenon appears limited in scope. Figures vary in the
range of 2 to 5 per cent of combatants, primarily in areas of the south -east and the
Pacific coast. There have been frequent reports that FARC-EP members are being
enticed to desert, in particular by criminal organizations involved in drug trafficking.
27. In a long hoped-for development, the formal phase of peace talks between the
Government of Colombia and ELN, the country’s second largest guerrilla group,
began in Quito on 7 February, following a number of postponements. The beginning
of the talks followed the release by ELN on 2 February of a hostage held since early
2016. However, violence resulting from the ongoing conflict between ELN and the
Government of Colombia persisted, as illustrated by the attack claimed by ELN on
19 February, when a bomb in Bogotá killed 1 policeman and injured 26 persons,
mostly policemen.

III. Mission tasks
28. The Mission serves as coordinator of the tripartite Monitoring and Verific ation
Mechanism, which worked intensely during the reporting period. The Government,
FARC-EP and the Mission have been collaborating more effectively at the national,
regional and local levels. In its coordination role, the Mission has been instrumental
in facilitating consensus on the Mechanism’s monitoring and verification activities.
The Mechanism demonstrated its value through its successful coordination and
accompaniment of the movements of FARC-EP members to zones and points, the
verification of compliance with protocols, the investigation of incidents and the
recommendation of remedial action when appropriate. Some matters relating to
the verification of the ceasefire and the process of the laying down of arms were
affected by the slow pace of construction of FARC-EP camps. Those were referred to
the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification Commission, given the need for political level decisions. Recent discrepancies in the parties’ views with respect to the state of
progress in the preparation of zones and FARC-EP camps pointed to the need to
reinforce joint assessments carried out within the Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism.

6/16

17-04472

S/2017/252

Ceasefire and cessation of hostilities
Monitoring of movements
29. According to the timeline established in the peace agreement, movement of
FARC-EP to the zones and points was to be achieved by the end of December, 30
days after the entry into force of the agreement. However, on 28 December, taking
into account the status of the zones and points, the Follow -up, Promotion and
Verification Commission agreed that FARC-EP would remain in temporary
pre-grouping points near those areas, and that those FARC -EP units in locations
distant from zones and points would continue their movement toward them.
30. On 5 January, President Santos, during a visit to the local temporary site in
Mesetas (Meta department), expressed the commitment of the Government to
overcoming delays in the construction of FARC-EP camps. Subsequently, an
accelerated effort to address logistical shortcomings was made by the Government,
in coordination with FARC-EP and the Mission. It was agreed that the Government
would take responsibility for camp access and ground preparation, the provision of
water, power and sanitation and the construction of common areas. The camps’
living areas were to be built by members of FARC -EP with the material provided by
the Government.
31. On 17 January, the Government and the leadership of FARC -EP agreed that,
regardless of the status of camp construction, movement of FARC -EP units to the
zones would be completed by the end of January.
32. From 28 January to 18 February, the tripartite Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism undertook a major operation to accompany and monitor the final
movement of FARC-EP guerrillas to zones and points.
33. An operations centre to plan and monitor the movements was established at
the headquarters of the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism in Bogotá. The
centre brought together the Mechanism and office of the High Commissioner for
Peace, as well as military and police forces, including the Strategic Transition
Command and the Police Unit for Peacebuilding. Such an integrated structure was
required to provide the logistical support and security to the movements.
34. Overall, 36 movements toward the zones and points were carried out in 14
departments. That involved compliance with ceasefire regulations, the establishment
of routes for movements, effective coordination and communication and security
measures for the transport of arms. The Monitoring and Verification Mechanism
monitored, coordinated and accompanied FARC-EP movements, while the
Government supplied logistics, security and means of transport.
35. By 18 February, some 6,900 members of FARC-EP had gathered in the 26
zones and points. Of that number, approximately 1,179 were women, many of them
pregnant or with young children. Remarkably, that complex movement of thousands
of armed members of FARC-EP was carried out with hardly an incident.
36. The parties agreed on 17 January that FARC-EP militia members would enter
zones and points temporarily to undergo procedures for their reintegration into
civilian life. Most militia members, however, are not expected to remain in zones
and points.

17-04472

7/16

S/2017/252

Investigation of incidents
37. During the reporting period, the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism
received 81 requests for the investigation of incidents. Of those, 19 were found to
be irrelevant to the mandate of the Mechanism, while 14 could not be verified.
During the reporting period, the Mechanism verified seven compliance failures,
eight minor violations and two serious violations of the ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities protocols. A serious violation took place on 10 January, near San Vicente
del Caguán (Caquetá department), when FARC-EP forces attacked a group of
deserters, causing the death of one. Investigations are also ongoing into a case of
alleged sexual abuse of a girl by a member of the Colombian armed forces.
38. The most frequent incidents concerned the exit of FARC -EP members from
camps without proper coordination with the Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism, the entry of Colombian public security forces to areas near FARC -EP
camps and the conduct of alleged political proselytism by FARC -EP members
during movements outside of zones and points.
39. The Monitoring and Verification Mechanism conducted routine activities such
as accompanying FARC-EP in movements other than those to zones and points,
monitoring the security layout for the protection of FARC-EP, conducting technical
visits to zones and points, accompanying high-level visits to the Mechanism’s local
headquarters, including by foreign Government representatives, monitoring
temporary pre-grouping points and monitoring and assisting in medical evacuations.
40. Social tensions and the mobilization of communities have in some cases
affected the work of the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism. The movement of
FARC-EP forces to Caño Indio (Norte de Santander department) was interrupted
from 9 to 14 February, owing to protests by local communities in La Gabarra
voicing concern about the security situation in the region and the alleged presence
of armed groups. In La Variante, Tumaco (Nariño department), starting on
21 February members of the community demonstrated intermittently in front of the
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism local site, affecting its work.
Demonstrations and roadblocks near the zone of El Carrizal, Remedios (Antioquia
department) have impeded access to the Mechanism local headquarters, with l ocal
communities protesting recent public security operations against illegal mining.
Similarly, in Filipinas, Arauquita (Arauca department) local farmers blocked roads,
claiming they had been damaged by efforts to prepare the zone of Filipinas.
Monitoring of the provision of logistics
41. Monitoring and verification of logistical support activities conducted by the
Government to address the needs of FARC-EP members resumed. As noted in my
previous report, FARC-EP had decided to suspend Government-provided supplies,
arguing that food had been delivered in poor condition and that the authorities were
not complying with the commitment to use local suppliers. On 17 January, the
parties decided to resume Government supplies and asked that their quali ty and
local origin be monitored by the Mechanism.
42. A marked improvement in compliance with commitments and the quality of
supplies was observed as the Mechanism offered recommendations to address
shortcomings. Nonetheless, the Mechanism found a number of deficiencies that

8/16

17-04472

S/2017/252

remain to be addressed. These include discrepancies between the articles requested
and provided and the provision of an insufficient quantity of certain goods, the
insufficient supply of infant formula and other goods for infants, the need for
equipment to ensure refrigeration of perishable goods in some areas and the need to
guarantee local supplies in accordance with agreements reached by the parties.
43. On 25 January, the Colombian Minister of Health indicated that 6,247
members of FARC-EP had been registered with the health system. In addition, the
Government provided medical brigades to offer assistance in temporary
pre-grouping points and urgent medical treatment. During the movements toward
zones and points, medical assistance was provided to 22 persons, including 11
pregnant women, 5 children and 6 adults.
44. Despite improvements made, there is an urgent need to establish field clinics
in the zones. The presence of more than 60 pregnant and nursing FARC -EP
members underscores the importance of medical attention, and FARC-EP has voiced
complaints regarding the unavailability of such care. The clinics are also intended to
provide medical services to local communities and personnel of the Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism. According to the Government, the procurement process is
ongoing. In the meantime, the Government has deployed “medical brigades”,
consisting of medical personnel who remain in a specific area for a few days, to the
zones and points, in order to ensure that health care is provided until the clinics are
established. A number of civil society initiatives have sought to support the
construction of FARC-EP camps and improve conditions therein, including
providing assistance to pregnant and nursing FARC -EP members.
45. The Mechanism has been monitoring the status of completion of FARC -EP
camps in the zones and points, and reported its latest findings in its report of
14 March. It has measured progress made in percentage terms to provide a general
idea of the preparation process. Phase I, comprising identification and renting of
land, is almost completed, with renting of additional land for a second camp in one
of the zones still pending. Phase II includes ground preparation, the provision of
water, power and sanitation and the construction of common areas. Approximately
17 zones were between 10 per cent and 50 per cent ready and 9 were over 50 per
cent ready. Phase III includes the delivery of material and the building of
accommodation. Approximately 25 zones were between 10 per cent and 50 per cent
completed, and 1 was more than 50 per cent completed.
Liaison and outreach
46. The Monitoring and Verification Mechanism has continued holding regular
meetings with civil society organizations, including women ’s groups, to share
information on the situation in areas where zones and points are located and to
listen to community concerns regarding the process. Meetings were also held with
departmental and local level authorities. The Mechanism established a
communications strategy implemented from Bogotá, through its eight regional
offices and its presence at the local level. Specific efforts have been directed
towards highlighting the work of women as part of the Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism. The Mechanism, in collaboration with the United Nations Mission, has
trained over 140 journalists in one national, two regional and one local workshop on

17-04472

9/16

S/2017/252

communications to enhance understanding of the ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities and the process of the laying down of arms.
47. On 16 March, the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism initiated workshops
at its regional offices with the aim of addressing, among other issues, potential
gender concerns that may arise in the context of monitoring activities, such as
reports of gender-based violence. The workshops will include the participation of
personnel based in local sites from the three components of the Mechanism.
Laying down of arms
48. A major milestone was achieved with the beginning of the process of t he
laying down of arms on 1 March, when the Mission initiated the registration of arms
in the FARC-EP camps. On 11 March, the Mission received the arms of the 140
FARC-EP members who are part of the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism, to
be followed, in short order, by the arms of FARC-EP members who have been
designated to promote peace-related activities. In addition, the Mission initiated, in
coordination with FARC-EP, planning for the verification of the destruction of
unstable FARC-EP armament located in caches.
49. While those steps represent a tangible start to the process of the laying down
of arms, the timeline set out in the peace agreement specified that by 1 March
(D+90) FARC-EP was to have delivered 30 per cent of its members’ arms to the
Mission, followed by the storing of remaining arms in two subsequent tranches.
FARC-EP has stressed its readiness to take those steps as greater progress is made in
parallel with regard to the logistics of the zones and the implementation of specific
commitments that are the responsibility of the Government, including the legal and
security guarantees for FARC-EP members and the implementation of plans for
socioeconomic reintegration as the process of the laying down of arms comes to a
conclusion. Notwithstanding this somewhat more complex dynamic of interlocking
commitments, which was the subject of an exchange of letters and subsequent
discussion between my Special Representative and the parties, both the Government
and FARC-EP have reaffirmed their commitment to completing the process of the
laying down of arms within the 180-day time frame established in the peace
agreement.
50. The status of camp construction has influenced the initiation of laying down of
arms activities. Under the terms of the peace agreement, the laying down of arms
was to take place at designated United Nations sites located inside FARC -EP camps
within the zones and points. As those camps are not expected to be completed until
the end of March or possibly later, FARC-EP members find themselves in temporary
camps that are in close proximity but may not coincide with the exact location of
the final camps.
51. Pending the completion of the designated United Nations sites within the final
FARC-EP camps, the Mission has adopted measures to enable the laying down of
arms to begin in the temporary FARC-EP camps. Observers deployed to FARC-EP
temporary camps have set up rudimentary team sites and stored weapons in easily
transportable reinforced metallic storage boxes, capable of holding up t o 100 small
arms each. The boxes are monitored through the constant presence of at least two
United Nations observers. All permanent designated United Nations sites, including
larger containers to store arms, are expected to be ready in the coming weeks.

10/16

17-04472

S/2017/252

52. According to the timeline established by the peace agreement, unstable
explosive material contained in weapons caches should have been destroyed by
30 January (D+60). This ambitious timeline could not be observed owing to delays
in the movement of FARC-EP members to zones and points. On 28 February,
FARC-EP agreed to inform the United Nations of the location of said caches, and
the Mission is in the process of deploying 60 observers to verify the extraction of
arms contained in weapons caches, as well as the destruction of unstable explosive
material, in coordination with FARC-EP. In early January, the Mission verified the
location and transport of a light weapons cache in Caloto to Monte Redondo,
Corinto (Cauca department). The upcoming monitoring and observation of the
destruction of weapons caches will be a major undertaking, owing in particular to
the remoteness and difficulty of access of most caches.
53. The United Nations Department of Safety and Security in Bogotá and the
security officers at the regional and local levels are involved in the planning of
operations related to the laying down of arms and the destruction of unstable
FARC-EP armaments located in caches. It was agreed that, following the security
risk management assessment of the overall process of laying down of arms, specific
security risk management assessments will be prepared for each local operation of
destruction of unstable armament and explosives.
Substantive coordination functions
54. The substantive coordination staff of the Mission continued to engage with
national, departmental and local authorities and civil society organizations to
exchange information on the peace process and the implementation of the mandate
of the Mission.
55. At the national level, the Mission holds regular meetings with the diplomatic
community, political leaders, civil society organizations, churches, the human rights
community, indigenous organizations, women associations and platforms of
non-governmental groups. Those encounters allowed the Mission to engage with
key stakeholders and brief on the implementation of its mandate. They also
provided an opportunity to collect perspectives on challenges and potential risks
facing the peace process, particularly the ceasefire and the laying down of arms.
Given the broad array of active and influential social and political actors in
Colombian society, such exchanges are essential to the work, acceptance and broad
legitimacy of the Mission; they also contribute to inform public opinion on the
dynamics of the process. Such interactions are particularly important, considering
the reservations of some sectors of the public regarding the peace process. Regular
meetings with civil society platforms bringing together women ’s organizations and
ethnic groups have brought to the light their desire to participate and be consulted
throughout the process of implementation of the peace agreement. Human rights
groups have highlighted the aforementioned security situation and threats facing
community leaders and human rights defenders.
56. A productive relationship continues with the United Nations country team at
all levels. The Mission participates regularly in the country team meetings, both at
headquarters in Bogotá and at the regional level, providing updates and e xploring
ways to further expand mutual cooperation. As an example, the Mission cooperated
with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes to develop local assessments

17-04472

11/16

S/2017/252

for targeted quick impact projects in municipalities housing zones and points. To
that end, the Mission provided personnel to participate in inter -agency assessment
visits to zones and points during the months of February and March. The Colombian
Agency for Territorial Renovation, under the Office of the Presidential Adviser on
Post-Conflict, was a key participant in this effort.

IV. Mission set up and structures
57. During the reporting period, the Mission moved quickly to reach full capacity.
It is currently fully operational at its national headquarters in Bogotá and in eight
regional offices and one subregional office in Bogotá, which began its activities on
17 January. Bucaramanga operated from temporary premises until 25 January, when
a permanent office became operational. The same applied to the Quibdó regional
office, which received permanent premises on 12 January. The Medellín regional
office continues to operate from temporary premises, although transfer to the final
premises is expected shortly.

A.

Observers
58. During the reporting period, the Mission reached the authorized ceiling of 450
observers from 19 countries, of whom 58 were women (13 per cent).
59. Currently, observers of the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism are
deployed in 23 temporary local headquarters and 3 mobile temporary local teams —
Agua Bonita (Caquetá department), Caño Indio (Norte de Santander department)
and El Gallo (Córdoba department) — thereby covering all zones and points.
60. There was little progress in the expansion and improvement of the local
headquarters of the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism, despite commitments of
the authorities to do so by the end of January. As a result, the Mission was unable to
deploy its full contingent of observers to local headquarters, as planned; some 200
observers (as well as 20 United Nations Volunteers and 8 professional civilian staff)
remained either at Mission headquarters in Bogotá or in the Mission ’s eight regional
offices pending the availability of space at local headquarters. In addition, security
and infrastructure improvements that had been foreseen for local headquarters (such
as the building of perimeter fencing and the installation of security lighting) are yet to
be made. During the meeting of my Special Representative with the Follow -up,
Promotion and Verification Commission on 21 February, the Government indicated
that it would proceed with improvements to local headquarters. On 9 March, the
Government signed an agreement with contractors to improve local sites.

B.

Coordination and substantive
61. My Deputy Special Representative for Colombia, Tania Patriota of Brazil,
arrived at the Mission on 3 February.

12/16

17-04472

S/2017/252

62. The Mission has made significant progress in the staffing of its eight regional
offices. All regional offices are staffed with heads of office, liaison office rs, national
information officers and security officers.
63. The civilian staff deployed to local headquarters work closely with, and as an
integral part of, the observer component. A determined effort was undertaken to
recruit women to these positions as a means to ensure greater gender parity. Of the
17 professional posts at the local level and 30 United Nations Volunteers currently
on board, 36 are women (76 per cent). As noted, there has been a delay in the
deployment of substantive-section observers, owing to logistical delays in the
expansion of the local headquarters. Those who have arrived at the Mission,
following training, have been deployed to their corresponding regional offices,
where they have been fully engaged in the work of regional teams an d travel
frequently to their local headquarters to interact as much as possible with members
of the local tripartite Mechanism teams.

C.

Mission support
64. The Mission continued to rely on existing United Nations capacity in Colombia
to facilitate administrative, logistical and financial services, primarily through the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The letter of assist for medical
services, which provides for evacuation and medical coverage for Mission observers
and camp health facilities, was signed with the Government of Colombia on 26
January 2017. The remaining letters of assist setting out the scope and description of
logistical and administrative support to be provided by the Government to the
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism and the Mission are approaching finalization.
65. As authorized in Security Council resolution 2307 (2016), costs relating to
the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism are to be shared equally with the
Government. Reimbursement for an initial submission of expenses by the
Government took place on 28 February, and the second batch of Government invoices
are now being processed for reimbursement.
66. In accordance with these cost-sharing provisions, the Government has, to date,
provided 122 of a total of 158 vehicles required for the Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism and the Mission. The remaining vehicles will continue to be deployed in
accordance with the opening of the local headquarters. The Mission has contracted
and deployed two helicopters to provide logistics support, movements and regularly
scheduled and special flights for the local zones and points. This capability will
provide crucial support for the process of the laying down of arms. For mobile and
static communications in remote regions, the Government of Colombia has
requested the Mission to assume full responsibility for the provision of telephone,
radio and Internet connectivity services throughout the Mission, including the
regional offices and local zones and points. All regional offices now have enhanced
radio connectivity and high frequency, VHF and satellite telephones. With UNDP
support, the Mission has rapidly established contracts for the provision of the full
range of information technology and communications services to local sites. These
contracts are now under implementation.
67. As at 16 March, of the 111 authorized international civilian staff, 88 were
already serving with the Mission, 4 were scheduled to arrive and 23 wer e in the

17-04472

13/16

S/2017/252

process of being hired. Of the total 211 civilian staff posts authorized for the
Mission, 148 have been recruited and are either serving with the Mission or have
scheduled arrival dates. Most of the 79 remaining posts still under recruitment are in
the national staff category. Of the civilian staff within the Mission, 47 per cent are
women.

D.

Safety and security of United Nations personnel
68. The Government of Colombia, specifically the National Police of Colombia,
continues to provide security to the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism and the
Mission. The Department of Safety and Security provides ongoing leadership and
operational support and advice on the policies and procedures of the United Nations
security management system, in close cooperation and liaison with the Colombian
authorities.
69. The security management system covers the United Nations country team and
the Mission in an integrated and unified security structure, under the responsibility
of the Designated Official, in line with the provisions of the memorandum of the
Secretary-General dated 28 December 2016 regarding the authority of the
Department of Safety and Security over security personnel and assets of
peacekeeping and special political missions. The Chief Security Adviser/Chief
Security Officer reports and serves as the principal adviser on safety and security to
the Designated Official. In addition, the Chief Security Adviser/Chief Security
Officer provides advice to the Special Representative of the Secretary -General on
all matters related to safety and security regarding the Mission.
70. All regional offices include a regional security officer. The regional security
officers are responsible for guaranteeing compliance with the policies and
procedures of the United Nations security management system within their area.
Under the coordination and technical guidance of the respective field security
coordination officers, the regional security officers advise the heads of regional
offices and the Chief of Regional Observers on security issues. Mission security
focal points have been designated in each zone and point, in order to liaise and
coordinate with the regional security officers. Field security coordination officers
and regional security officers participated in the monitoring of the movement of
FARC-EP to zones and points.
71. As a result of the security risk management developed for the Mission, the
predicted levels of risk in relation to most identified threats (attack by spoilers,
crossfire and violent demonstrations) vary between low and medium. From the point
of view of security, the activities planned for the Mission are viable insofar as the
relevant risk management measures are fully implemented. The threat of landmines
continues to pose considerable risk in some areas.

E.

Conduct and discipline
72. The Mission is strongly committed to preventing acts of sexual exploitation
and abuse and any misconduct involving its personnel. Following a risk analysis at
the Mission headquarters and regional offices, a variety of preventive measures

14/16

17-04472

S/2017/252

have been put in place, including a conduct and discipline field visit programme
undertaken by the Conduct and Discipline Team to offices in the Mission area of
responsibility. Regular meetings with women’s organizations at the national and
local levels and close contact with communities remain important tools of
prevention. An immediate response team was established, as was a roster composed
of selected staff members and international observers to respond in a timely and
appropriate manner to any suspected case.
73. In the light of the multiple challenges posed by the mandate of the Mission and
the potential impact on the work environment of any case of misconduct, a plan to
train all Mission personnel on prohibited conduct was developed to ensure a broad
knowledge by personnel of their obligations, including maintaining strict standards of
impartiality and respect for the population, as well as an environment free of
discrimination, harassment, including sexual harassment, and abuse of authority.
74. The Mission established a conduct and discipline task force that is led by my
Special Representative and is composed of senior Mission staff, to review and
discuss preventive measures, identify gaps and decide on further measu res regarding
conduct and discipline. In that regard, and following recommendations from the task
force, a conduct and discipline sub-working group composed of different Mission
components developed and reviewed training materials and the welfare policy to
ensure that misconduct does not take place. Furthermore, posters and calendars
underscoring the zero-tolerance policy and informing of reporting lines have been
disseminated to all offices, Mission headquarters and regional offices.

V. Observations
75. Colombia’s remarkable journey towards peace has continued. The images
witnessed in February of thousands of FARC-EP members making their final march
into the zones where they will begin their reintegration into civilian life and
FARC-EP will transform into a political organization were images of peace that
many Colombians thought they would never see. These historic steps forward, as
part of a comprehensive peace agreement, are testament to the resilience of the
peace process and the commitment of the parties.
76. We should not lose sight of this momentous progress, even as the peace process
now squarely confronts the challenges of implementation. In this undertaking it faces
hurdles that are not unusual in peace implementation, in particular where the scope of
the tasks envisaged in the peace agreement stretches resources and capacities under
demanding time constraints. As I observed in my last report to the Council
(S/2016/1095), the transition from war to peace in Colombia faces unique difficulties,
including a pattern of insecurity in rural areas long affected by the conflict, with
strong linkages to a thriving illicit economy. The violence against human rights
defenders is of serious concern. Moreover, the first steps towards implementation
coincide with the opening phase of campaigning for general elections due to be held
in May 2018, which carries its own set of complications.
77. In dealing with the complexities in Colombia, the primary asset of the pea ce
process remains the determination on the part of the leadership of the Government
of Colombia and FARC-EP to achieve the goal of a sustainable peace, including the
transition of FARC-EP into a political organization, the reintegration of its members

17-04472

15/16

S/2017/252

and the provision of peace dividends to the people and areas most in need of
security, stability and development. That determination has not been diminished by
the challenges encountered since the signing of the peace agreement in November
2016, as illustrated in particular by the full respect for the ceasefire by both parties
throughout the reporting period. In that respect, the commitment of Colombian
security forces — the army and police — to the process will remain a foundation for
the consolidation of peace.
78. There are other factors of strength. In its contacts with the diverse sectors of
Colombian society — the Church, political parties, the private sector, civil society
organizations, women’s groups, ethnic organizations and local communities — the
Mission has found strong support for efforts to ensure the sustainability of the peace
process. There is no debate about the need to end definitively a conflict that has
spanned generations, even if, for some, doubts, misgivings and objections to parts of
the peace agreement remain. The peace process has genuine roots in this broad
national consensus across political divides.
79. These assets notwithstanding, there are matters that the United Nations, in
concurrence with the Government of Colombia and FARC -EP, deems urgent,
particularly given the dynamic process of the laying down of arms and the
transformation of FARC-EP into a political party, both of which are to be completed
within the next three months. Several sensitive issues have been mentioned in this
report, ranging from quicker implementation of the amnesty law to the requirement
of health care in the zones. Others will become increasingly sensitive as time goes
by, including security guarantees and the prospects for productive livelihood
following the laying down of arms. Increasingly, the process will also be judged
throughout the most affected areas by the delivery of concrete peace dividends.
80. Much of the responsibility for advancing the implementation of the peace
agreement rests with the Government at the national, departmental and local levels.
However, the private sector and civil society can also bring their resources and
ingenuity to bear. The international community has its contribution to make to this
common effort, and rightly sees in the Colombian peace process a much-needed
message of encouragement that deadly conflict can be resolved by peaceful means.
81. I would like to thank once again the Member States, principally but not
exclusively, from the Community of Latin American and Ca ribbean States for their
crucial contributions of observers to the Mission. The Mission reaching its full
deployment level, with an exemplary percentage of female observers, was only
possible thanks to the responsiveness of contributing countries. I would also like to
acknowledge the continuing support of the guarantor nations, Cuba and Norway,
and the accompanying nations, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Chile.
82. Lastly, I wish to commend my Special Representative, Jean Arnault, and his
team for their serious and determined efforts to implement the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Colombia, as well as the close cooperation with the
United Nations country team, which has its own important roles to play in
facilitating the implementation of the peace agreement. The United Nations will
continue to provide its utmost support to a peace process that is owned and led by
the Colombian parties and the Colombian people.

16/16

17-04472
