40

- - - - · - · · ----- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

Emphasizing the obligation of States, under customary
international law, not to intervene in the interna) alfairs of
other States,
l. Urgently calls for full and immediate compliance
with the Judgment of the International Court of Justice of
27 June 1986 in the case of "Military and Paramilitary
Activities in and against Nicaragua" in confarmity with
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the General
Assembly informed on the implementation of this resolution;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Judgment of the International Court of Justice of 27 June 1986 concerning
military and paramilitary activities in and against Nicaragua: need far immediate compliance".
68th plenary meeting
12 November 1987

42/19.

Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) 62

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Falkland Islands
(Malvinas) and having received the report of the Secretary-General, 63
Aware of the interest of the international community in
the peaceful and definitive settlement by the Governments
of Argentina and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland of ali their dilferences, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
Taking note of the interest repeatedly expressed by both
parties in normalizing their relations,
Convinced that such purpose would be facilitated by a
global negotiation between both Governments that will allow them to rebuild mutual confidence on a salid basis and
to resolve the pending problems, including all aspects on
the future of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
1. Reiterates its request to the Governments of Argenntina and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to initiate negotiations with a view to
finding the means to resolve peacefully and definitively the
problems pending between both countries, including ali
aspects on the future of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
renewed mission of good offices in arder to assist the parties in complying with the request made in paragraph l
above, and to take the necessary measures to that end;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its farty-third session a report on the
progress made in the implementation of the present resolution;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
farty-third session the item entitled "Question ofthe Falkland Islands (Malvinas)".
72nd plenary meeting
17 November 1987

62 See also sect. I, f"ootnote 10, and sect. X.B.6, decision 42/410.
63 A/42/732.

42/20.

Law of the sea

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 37 /66 of 3 December 1982,
38/59 A of 14 December 1983, 39/73 of 13 December
1984, 40/63 of 10 December 1985 and 41/34 of 5 November 1986, regarding the law of the sea,
Recognizing that, as stated in the third preambular paragraph ofthe United Nations Convention on the Law ofthe
Sea, 48 the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated
and need to be considered as a whole,
Convinced that it is important to safeguard the unified
character of the Convention and related resolutions
adopted therewith and to refrain from any action to apply
their provisions selectively, in a manner inconsistent with
their object and purpose,
Emphasizing the need far States to ensure consistent application of the Convention, as well as the need far harmonization of national legislation with the provisions of
the Convention,
Considering that, in its resolution 2749 (XXV) of
17 December 1970, it proclaimed that the sea-bed and
ocean floor, and the subsoil thereof, beyond the limits of
national jurisdiction, as well as the resources of the area,
are the common heritage of mankind,
Recalling that the Convention provides the régime to be
applied to the Area and its resources,
Emphasizing that no State should undermine the Convention and related resolutions of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea,
Recognizing also the need far co-operation in the early
and elfective implementation by the Preparatory Commission far the International Sea-Bed Authority and far the
International Tribunal far the Law of the Sea of resolution II of the Third United Nations Conference on the
Law of the Sea, 64
Noting with satisfaction the progress made in the work of
the Preparatory Commission since its inception, including
the registration oflndia as a pioneer investor in the mining
of the sea-bed and ocean floor and subsoil thereof, beyond
the limits of national jurisdiction,
Noting the decision of the Preparatory Commission to
convene its General Committee from 7 to 18 December
1987 for the purpose of considering the applications of
France, Japan and the Union ofSoviet Socialist Republics
for registration as pioneer investors,
Noting also that the Preparatory Commission has decided to hold its sixth regular session at Kingston from
14 March to 8 April 1988 and that it will decide upon the
summer meeting far 1988 during its next session, 65
Noting further the increasing needs of countries, especially developing countries, far infarmation, advice and
assistance in the implementation of the Convention and in
their developmental process far the full realization of the
benefits of the comprehensive legal régime established by
the Convention,
Recognizing that the Convention encompasses ali uses
and resources of the sea and that ali related activities
within the United Nations system need to be implemented
in a manner consistent with it,

64 Official Records of 1he Third United Nations Conference on the Law
ofthe Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3),
document A/CONF.62/121, annex J.
b\ See A/42/688, para. 132.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

-----------------Taking note of activities carried out in 1987 under the
major programme on marine atfairs, set forth in chapter 25 of the medium-term plan for the period 1984-1989,
in accordance with the report of the Secretary-Generai, 66
as approved in General Assembly resolution 38/59 A, and
the report of the Secretary-General, 67

Recalling its approval of the financing of the expenses of
the Preparatory Commission from the regular budget of
the United Nations,
Taking special note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral prepared in pursuance of paragraph 13 of General Assembly resolution 41/34,67
l. Recalls the historie significance of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea as an important
contribution to the maintenance of peace, justice and progress for all peoples of the world;
2. Expresses its satisfaction at the increasing and overwhelming support for the Convention, as evidenced, inter alia, by the one hundred and fifty-nine signatures and
thirty-five of the sixty ratifications or accessions required
for entry into force of the Convention;
3. Calls upan all States that have not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the Convention at the earliest possible date to allow the etfective entry into force of
the new legal régime for the uses of the sea and its resources;
4. Calls upan all States to safeguard the unified character of the Convention and related resolutions adopted
therewith;
5. Also calls upan States to observe the provisions of
the Convention when enacting their national legislation;
6. Further calls upan States to desist from taking actions which undermine the Convention or defeat its object
and purpose;
1. Notes the progress being made by the Preparatory
Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and
for the International Tribunal for the Law ofthe Sea in all
areas of its work;
8. Expresses its satisfaction at the successful resolution
of conflicts of overlaps that had arisen in the claims of applicants for registration as pioneer investors and with
those of certain potential applicants under resolution II of
the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the
Sea;
9. Further expresses its satisfaction at the historie decision of the Preparatory Commission of 17 August 1987 to
register the first pioneer investor, namely India, and at the
decision of the Preparatory Commission to convene its
General Committee from 7 to 18 December 1987 for the
purpose of considering the applications of France, Japan
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics for registration as pioneer investors;
10. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for bis etforts in support of the Convention and for the effective execution of the major programme on marine affairs set forth in chapter 25 of the medium-term plan for
the period 1984-1989;
11. Further expresses its appreciation for the report of
the Secretary-General prepared in pursuance of General
Assembly resolution 41/34 and requests him to contmue
to carry out the activities outlined therein, as well as those
aimed at the strengthening of the legal régime of the sea,
special emphasis being placed on the work of the Prepara66 A/38/570 and Corr. l and Add. l and Add.1/Corr.1
67 A/ 42/688.

41

tory Commission, including the implementation ofresolution II of the Third United Nations Conference on the
Law of the Sea;
12. Calls upan the Secretary-General to continue to assist States in the implementation of the Convention and in
the development of a consistent and uniform approach to
the legal régime thereunder, as well as in their national,
subregional and regional etforts towards the full realization of the benefits therefrom and invites the organs and
organizations of the United Nations system to co-operate
and lend assistance in these endeavours;
13. Approves the decision of the Preparatory Commission to hold its sixth regular session at Kingston from
14 March to 8 April 1988 and notes that the Preparatory
Commission will decide upon the summer meeting for
1988 during its next session; 65
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on developments pertaining to the Convention and all related activities and on the implementation of the present resolution;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Law of the sea".
73rd plenary meeting
18 November 1987
42/21.

Application of the Republic of Nauru to become
a party to the Statute of the International Court
of Justice

Whereas the Government of Nauru, by a communication6 8 dated 21 August 1987 addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, has expressed the desire to learn the conditions
on which Nauru could become a party to the Statute of the
lnternational Court of Justice,
Whereas Article 93, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the
United Nations provides that a State which is nota Member ofthe United Nations may become a party to the Statute of the Court on conditions to be determined in each
case by the General Assembly upon the recommendation
of the Security Councíl,
Whereas the Security Cou11cil has adopted a rernmme11datio11 011 this matter, 69
The General Assembly
Determines, in pursua11ce of Article 93, paragraph 2, of
the Charter and upo11 the recomme11datio11 of the Security
Cou11cil, the co11ditio11s on which Nauru may become a
party to the Statute of the Internatio11al Court of Justice,
as follows:
"The Republic of Nauru will become a party to the
Statute 011 the date of the deposit with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations of an instrument, signed
011 behalf of the Government of the Republic of Nauru
and ratified as may be required by the constitutional law
of the Republic of Nauru, containing:
"(a) Acceptance of the provisions of the Statute of
the International Court of Justice;
"(b) Acceptance of ali the obligations of a Member
of the U11ited Natio11s under Article 94 of the Charter;
"(e) An undertaki11g to contribute to the expenses of
the Court such equitable amount as the General Assem-

68 See Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-second Year,
Suf¡Iement for Ju/y, August and September 1987, document S/19137.
See Officwl Records oj thc General Assembiy. Forty-second Session.
Annexcs, agenda ítem 144. document A/42/242.
