2. Que soient acceptees les recommandations suivantes du Comite d'experts relatives aux propositions
de la commission de l'Assemblee generale au sujet de
!'article 60 du reglement interieur provisoire du Conseil
de securite31 :
a) Refuser de substituer le mot "examine" au mot
·'decide";

2. That, as regards proposals made by the General
Assembly committee concerning rule 60 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, the
following recommendations of the Committee of
Experts 31 be accepted :
(a) That the change of the word "decide" to the
word "consider" in the first paragraph not be accepted;
(b) That the addition of two paragraphs as the
second and third paragraphs be accepted ;
(c) That the change of the word "recommendations"
from the plural to the singular be accepted ;
3. That the sub-committee of the Committee of
Experts be instructed to advise the General Assembly
committee that the proposed change in rule 114 and
the addition of a new rule 116 in the provisional rules
of procedure of the General Assembly are accepted.

b) Accepter d'ajouter deux paragraphes qui seraient
les deuxieme et troisieme de !'article ;
c) Mettre au singulier le mot "recommandation"
precedemment au pluriel [dans le texte anglaisl;
3. Que le sous-comite du Comite d'experts rec;oive
pour instructions de faire connaitre a la commission
de l'Assemblee generale que la modification proposee
pour !'article 114 et !'addition d'un article l lo nouveau au reglement interieur provisoire de l'Assemblee
generate sont acceptees.
Adoptee a la 197' seance

Adopted at the 197th meeting by 10 votes to none,
with J abstention (Australia).

par JO voix contre zero,
avec une abstention ( A 11stralie).

37 (1947). Resolution du 9 decembre 1947

37 (1947). Resolution of 9 December 1947
The Security Council
Decides to include in its rules of procedure the
following revised rules :

CHAPTER

X. -

Le C onseil de securite
Decide d'inclure dans son reglement interieur les
nouveaux articles suivants :

ADMISSION OF NEW MEMBERS

CHAPITRE

X. -

ADMISSION DE NOUVEAUX MEMBRES

"Rule 58

"Article 58

"Any State which desires to become a Member
of the United Nations shall submit an application
to the Secretary-General. This application shall
contain a declaration made in a formal instrument
that it accepts the obligations contained in the
Charter.
"Rule 59

"Tout Etat qui desire devenir Membre de l'Organisation presentc une demande au Secretaire general.
Cette demande doit contenir une declaration, faite
dans un instrument formel, par laquelle cet Etat
acccpte Ies obligations de la Charte.

[Text unchanged.]

[Texte sans changement.]

"Rule 60

"Article 60

"The Security Council shall decide whether in its
judgement the applicant is a peace-loving State and
is able and willing to carry out the obligations
contained in the Charter, and accordingly whether
to recommend the applicant State for membership.

"Le Conseil de securite decide si, a son jugcment,
l'Etat qui sollicite son admission est un Etat pacifique, capable de remplir les obligations de la Charte
et dispose a le faire et s'il convient, en consequence,
de recommander !'admission de cet Etat a l'Asscmblee generale.
"Si le Conseil de securite recommande !'admission
de l'Etat qui a presente la demande, il transmet a
l'Assemblee generale sa recommandation accompagnee d'un compte rendu complet des debats.
"Si le Conseil de securite ne recommande pas
!'admission de I'Etat qui a presente la demande ou
remet a plus tard l'examen de cettc demande, il
presente a l'Assemblee generate un rapport special
accompagne d'un compte rendu complet des debats.

"Article 5 9

"If the Security Council recommends the applicant State for membership, it shall forward to the
General Assembly the recommendation with a complete record of the discussion.
"If the Security Council does not recommend the
applicant State for membership or postpones the
consideration of the application, it shall submit a
special report to the General Assembly with a
complete record of the discussion.

25

"In order to ensure the consideration of its
recommendation at the next session of the General
Assembly following the receipt of the application,
the Security Council shall make its recommendation
not less than twenty-five days in advance of a
regular session of the General Assembly, nor less
than four days in advance of a special session.

"Le Conseil de securite presente sa recommandation vingt-cinq jours au moins avant le debut de
la session reguliere de l'Assemblee generale et quatre
jours au moins avant le debut d'une session extraordinaire, pour mettre l' Assemblee generale en
mesure de l'examiner lors de la plus proche session
qu'elle tient apres la reception de la demande
d'admission.

"In special circumstances, the Security Council
may decide to make a recommendation to the General Assembly concerning an application for membership subsequent to the expiration of the time limits
set forth in the preceding paragraph."

"Dans des circonstances speciales, le Conseil de
securite peut decider de faire une recommandation
a l'Assemblee generate concernant une demande
d'admission apres !'expiration des delais prescrits a
l'alinea precedent."

Adopted at
meeting.82

the

Adoptee a la 222• seancea2.

222nd

B.

B. VOTING PROCEDURE IN THE SECURITY COUNCIL

PROCtDURE DE VOTE AU CONSEIL DE StCURITt

Decisions

Decisions

At its 197th meeting, on 27 August 1947, the
Council decided to refer General Assembly resolution
40 (l) to the Committee of Experts for study and
report.

A sa 197• seance, le 27 aout 1947, le Conseil a
decide de renvoyer la resolution 40 (I) de l' Assemblee
generale au Comite d'experts pour examen et rapport.

At its 224th meeting, on 19 December 1947, the
Council decided that the letter dated 3 December 1947
from the Secretary-General to the President of the
Security Council transmitting General Assembly resolution 117 (ll) should be considered as received by
the Security Council.

A sa 224• seance, le 19 decembre 1947, le Conseil
a decide de declarer re\;ue la lettre, en date du 3
decembre 1947, adressee par le Secretaire general au
President du Conseil de securite, transmettant la resolution 117 (II).

a2 Ad0p1cJ without vote.

82

26

Le projet de resolution n'a pas ete mis aux voix.
