A /77/PV.80

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

80th plenary meeting

Thursday, 22 June 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/77/266 and
A/77/718)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.78)
The President: I would like to inform members
that, as mentioned in the letter from the President of
the General Assembly dated 21 June, we will first take
action on the draft resolution, followed by the debate on
the agenda item.
Statement by the President
The President: It is with a heavy heart that I open
our meeting this morning. Let me extend my sincere
condolences to all who have lost their loved ones in the
horrific attack that took place in Uganda on Saturday,
and by expressing my sympathy to the many families
living the unimaginable, still kept in the dark about the
fate of their children — killed or kidnapped. Let me be
clear. Targeting innocent children in the sanctuary of
their school is a most heinous and insidious act. It shows
the true intention of terrorism. And it is a war crime.
Terrorism is a destructive wildfire, fuelled by hatred.
It knows no borders and it takes thousands of innocent
lives every year, stopping at no one: school children,
infants, pregnant women, fathers and grandmothers.
Anyone can become a victim.

Whether domestic or transnational, terrorism should
have no place in today’s world. Terrorism, domestic
or transnational, thrives off conflict and instability,
marginalization, inequalities, discrimination, human
rights violations, lawlessness and poor governance.
Our unsustainable way of living will only increase that
pressure in the future. We have to look forward to many
more crisis situations across the globe.
We must ask ourselves, should we continue to bicker
over what constitutes terrorism or violent extremism,
to languish in details and remain blind to the bigger
picture? Or should we come together and channel all
our resources to fight terrorism in all its forms? Which
proactive, agile and innovative steps can we take, both
online and offline? How can we make our multilateral
response comprehensive, inclusive and effective? How
can we collaborate on solutions that strengthen respect
for human rights?
The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is a unique
instrument that carries truly transformative potential. It
provides the framework for action. It outlines the tools
at our disposal. What is needed now is the political and
moral will to act together. I would like to truly thank
the co-facilitators of the eighth review of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, Ambassador Robert Rae of
Canada and Ambassador Tarek Ladeb of Tunisia. They
have worked tirelessly to bring together all Member
States and other stakeholders to forge consensus on our
joint way forward, and they have done this despite many
challenges, as we know. They have worked to find the
common ground to achieve our shared goal — a world
without indiscriminate violence. I invite everyone to

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-18097 (E)

*2318097*

A/77/PV.80

join that consensus, to focus on what unites us and to
think of the countless victims and the many scarred
survivors of terrorism and of those across the globe
who look to this House for hope and action.
Let me emphasize my strong hope that our
8 billion shareholders can see the purpose of the work
we are doing here together. It is my wish that people
understand and acknowledge the merit of the debates
we are conducting. It is also my wish that they have a
good reason to recognize the progress Member States
achieved, having spent months of intense work to
reduce the danger of terrorism in this fragile world. Let
us remember that people outside Turtle Bay may not
be interested in some sophisticated references in long
resolutions we may produce. They simply want us to
act together to reduce the danger of terrorism. Our joint
message to them, to the world and to the perpetrators
must be that the United Nations stands together in the
face of terrorism and that it has been able to take a step
ahead. Terrorism is not only a war on people, but a war
on our minds. Let us not succumb to the division it
wields. Let us rise above it.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/77/L.78. In order to ensure the smooth conduct of
our proceedings today, delegations wishing to make
a statement in explanation of position are kindly
encouraged to do so in their statement to be delivered
in the debate.
Before giving the floor for explanations of position
before adoption, may I remind delegations that
explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Parihar (India): Today Member States are
well aware that terrorism is an existential threat
to international peace and security. It knows no
border, nationality or race and is a challenge that the
international community must combat collectively.
India has been at the forefront of the global fight against
terrorism. As a country that has itself been a victim of
State-sponsored cross-border terrorism for nearly three
decades, India is acutely aware of the social, economic
and human cost of terrorism.
My Minister for External Affairs, Mr. Subrahmanyam
Jaishankar, put an eight-point action plan for the
global fight against terrorism before the Member
States during his statement on 12 January 2021 (see
2/26

22/06/2023

S/2021/48, annex 5) at the ministerial meeting on the
twentieth anniversary of Security Council resolution
1373 (2001) and the establishment of the CounterTerrorism Committee. As the Chair of the CounterTerrorism Committee last year, India strove to bring
two principles into the counter-terrorism architecture
of the United Nations and into the debate on terrorism
at the United Nations. India hosted a special meeting
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee in Mumbai and
Delhi in October 2022. The Delhi Declaration that
was adopted then is a landmark document to deal with
the issue of countering the use of new and emerging
technologies for terrorist purposes, an issue that is
often of acute importance for several Member States.
In that context, my delegation has serious concerns
with respect to the fourth revision of draft resolution
A/77/L.78, which was circulated by the co-facilitators
under silence on 19 June. We had submitted to the
co-facilitators that deleting a factual reference to the
Delhi Declaration, which was unanimously adopted
by all Council members, was uncalled for on two
principled grounds. The first is on the grounds of
process. No consultation with Member States was
convened and the reference to an unanimously
approved Council document was removed in an opaque
and non-consultative manner by the co-facilitators. The
membership has not been made aware of the substantive
grounds on which the reference to the Delhi Declaration
was removed. That is uncalled for.
Secondly, the proceedings of the United Nations
High-Level Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism
Agencies of Member States a few days ago amply
demonstrated wide support for the Delhi Declaration,
which provides important policy pointers on the critical
challenges facing the counter-terrorism discourse
today. The Office of Counter-Terrorism, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and other
competent entities cited it as an example of the pathway
ahead. For us now to arbitrarily ignore the same and
pick and choose certain Council documents while
ignoring others is equally disturbing.
In view of our concerns, as outlined today, my
delegation is constrained to disassociate itself from
the draft resolution on the eighth review of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which has been submitted
for adoption at this meeting today.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position before adoption.
23-18097

22/06/2023

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.78, entitled “The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy: eighth review”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.78?
Draft resolution A/77/L.78 was adopted
(resolution 77/298).
The President: I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Robert Rae,
Permanent Representative of Canada to the United
Nations, and to His Excellency Mr. Tarek Ladeb,
Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United
Nations, the co-facilitators of the informal consultations,
who demonstrated great ability and patience in
guiding the discussions and complex negotiations on
resolution 77/298.
Before giving the floor for explanations of position
after the adoption, may I remind delegations that
explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Peñalver Portal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
For more than 60 years, the Cuban people have been
the victim of innumerable terrorist actions that, for
the most part, have been planned and organized from
the territory of the United States of America, with
the support, protection and financing of successive
Governments of that country. Because of those acts,
Cuba has paid a high cost in human lives and economic
losses, with incalculable suffering and damage caused
to the families, those affected and Cuban society in
general. Due to such actions, 3,478 people have died
and another 2,099 have been incapacitated.
Cuba’s conduct in the fight against terrorism
is irreproachable. It has never participated in the
organization, financing or execution of terrorist acts
against any country, nor has its territory been used or ever
will be used for that purpose. It has never supported and
will never support acts of international terrorism. Our
country is among the 19 international conventions related
to terrorism and has implemented measures to deal with
that scourge. Cuba complies with and will continue to
honour the commitments it has assumed in this matter.
The commitment of our country in the fight against
terrorism was elevated to constitutional status in 2019.
We strongly condemn all terrorist acts, methods
and practices in all their forms and manifestations by
whomever, against whomever and wherever they are

A/77/PV.80

perpetrated, whatever their motivations, including
those in which States are directly or indirectly
involved. We condemn the unilateral measures and
acts of certain Governments, such as the United States,
which claims the right to make lists of countries as a
means of political coercion. Such actions undermine
the central authority of the General Assembly in
the fight against terrorism and hinder international
cooperation in the matter. We strongly reject the
inclusion of Cuba on the list of the United States
Department of State of countries that allegedly
sponsor international terrorism. That designation is
slanderous, hypocritical and opportunistic. It is known
that these are baseless designations without authority
or international support, and that they are intended
to defame and coerce sovereign countries. We urge
the United States Government to revoke those absurd
and unjustified qualifications, which are the subject
of widespread international rejection. The United
Nations should speak out against such unilateral,
politically manipulated lists and certifications, which
are contrary to international law. Terrorism cannot be
eradicated if double standards, manipulation, political
opportunism and selectivity prevail when dealing
with it. It is unacceptable that some terrorist acts
are condemned while others are silenced, tolerated,
encouraged, justified or manipulated for political and
economic interests.
Our delegation remains concerned about the
improper use of information and communication
technologies to commit, incite, recruit, finance or plan
terrorist acts, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. Terrorism cannot be
linked to any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic
group. Its confrontation must be comprehensive with
direct actions that include prevention to eradicate its
root causes. We reaffirm the value of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the primary
responsibility of States to apply it in a transparent and
balanced manner across its four pillars. We actively
participated in the seventh review process of the
Strategy in order to achieve a balanced text that would
address the demands and concerns of all. We reiterate
our commitment to the adoption of a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism, which includes
State terrorism, and overcomes the existing legal gaps
and regulatory differences. We urge that negotiations
leading to that end be resumed without delay.

23-180973/26

A/77/PV.80

Finally, we highlight our firm position against
terrorism, which we have expressed in international,
regional and consultative organizations of which
Cuba is a member State and actively participates,
including the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries;
the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States; the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our
America — Peoples’ Trade Agreement; the Association
of Caribbean States; and the Group of 77 and China.
Cuba maintains a firm commitment to the Proclamation
of Latin America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace,
adopted at the second Summit of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, held in Havana
on 28 and 29 January 2014.
Mr. Shamenov (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
Allow me to express my gratitude to the United Nations
for its implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. We thank the Permanent Representatives
of Tunisia and Canada for preparing the documents
related to the eighth review of the Strategy. We are
also grateful for their efforts in achieving consensus
on the review of the Strategy and its approval by the
General Assembly.
Kyrgyzstan has fully supported the work of the
States Members of the United Nations regarding
the effective implementation of the Strategy. Today
terrorism is one of the most serious threats to peace,
to stability, to security and to the social and economic
development of every State. Combating terrorism is
one of Kyrgyzstan’s priorities with respect to ensuring
national security. We continue to take the necessary
measures at the national level to effectively combat
international terrorism. At the same time, Kyrgyzstan
strongly supports the effective implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which is a unique global document aimed at bolstering
national, regional and international efforts to combat
terrorism. At the same time, we note the need to take
practical steps, in particular to bolster the capacity of
Member States to combat terrorist threats.
Kyrgyzstan is actively participating in support
of the measures being taken by the international
community to combat international terrorism and
extremism. In particular, we work closely with the
counter-terrorism bodies of the United Nations,
Commonwealth of Independent States, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the European Union.
4/26

22/06/2023

We also take active part in the work of the Eurasian
Group on Combating Money Laundering and Financing
of Terrorism. We are convinced that the fight against
this threat must be carried out under the auspices of
the United Nations. Kyrgyzstan believes that any
measure taken to counter this threat must be in line
with all obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Here, Kyrgyzstan has strictly adhered to Security
Council resolutions and is focused on maintaining its
close relations with the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism.
We stress that one of the most practical steps
towards establishing new partnerships for international
cooperation in the combat against terrorism is the work
of the United Nations High-level Conference of Heads
of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States,
which is nearing its completion. We are convinced that
the successful completion of the Conference will allow
for a broadened scope of practical cooperation among
States Members to combat terrorism.
One of the main priorities in combating terrorism
is to take preventive steps. That is why Kyrgyzstan
has joined other States of Central Asia in actively
working to return their citizens from combat zones. As
representatives are well aware, on 7 March 2022, on
the initiative of the Kyrgyz Republic and in accordance
with paragraphs 2 and 4 of Security Council resolution
2610 (2021), the terrorist organization Jama’at al-Tawhid
wal-Jihad was designated an international terrorist
organization associated with Al-Qaida, participating
in the financing, planning, preparing, facilitating and
carrying out of terrorist activities. Moreover, in March
2021, the Government of Kyrgyzstan, along with United
Nations agencies, carried out the humanitarian mission
known as Meerim, in which 79 children, citizens of
Kyrgyzstan, were repatriated from Iraq. There are many
targeted actions in the plan to assist those children,
including reintegration, early rehabilitation and return
to safe and peaceful lives. In addition, in February
Kyrgyzstan, along with partners, also carried out a
mission known as Aikol, in which 59 Kyrgyz citizens
were returned to the Kyrgyz Republic from Syria.
Terrorism continues to pose a major direct threat
to many regions and countries. Deterring, disrupting
and foiling terrorist attacks and bringing the suspected
terrorist offenders to justice must remain at the heart
of our work. This is in line with international law,
23-18097

22/06/2023

international legal instruments to combat terrorism,
relevant Security Council resolutions and the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. For its
part, Kyrgyzstan is ready to work more closely, both
bilaterally and within regional and international
organizations, which will allow us in the future to
achieve concrete essential objectives to promote the
development and prosperity of our countries.
Mr. Al-Hajri (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome the adoption by the General Assembly of
resolution 77/298, on the eighth review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We thank
the Permanent Representatives of Tunisia and Canada
for leading the consultations on the resolution to achieve
its adoption by consensus, demonstrates the resolve of
all Member States to work together against the scourge
of terrorism, which is a threat to all of us. We hope
that the resolution will make it possible to strengthen
the effective implementation of the Global Strategy as
a framework to identify our shared goals and to guide
our national and international efforts in that regard. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his report on this
item on the agenda (A/77/718) and commend the United
Nations system for its efforts in the different areas of
implementation of the Global Strategy.
The State of Qatar is fully committed to the
holistic and balanced implementation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, including all four of its
pillars, the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the national and international conventions to which we
are party. We are committed to continuing to take all
the necessary steps to fight terrorism and the violent
extremism that leads to terrorism. At the national level,
my country continues to develop its legislation and
national systems to address terrorism, the financing of
terrorism and money-laundering, and to promote the
capacity and coordination of relevant national bodies.
We continue to develop our national counter-terrorism
committee. Last year, we adopted a comprehensive
national strategy on counter-terrorism that covers
prevention, security, tracing and recovery, in line with
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
In addition, we have adopted comprehensive national
policies that contribute to the prevention of terrorism.
The State of Qatar is fully aware of the pivotal
role played by the United Nations in counter-terrorism.
That is why we are determined to have an effective
partnership with the United Nations across those
various fields. My country is the largest donor to the

A/77/PV.80

United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT),
with an annual donation of $15 million. That donation
has been renewed in advance until 2026, which will
allow the Office to fulfil its mandate, including in the
field of policy coordination and administrative support
for the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact. We also support efforts to assess
the implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and organize successful international and
regional conferences. The Qatari donation also
contributes towards financing many important strategic
programmes, projects and initiatives of the UNOCT in
the area of capacity-building, which has led to tangible
achievements, including programmes to address the
movement of terrorists and threats of terrorism against
vulnerable targets, remote autonomous systems,
integrated cells and counter-terrorism investigations;
strengthen security for major sporting events and
promote sports as a means to prevent violent extremism;
and support for the victims of terrorism.
We commend the field presence of UNOCT in
many countries to ensure the effective implementation
of its programmes. Doha also hosts the offices of the
International Hub on Behavioural Insights to Counter
Terrorism, which exchanges relevant expertise and
supports research, and of the Parliamentary Engagement
hub, which facilitates legislative models to promote
the role of parliaments in a number of related areas,
including the rights of terrorist victims. We welcome
the reference in the resolution adopted today to those
two offices.
The nature of the terrorist threat requires
coordinated and collective work. We must also
respond to constantly evolving threats posed by global
terrorism and modern techniques. In that regard, we
note the importance of behavioural science as a way of
better understanding the motives and factors that lead
to extremism and terrorism. It contributes to building
the flexibility of individuals and societies and is used
by many governmental and academic institutions in
developing evidence-based responses. We reiterate
that if we are to achieve success in preventing and
addressing terrorism and extremism, we must respect
human rights, the rule of law and the principle of
non-selectivity.
We should neither link terrorism and extremism to
any country, race, religion, culture or nationality, nor
equate terrorism and the legitimate right of people to
fight against occupation. We stress the need to address

23-180975/26

A/77/PV.80

terrorism alongside racism, xenophobia and all forms
of intolerance. We also emphasize our rejection of all
hate speech, which can increase feelings of hostility
and violence and lead to the proliferation of extremism
and terrorism. In that regard, the State of Qatar stresses
the need to address Islamophobia. We express our deep
concern and condemnation of all incidents in a number
of countries where the Holy Quran has been burned
recently. The periodic review of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy should pay particular attention to
those important issues in a balanced way in order to
effectively fight all threats that lead to terrorism.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar takes this
opportunity to condemn all terrorist acts. They are
criminal acts that have no justification regardless of the
motives behind them, their perpetrators, place and time
of perpetration. They pose a serious threat to peace and
security, human rights and the rule of law. We reiterate
that the State of Qatar is committed to fighting that
threat with all appropriate means.
Mr. Alzaabi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to begin by welcoming the
consensus adoption of resolution 77/298, “The United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy: eighth
review”. I thank the co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Canada and Tunisia, for their
tireless efforts during the negotiations. The United
Arab Emirates also aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the sisterly
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.
Everyone is aware that terrorism is a complex
global phenomenon that transcends borders,
cultures and religions. Counter-terrorism requires a
multidimensional and multilateral approach capable of
responding to and proactively addressing the advanced
methods of terrorist groups. The biannual review of the
Strategy is therefore extremely important by offering us
an opportunity to take stock of progress in implementing
and updating the Strategy in a manner that corresponds
to existing and emerging terrorist threats.
Recent years have highlighted the magnitude of
challenges related to counter-terrorism. Terrorists
have access to modern technology, information and
communications technologies and use them to recruit,
finance and launch attacks that are more complex, fatal
and grave. In that regard, I refer to the use by terrorist
groups of drones, virtual space, cryptocurrencies and
6/26

22/06/2023

3D printing. In addition, they are using information
technology, social networks and digital gaming
platforms to spread their destructive ideas. The result is
a very serious proliferation of hate speech, extremism
and misleading and false information that destroy the
social fabric and increase the targeting of religious and
racial minorities.
Accordingly, I would like to stress two important
issues. First, we must not underestimate the capacity
of modern technology to threaten international peace
and security if it falls into the hands of terrorist groups.
Secondly, the Global Strategy must reflect that new
reality and address its urgent threats in a manner
that allows the international community to respond
effectively. Therefore, we would like to reiterate the
need for the Global Strategy to sufficiently highlight
some of the emerging trends in this area that cannot be
neglected. There is a dire need to promote preventive
approaches at the international level in order to address
intolerance and extremism before those scourges
develop into terrorist acts and armed conflicts. That
would save the lives of many innocent people and
promote community resilience. We believe that focusing
on tolerance, peaceful coexistence and dialogue is a
way to build prosperous and peaceful societies that
celebrate their cultural, racial and religious diversity.
The United Arab Emirates has made that issue our
priority at the local, regional and international levels,
including through our efforts within the Organization.
We note that this month the Security Council
adopted by consensus resolution 2686 (2023), on
tolerance and international peace and security. The
resolution was introduced by my country, in cooperation
with the United Kingdom. It acknowledges that hate
speech, racism and extremism are factors that lead to
increased threats and recurring exacerbated conflicts.
It is also the first resolution that urges countries and
regional and international organizations to renounce
hate speech and extremism, and calls on the United
Nations entities to adopt a comprehensive response to
monitor hate speech and extremism while reporting and
addressing them accordingly, as well as ensuring the
protection and promotion of human rights.
The commitment of the United Arab Emirates to
the promotion of tolerance and peaceful coexistence
was not born overnight. In fact, it is part and parcel
of our State-building and preparations for the future.
Therefore, we have made use of all tools, institutions
and initiatives that focus on saving communities
23-18097

22/06/2023

from the scourge of extremism and terrorism, while
promoting tolerance at all national and international
levels. Those efforts include the establishment of the
Hedayah Global Center for Excellence in Countering
Violent Extremism, which plays a lead role in developing
innovative solutions and establishing practical counterterrorism strategies on global counter-terrorism, in line
with the General Assembly’s call for the involvement
of all society in addressing terrorism. The United
Arab Emirates involves all active actors, civil society,
women, young people, religious leaders and others in
preventing terrorism and extremism within society.
We must remain vigilant against the growing
threats of terrorism, including by continuing to build
on the momentum borne of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the high-level CounterTerrorism Week. Through coordinated international
efforts, we will be able to eliminate the roots of
terrorism and extremism and build a better future
where our people enjoy stability and prosperity.
Mr. Fouad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President,
and all member States on the consensus adoption of
resolution 77/298, “The United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy: eighth review”. My country’s
delegation would like to express its appreciation to the
Permanent Representatives of Tunisia and Canada and
their teams for the tireless efforts made in recent weeks
to reach consensus.
Egypt aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation. We would like to add the following
remarks in our national capacity.
First, Egypt expresses its regret over the failure
to develop the language of resolution 77/298 due to
the lack of flexibility of some delegations and their
rejection of updates that were necessary to increase the
effectiveness of the Strategy, ensure its compatibility
with contemporary realities and address terrorist threats.
Secondly, Egypt strongly condemns incidents
of the burning of the Holy Quran by some extremist
right-wing groups in certain countries. We reiterate
that such hateful incidents incite terrorist acts against
Muslims in those countries and spread hate speech and
Islamophobia. Such incidents must be criminalized
and should not be minimized. We also stress in that
context that it is incomprehensible that such hostilities

A/77/PV.80

are justified under the pretext of freedom of expression
or other unconvincing justifications. It is regrettable
that during the negotiations some delegations insisted
on ignoring that concerning challenge, despite the
significant flexibility demonstrated by the Islamic
group in the negotiations, leading to the resolution’s
failure to condemn and address such heinous acts.
Thirdly, in relation to the aforementioned, my
country’s delegation also regrets the inability of the
latest review to address terrorist attacks on the basis of
xenophobia, racism and other forms of intolerance that
are referred to in the report of the Secretary-General
(A/77/266) as growing challenges. It is also regrettable
that we were unable to reach consensus on reference to
the International Day to Combat Islamophobia, which
was proclaimed in the consensual resolution 76/254.
The fact that Muslims are victims of hate speech and
terrorism was also ignored.
Fourthly, since the adoption of the Strategy in
2006, consensus has been our approach in adopting
the successive reviews. That consensus is highly
appreciated and valued by Egypt. It represents unity
within the international community with respect to
terrorist threats. However, in recent years it has been
concerning to see a growing tendency among certain
delegations to impose certain issues that are irrelevant
to the Strategy and its agreed four pillars. That results
in weakening the collective message that we seek to
deliver, negatively affects the negotiating environment
and threatens the principle of consensus over the
Strategy that we have all protected for 20 years. In
that context, Egypt calls on all delegations to focus
on the proven contemporary challenges of terrorism
and on preventing distraction and an imbalance in the
Strategy’s four pillars.
Egypt is pursuing its efforts at the national, regional
and international levels to counter terrorism and
extremism through our comprehensive approach based
on building the capacities of our national institutions to
counter terrorism as a prerequisite for the success of any
counter-terrorism effort. We do not believe those efforts
to represent a militarization or securitization of counterterrorism, as some claim. In addition, we must address
the root causes of terrorism and the socioeconomic
factors leading to extremism. Moreover, we monitor,
analyse and refute extremist narratives through the
Al-Azhar Observatory for Combating Extremism and
the Salam Center for Extremism Studies, which is
affiliated with the Egyptian Dar Al-Iftaa organization.

23-180977/26

A/77/PV.80

Egypt has also continued in recent years to issue an
annual report on the efforts of Government agencies to
counter terrorism and extremism. The language of the
most recent report was developed to align with the four
pillars of the Global Strategy.
At the regional level, Egypt is active in building the
counter-terrorism capacities of several sisterly African
States through the Egyptian Agency of Partnership
for Development, as well as the Cairo International
Centre for Conflict Resolution, Peacekeeping and
Peacebuilding. We also support international efforts
to counter terrorism through our co-chairing with the
European Union of the Global Counterterrorism Forum
and our active membership in the Global Coalition to
Counter ISIS.
In conclusion, Egypt calls on all delegations to
reflect on the lessons learned from the last and previous
reviews of the Strategy in order to prepare for the next
review, which we hope will lead once again to reaching
consensus and which we hope will sufficiently
address the priority issues related to the promotion of
international cooperation on counter-terrorism.
Mr. Mahmudzoda (Tajikistan): First of all,
I would like to thank Canada and Tunisia for
facilitating and coordinating the negotiating process
of resolution 77/298, “The United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy: eighth review”, and thank
all Member States for its adoption.
The world is going through turbulent times. Such
challenges as terrorism, extremism, radicalization,
illicit drug trafficking and other transnational
organized crime continue to seriously threaten
our countries. Today terrorist groups have become
increasingly innovative and proficient in adapting to
changing circumstances.
Due to its geographical location, Central Asia,
and in particular Tajikistan, remains at the forefront
of countering the aforementioned modern threats and
challenges. Central Asia adopted its Joint Plan of Action
in 2011, the first regional framework designed to address
the threat of terrorism through a common approach,
based on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and strengthened international partnership.
Phase IV of the Joint Plan of Action project 2022–2025
was successfully launched during the annual meeting of
Deputy Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Central Asia,
held on 8 December 2021 in Dushanbe. Furthermore,
to promote the implementation of the United Nations
8/26

22/06/2023

Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and relevant
Security Council resolutions at the national level, the
Government of Tajikistan successfully implemented
its National Strategy on Combating Terrorism and
Extremism for 2016–2020 and is realizing the second
phase of its Strategy on Countering Extremism and
Terrorism for the period 2021–2025.
To advance the capacity of law enforcement and
other agencies to combat terrorism, prevent violent
extremism, enhance border security and prevent
terrorist financing, Tajikistan continues to take the
following additional steps and efficient and effective
measures. In order to prevent the spread of extremist
ideas in correctional institutions, the methodological
and preventive capacity of the educational units of
those institutions has been strengthened and enhanced.
Laws on countering extremism and combating
terrorism were adopted in 2020 and 2021, defining the
rights and obligations of State authorities in that field,
as well as forms and liability for extremist actions and
measures to prevent extremist activities. The Decree of
the President of Tajikistan on the National Concept of
Countering the Laundering of the Proceeds of Crime,
the Financing of Terrorism and the Financing of the
Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction for
2018–2025 was adopted in 2018.
A number of revisions and amendments have been
made to criminal and administrative legislation with a
view to criminalizing new acts and increasing — and
at some points, decreasing — liability for crimes and
offences of an extremist and terrorist nature. In the
process of strengthening the institutional framework for
countering extremism and terrorism, the Department for
Combating Extremism and Terrorism and the Unified
Fusion Centre for Preventing Extremism, Terrorism
and Cybercrimes have been established in the General
Prosecutor’s Office. An inter-agency task force has
been set up to coordinate the activities of operational
services and investigative units, as well as to identify
and investigate crimes involving the recruitment of
citizens to terrorist organizations. Regular operational
measures are being taken to suppress acts of terrorism
in preparation and to identify persons involved in
extremist and terrorist activities in the territory
of Tajikistan.
As part of the implementation of the National Strategy
of the Republic of Tajikistan on Countering Terrorism
and Extremism for 2016–2020, the Government of the
country, among other significant achievements, has
23-18097

22/06/2023

also improved its mechanism for preventing extremism
and strengthened the role of education and civil society.
The successful implementation of that document has
created a favourable environment for the development
and adoption of a new strategy for 2021–2025. A
special secretariat has been created for the successful
implementation of the strategy, and there is a platform for
cooperation between public implementing institutions
and international and civil society organizations.
The specific actions undertaken by the Government
of Tajikistan has resulted in the return of more than 350
citizens of our country, mainly women and children,
from Syria and Iraq. Currently, we are continuing
effective actions to rehabilitate and reintegrate them
within society. On 18 and 19 October 2022, a HighLevel Conference on International and Regional Border
Security and Management Cooperation to Counter
Terrorism and Prevent the Movement of Terrorists
was hosted by the Government of the Republic of
Tajikistan, in cooperation with the Office of CounterTerrorism (UNOCT) and other partners. The Dushanbe
Conference was the third milestone in a series of
events within the Dushanbe process, pursuant to the
High-Level Conference on International and Regional
Cooperation on Countering Terrorism and its Financing
Through Illicit Drug Trafficking and Organized
Crime, held in Dushanbe on 16 and 17 May 2019. The
High-level International Conference on Countering
Terrorism and Preventing Violent Extremism, hosted
by the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan
in cooperation with the United Nations and other
international partners, was held in Dushanbe on 3 and
4 May 2018.
Last but not least, my delegation acknowledges
with appreciation the partnership and cooperation of
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and
thanks UNOCT and many other counterparts from the
international community for providing coordination
and coherence in the implementation of activities
to prevent and counter violent extremism, including
the development and implementation of the National
Strategy and Action Plan of the Republic of Tajikistan
on Countering Terrorism and Extremism for 2021–
2025, and for convening international conferences
in Tajikistan.
Ms. Jamal (Bahrain): It is a pleasure to address the
General Assembly in person for the first time since our
last review took place over video conferencing during
the pandemic, when I first took on my current role at

A/77/PV.80

the Foreign Ministry of the Kingdom of Bahrain. So
much has happened since then. There has been a great
deal of positivity at the national, regional and global
levels, and the return to normalcy and interaction is the
cherry on top.
The last two years have brought about numerous
opportunities for us to comprehend the many
developments on the terrorism and extremism
landscapes. The hype of events has made sure that
our terminology has grown fourfold, and it has
become hard to keep up nowadays. Adding to that, the
incessant need to properly interpret specialized, very
experience-centric terminology between languages to
ensure that our longer-term knowledge, commitments
and goals remain parallel, if not similar, emphasizes the
role of academics and strategic communications experts
in particular. Such a struggle makes it imperative that
we consider our collective institutional memory, given
how, over the years, expertise has been gradually
spreading out into a variety of either connected or
dispersed fields. Networks, once created under the pillar
of the Global Coalition against Daesh, are now working
in silos perhaps due to the change in objective or due to
a difference in approach. That does necessarily affect
the current impact on target audiences but does not
ensure that a longer-term barricade can be called upon
immediately to address a collective threat requiring a
unified narrative.
We in the region have had our fair share of work cut
out for us and have managed to build monitoring and
evaluation standards that have proved suitable for our
modus operandi at least. I remember just a few years
ago when it was common to find gaps in assessment
techniques used in projects strategic communications
campaigns to prevent violent extremism; but today it
seems there is a general satisfaction with the realities
of success and the means of achieving behavioural and
attitudinal change.
Those here in attendance who are familiar with our
regional approaches know that across the board we prefer
to use a direct counter-narrative that negates criminal
extremist ideology based on religious principles and that
derives support from nationalistic values that replace
vulnerability with sociopsychological safeguards.
Such an approach requires expert comprehension of
the tenets of each specific ideology to be addressed
head on as it develops, which makes a one-size-fits-all
approach impossible.

23-180979/26

A/77/PV.80

As the world gradually seeks a sustainable solution
for the rehabilitation and reintegration of terrorist
fighters, our individual country approaches will
define success. That will impact safety and security
everywhere, making this United Nations congregation
the most suitable place to understand that what we decide
today will impact the future stability and peace of our
entire world. Extremism, its definition, its prevention
and its depletion should be at the heart of our debate,
not simply within the context of counter terrorism but
a theme, a term, an objective and an industry in itself.
Within the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy framework and the deliberations of today’s
United Nations agenda, Bahrain, my country, stands
here today ready, committed and proud.
Mr. Frank (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Today
concludes the eighth review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, a process centred
on the establishment of a unified global response to
prevent and counter terrorism. Allow me at the outset
to thank the co-facilitators, Mr. Robert Rae of Canada
and Mr. Tarek Ladeb of Tunisia, and their teams for
having guided our work so skilfully. My delegation
congratulates them on the results we have achieved.
It is critical that the fight against terrorism remain
an integral part of multilateralism and that mutual
trust be strengthened in order to find consensusbased solutions. As our Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Ignazio Cassis, stated at the high-level event held
on 3 May under the Swiss presidency of the Security
Council, “Yes, the multilateral system is under stress,
but no, it is not bankrupt” (S/PV.9315, p.8). Everything
is possible where there is trust, and the consensus
adoption of resolution 77/298 today is proof of that.
Allow me to raise three essential priorities for
Switzerland during these negotiations.
First, we must guarantee full respect for the rule
of law and international law, in particular human
rights and international humanitarian law, in any effort
aimed at countering violent extremism and terrorism.
Moreover, we must take gender into account in terms
of the impact of terrorism and the variety of roles it can
play in terms of prevention. To that end, Member States
and the United Nations must make progress in terms
of accountability and prevention, combat impunity and
implement the appropriate measures. Today’s resolution
is a step in the right direction, but we must go further.
We must have an appropriate assessment of the impact
10/26

22/06/2023

of United Nations counter-terrorism activities on the
rule of law, international law and gender equality. An
effective review mechanism would be a significant
contribution in terms of learning lessons, making
continuous improvements and guaranteeing respect for
the commitments that we have made.
Secondly, we must ensure that the measures taken to
combat terrorism, including United Nations sanctions,
do not undermine humanitarian efforts. The rapid, safe
and barrier-free provision of humanitarian assistance
and protection, as envisaged under international
humanitarian law, must be the highest priority for us all.
In that regard, Switzerland calls for the comprehensive
and immediate implementation of Security Council
resolution 2664 (2022), in particular in the context of
counter-terrorism. The implementation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy must effectively take
significant developments into account.
Thirdly, clear and transparent approaches based
on reliable and results-oriented data must be at the
foundation of any actions taken by the United Nations
and its Member States. Switzerland welcomes the fact
that the resolution contains provisions to that effect.
It is essential to measure the effects and effectiveness
of and progress in the implementation of the Global
Strategy to understand the effects, to identify where we
have been successful and to introduce improvements
where they are needed. Ensuring that our results are
developed in a collective and transparent manner that
involves all stakeholders, in particular civil society, is
the best way to achieve that.
Today we adopted the resolution emerging from the
eighth review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy; however, this does not mean that
our work is complete. Rather, it continues. We must
now promote the resolution and track its development.
Its implementation and assessment are equal steps for a
proper global strategic response to terrorism.
Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the States members of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) upon the
adoption of resolution 77/298, on the eighth review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(GCTS). This review always offers a useful opportunity
to renew our collective and unwavering resolve to
combat terrorism and promote international peace
and security.
23-18097

22/06/2023

The OIC would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, as well as to congratulate and thank the
co-facilitators of the eighth GCTS review, Ambassador
Tarek Ladeb of Tunisia and Ambassador Robert Rae
of Canada, for their valuable efforts throughout the
negotiations. The OIC also highly values and appreciates
the tireless efforts of Mr. Yassine Salah and Mr. Hussein
Hirji, the counter-terrorism experts of the Permanent
Missions of Tunisia and Canada, who have strived over
the past weeks to secure consensus among delegations
on this GCTS review resolution. I also wish to express
a special thanks to our expert in the Permanent Mission
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Mr. Khalid Felemban,
for his coordination of the OIC positions.
In our view, the GCTS biannual reviews have so far
been an attestation to the significant role multilateralism
can still play in today’s polarized world and despite all
challenges. The adoption by consensus of the GCTS in
2006 (resolution 60/288) and all its reviews until the
current eighth one, has contributed to sending a strong
and necessary message on our united global approach
to counter-terrorism and violent extremism conducive
to terrorism in all its manifestations, as embodied in
the Strategy, with its four pillars. Thus, cognizant
of the paramount significance of consensus in that
unique process, the OIC as the largest negotiating
block, comprising 57 Member States, in that process,
has always strived for maintaining this practice as the
modus operandi for our consecutive reviews and has
often made considerable compromises and sacrifices
towards that end.
The OIC engaged in the negotiations over the
past weeks in good faith and the firm belief that
it was necessary to have an updated Strategy that
reflects the emerging new threats and challenges
that have prevailed since the last review in 2021.
Throughout the negotiations, the OIC demonstrated the
utmost flexibility and transparency, despite genuine
reservations and concerns regarding the process and
the evident lack of flexibility on the part of certain
delegations. The OIC regrets that the eighth review
failed to reach consensus on many proposals that
reflect recent events and emerging new trends since the
last review. Those include proposals tabled by the OIC
to condemn the recurrent attempts and acts of racist
and extremist right-wing elements to instigate violence
and terrorism against Muslims through the deliberate
desecration of mosques and the burning of their most
sacred text, the Holy Quran. Our group spent endless

A/77/PV.80

hours explaining how such acts of hatred promote
Islamophobic, anti-minority and anti-immigrant
narratives, and how they constitute criminal instigation
of terrorism, which should be condemned in the
strongest terms and penalized. Nonetheless, our group
was surprised by the justifications of such acts of hatred
and instigation of terrorism by some delegations.
Consistent with the OIC’s long-standing approach
of flexibility and negotiating in good faith, we proposed
language formulations that clearly avoided all the socalled red lines expressed by the objecting delegations,
based on consensus language from resolutions they
themselves have submitted to the General Assembly.
Unfortunately, we had no luck. That complete rejection
of merely considering linguistic proposals to capture
and call out those heinous acts, as mitigated as they
may be, leaves us disappointed by the fact that the few
objecting delegations did not make any effort to reach
consensus on that important issue and rejected our
continuous efforts to reach a consensual solution.
Nonetheless, it would be also fair to state on the
record that our failure today to condemn such acts
sends a clear message that incitement to terrorism
against Muslims can be tolerated. In the same vein,
the OIC is also extremely disappointed that the eighth
review resolution failed to include a reference to the
International Day to Combat Islamophobia, which was
proclaimed based on the recent General Assembly
consensus resolution 76/254. Our group rejects
such failure and, despite the unwillingness of a few
delegations who opposed our proposals, remains united
and unequivocal in continuing its efforts to ensure a
collective effort at the international level to combat
such phenomena.
We would like also to recall the commitments
expressed, inter alia, in the present resolution and
previous GCTS resolutions to strengthening international
cooperation to prevent and combat terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations and reiterate that terrorism
and incitement to terrorist and violent acts against
Muslims as an increasing form and manifestation of
terrorism is not an exception. We should demonstrate
our resolve and unfaltering determination to combat
terrorism by enhancing international cooperation to
counter such heinous acts so as to prevent people from
falling victim to those reprehensible attempts and acts,
to suppress the normalization of such acts of violence
and terrorism and, finally, to advance our common
goal of a world free of terrorism. Given that the

23-1809711/26

A/77/PV.80

ongoing misuse of information and communications
technologies by such groups has already given rise to
the broad scope and scale of such acts of violence and
terrorism against Muslims, we would like to highlight
the responsibility of the global Internet governance
system and global social media platforms in engaging in
effective cooperation with law enforcement to prevent
the dissemination of hatred and acts of incitement to
terrorism against Muslims.
The OIC is also very concerned about the neverending quest by some delegations to shift the focus
of the GCTS from terrorism to many other issues
that are more suited to the Third Committee. Such
attempts do not contribute to enhancing the capacity of
Member States or international cooperation to counter
terrorism. To the contrary, they create a distraction and
threaten to disrupt the delicate balance achieved across
the four pillars of the GCTS and will lead us sooner or
later to losing the consensus nature of the GCTS review
resolutions — a threat that is nearing with every review.
We therefore call on all Member States to refrain from
such attempts and to focus on real, meaningful and
action-oriented updates that have an appreciable impact
on countering terrorism worldwide.
To conclude, we would like to reaffirm that
terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism
cannot and should not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
Finally, the OIC welcomes the decision to convene
the ninth biennial review of the Strategy in 2026,
which will coincide with the twentieth anniversary of
the launching of the GCTS. The OIC sincerely hopes
that all Member States will be able, during the next
review of the Strategy, to engage more effectively and
in the spirit of consensus and compromise to realize a
review document that is more reflective of the concerns
and priorities of Member States, while learning from
the shortfalls from previous reviews, including this
current one.
Mr. Rae (Canada): On 22 June 1985, exactly
38 years ago today, a plane took off from Vancouver
to Toronto with a bomb that was built in Canada by
violent extremists in my country. The luggage in which
that bomb was hidden made its way onto a plane that
took off from Toronto, my hometown, on Air India
Flight 182, which then picked up more passengers in
Montreal and took off for London, after which it was
intended to fly to Delhi. Given the time of the year,
12/26

22/06/2023

just like today, students were finishing school, and
many Canadians with family ties to India were going
to see loved ones. Shortly after midnight on 23 June,
that bomb — which had gone undetected — went off,
and all 329 people on board that plane perished, with
the bodies being identified by Canadian families who
descended on Cork, Ireland, supported by an incredible
Irish population who rallied to house them.
That same day, two baggage handlers in Narita,
Japan, were killed by a bomb that also originated on
a separate flight from Vancouver. That fateful day,
23 June, which Canadians will commemorate tomorrow,
remained the deadliest act of aviation terrorism until
the events of 9/11 and its devastating impact on this city
of New York. Indeed, after 9/11 my Government asked
me to examine the incident and the lessons learned
from it for our then counter-terrorism posture. I will not
go into the details of that report, which members can
still find online under the title “Lessons to be learned”,
but I mention all this because, when the President of
the General Assembly asked me and my dear colleague
Ambassador Ladeb of Tunisia to co-facilitate the eighth
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, I was motivated by the victims aboard that
flight and so many others who have shared their stories
with me, and to make a further contribution to the fight
against this global scourge.
I say these words without any sense of
defensiveness, as follows. Ambassador Ladeb and I
are not the co-authors of the text. That is not what the
co-facilitation process is all about. It is about member
States agreeing with other member States that have
different points of view. What we can do and what I
hope we were successful in doing is shaping the process
and helping to identify the consensus that actually exists
among Member States. We tried to engage directly
and transparently with all the parties who sought to
be actively included in the process. We built on past
practice and sought to further consultations with civil
society, with briefings from numerous United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact
entities in the process, and will seek to ensure that
the practice is preserved in the development of future
road maps.
As one of the co-facilitators, let me thank several
people and groups. I know I will be followed in this
by my good friend Ambassador Ladeb as well. First of
all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving
us this honour, although I must confess that that was
23-18097

22/06/2023

not necessarily my feeling on every single day in the
last little while. I also want to express my thanks to
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and his team, the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT)
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate for the assessments and analysis that have
kept us all current. I thank the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime for its strong field presence and
experience and for briefing Member States on new
programmes. I thank the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special
Rapporteur for reminding us to be aware of the human
rights impact of all of our counter-terrorism efforts and
the universality of our obligations. Of course, I want
to thank my friend and colleague Ambassador Tarek
Ladeb. We have become good buddies in the last little
while and it has been good to work with him and his
team. I thank my assistant, Hussein Hirji, who has been
thanked by others. I think we all know that the process
of facilitation is carried out by what we call experts
who have just spent countless hours working together
to help us get to this finish line.
I want to say a word about the Strategy overall. In
my view, we actually made some progress in the eighth
review. Listening to the speeches this morning, it is
clear that we did not make all the progress that some
countries, representatives and groups would have liked,
and that is a reality. It is in the nature of the process. We
do not carry out these discussions in a perfect world.
We do not carry them out without the geopolitics of our
time taking place. We carry them out in a way that is
never going to be perfect; however, we try to advance
a little bit, bit by bit, where we think the consensus can
go and with a view to strengthening it.
I think it is fair to say that a few things have
changed over the past several years in the landscape.
The first one is — and perhaps my narrative about the
tragic events in India, Canada and Ireland illustrates
this — to appreciate that the nature of the beast is
global. People move. People travel. The idea that
terrorism and its threat is somehow confined to only
one part of the world or to a particular set of issues
is not true. It is a truly global phenomenon. While it
comes out of conflict zones, those conflict zones have
impacts all over the world simply because of the nature
of globalization. Terrorists used to target planes to
hijack or blow up; now they seek out and use drones.
It therefore depends on technologies. That is one. The
Internet obviously is another. The speed with which

A/77/PV.80

communication takes place and the way in which it
takes hold of the individual citizen and the individual
young person means that an event that happens in one
part of the world can have a direct impact on another
part of the world because of the person who is getting
the misinformation or disinformation or hate speech
online. That is where the process of radicalization
is taking place. Recruitment is not confined to a
geographic area. The recruitment is taking place online
right now as we speak. There are young people sitting in
front of a screen who are watching hateful propaganda
and who are being persuaded by it and attracted by it.
They could live in New York, Delhi, Toronto, Buenos
Aires or anywhere.
As we went through the seventh review, people
initially wanted a technical rollover. Since we had made
progress in the seventh review, the idea was to build on
that. But as we did that, each representative would come
to us and say they wanted to do a technical rollover but
that there was just one new thing they would like to
add that reflected their point of view. So, we listened to
that, obviously, as co-facilitators, but we also said that
the co-facilitators were not the ones who needed to be
persuaded because for every addition someone wanted
to make, there was someone else wanting to make
another one. I have heard the frustration of colleagues
from the podium and I understand the frustration, but
the reality is that this is the process of consensus we
have created, and I think the advantage of consensus
is that it allows us to speak on behalf of all the citizens
of the world and to say that, at a very minimum, this
is where we need to go. I think that is something we
would lose if we simply went paragraph by paragraph,
word by word, vote by vote and started dividing up
even more than we are already divided.
But, speaking personally and speaking in my
national capacity, I have to say that some of the things
that were suggested have tremendous merit. I think
we do have to deal with new forms of hatred. I think
we do have to deal with Islamophobia. But we should
find it in our hearts to deal with antisemitism and any
other form of racial hatred that desecrates religions
and that leads to violence. We have to understand the
legitimate concerns of free speech, but we also have
to understand that direct incitement remains a criminal
act. So, we were able to do some things. We reflected
important meetings that have been held in Spain,
India and Tajikistan, as well as the United Nations
Global Congress of Victims of Terrorism in New York.

23-1809713/26

A/77/PV.80

Although there was no consensus on the outcome
documents for those meetings — including, regrettably,
the Delhi Declaration — there was a recognition that
those discussions were taking place on an ongoing basis.
We discussed the importance of further engaging civil
society, particularly around counter-terrorism, with
many emphasizing the importance of protection. And
while we could not agree on specific stronger language,
which I find regrettable, there is a new reference to the
importance of supporting women-led civil society.
We discussed the question of oversight of the
growing United Nations architecture on counterterrorism. The philosophy we have adopted in Canada
is to say that measures against terrorism and the threat
of terrorism have to be robust, but that the oversight
to ensure that civil liberties are protected also has to
be robust. That is where I think we need to strike the
balance here at the United Nations. I, for one, certainly
hope that over the next three years we will be able to
take away some of the fears and concerns that we heard
expressed about what that would mean or how it would
impact the work of the agencies.
I think we have seen leadership from the SecretaryGeneral in his report on the growth of racist and sexist
extremism (A/77/266), and I think his reports are a first
step in understanding this threat. We agree that more
research and data are going to be required. To achieve
that, we have made an important agreement that the
next cycle will take three years. As my colleague from
Saudi Arabia pointed out, it will now take place at the
twentieth anniversary of the whole Strategy. This is a
learning exercise for all of us. It is a learning exercise
for the globe. We took a dramatic step after 9/11 to
recognize that global terrorism is something that can
have an impact on every country around the world and
that we need to create a global strategy to deal with a
global phenomenon.
(spoke in French)
Terrorism and its risks are not restricted to any one
country, conflict zone or region. They are not limited
by ethnicity or determined by one religion or another.
Those things have nothing to do with the situation.
The reality of our situation in the world today is that
terrorism is a threat to everyone. It is a threat to every
citizen of the world. It is a threat that can have terrible
impacts on the peoples of the world. That is why I
believe our work is absolutely essential.
14/26

22/06/2023

(spoke in English)
In my opening comments, I referred to the Air India
bombing of 1985. Just before I completed that report, I
had a visit from a man who I did not know. He came
with a package for me, and I opened it in front of him.
He told me that he was related to a little girl who was on
the plane, and he showed me her picture. Her name was
Kiranjit Rai. He said, “I want you to know that what
you are doing is not about numbers or people that you
do not know. So let me tell you about her”. And he did.
He then showed me something that really shook me.
He showed me the letters that the children in her class
at a public school in Toronto had sent to her family. He
also gave me the picture and he said, “I want you to
keep this picture and put it on your desk”. It came in
a little frame. Any who come to my residence will see
that picture. It is on my desk.
Finally, as we go forward, I would ask members
to think about a couple of things. The first one is the
enduring value of empathy. We should find it in our
hearts to speak not only about the hatred against
ourselves or our own group. We should find it in our
hearts to speak more about the hatred that exists for
others as well. That is what empathy means. It means
the ability to really understand what other people are
going through. We should find it in our hearts to do that.
In order to do that, we not only have to demonstrate that
capacity for empathy and understanding, but we also
have to really listen to what other people are saying
about what we have just said. That is what this process
is about. That is what the General Assembly at its best
is about. It is about empathy, and it is about listening.
Finally, it is about action. We took action to create
UNOCT. We took action to try to demonstrate that we
were capable as a global community to coordinate all of
our national efforts to deal with the impact of terrorism
on our world. We have now created an architecture with
the four pillars that have been so aptly described and
now we have to keep on building. Let us never forget
and let us keep in our mind’s eye and in our hearts the
realities of all those who have been killed, all those
who are at risk, and all those whose security is not
sufficiently protected because our efforts have been
imperfect. Can we do it better next time? I hope so. We
must keep trying.
The President: On a personal note, I would
like to thank Ambassador Rae of Canada and his
counterpart, Ambassador Tarek Ladeb of Tunisia, for
23-18097

22/06/2023

their dedication, empathy, hard work and leadership,
which helped us successfully to come around and to
stand together when adopting resolution 77/298. I offer
many thanks on behalf of the General Assembly.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for the trust you placed in
my colleague the Permanent Representative of Canada,
Ambassador Bob Rae, and myself to facilitate the
eighth review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
All through this process, we have strived to
accomplish this task in the best manner we could and
undertook to listen carefully to and to work closely
with each and every delegation. We were keen also
to ensure an inclusive process and to seek the views
of all stakeholders, including governmental and
non-governmental
organizations,
representatives
of civil society, experts, academia and United
Nations entities.
I should say that bringing all Member States
on board was not an easy task, but we tried hard up
to the last minute. Here I would like to commend all
delegations for their hard work, their flexibility and
constructive engagement during the negotiations,
which made this consensus possible and facilitated
our reaching the text of resolution 77/298, which,
although considered imperfect by some delegations,
remains a positive outcome, as it contains a number
of key messages about, first, our collective resolve to
strengthen international cooperation to prevent and
combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
including through a comprehensive approach that seeks
to address its root causes while ensuring compliance
with human rights, fundamental freedoms and the
rule of law; secondly, our determination to ensure
an integrated and balanced implementation of the
strategy in all its pillars; and thirdly, our keen interest
in keeping the Strategy relevant and able to adapt to
the global threat landscape and emerging new trends of
international terrorism, an issue which we thoroughly
discussed at the high-level Conference on Tuesday.
We might have some different views on a few aspects
of the resolution or about elements that unfortunately
could not be included without jeopardizing consensus,
but I remain convinced that what is most important today
is what unites us. Despite those differences, we stand
united against terrorism and violent extremism conducive
to terrorism in all their forms and manifestations. Today

A/77/PV.80

we share a common conviction that we need a holistic
approach to address all drivers of that scourge and
that we cannot respond to the threat efficiently without
reinforcing national capacities or without promoting
tolerance, respect for diversity, dialogue, interreligious
and intercultural understanding among peoples at the
national, regional and global levels.
Today we concur that we need appropriate measures
to address the new and emerging terrorist threats based
on xenophobia, racism and other forms of intolerance, or
in the name of religion or belief. We need also to upscale
our cooperation and coordination with all stakeholders
to counter the increasing and evolving use by terrorists
of information and communications technologies and
other emerging technologies to commit, incite, recruit
for, fund or plan terrorist acts.
I could go on for hours listing all the important
elements contained in the document before us on which
we all agree and which constitute our common road map
to combat terrorism, a scourge that no country can face
by itself. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, which we have reviewed today, remains a key
framework for our collective action, and it needs our
support and our unity to remain relevant and up to date.
Finally, I would be remiss not to extend my warm
thanks to Secretary-General António Guterres, the
Under-Secretary General of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, and all the
staff of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism for
their efforts, assistance and facilities, which contributed
to achieving the results that we have accomplished. My
thanks and appreciation go to my friend Ambassador
Bob Rae and his team, especially Hussein Hirji, and to
my colleague Yassine Salah for their tireless efforts along
the process. Countering terrorism is a priority we all
share and only together can we face such a global threat.
The President: The words of gratitude expressed
just a couple of minutes ago to Ambassador Bob Rae go
equally go to Ambassador Tarek Ladeb on behalf of the
General Assembly.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
European Union, in its capacity as observer.
Mr. Skoog (European Union): I am honoured to
deliver remarks on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States on the occasion of the eighth review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

23-1809715/26

A/77/PV.80

The candidate countries Serbia, Albania, the
Republic of Moldova and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the
potential candidate country Georgia; and the European
Free Trade Association country Iceland, member of the
European Economic Area; as well as Monaco and San
Marino align themselves with this statement. In the
interest of time and out of respect for other speakers
coming after me, I would like to shorten my intervention.
The full version is available and will be published.
Let me start by welcoming the adoption by
consensus of resolution 77/298, on the eighth review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
and by thanking the co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Canada and Tunisia, for their
tireless efforts in advancing the process with the aim
of ensuring that the Strategy is updated to reflect the
threat and the challenges we face today. I wish to tell
the two of them that everything I will say now should
in no way reflect anything negative or anything short
of the highest esteem we hold for our co-facilitators for
their dedicated work.
Counter-terrorism remains at the top of the EU
agenda but also at the forefront of efforts to promote
peace and security. The evolving threat of terrorism
and of violent extremism conducive to terrorism, in all
their forms and irrespective of their origin, continues
to pose a major risk to all of us. The continuous threat
posed by Al-Qaida and Daesh and by their affiliates in
Afghanistan and Central Asia, the Sahel and across the
African continent, in Syria, Iraq and elsewhere attest to
that. The threat posed by terrorist groups and lone actors
and the growth of politically motivated extremism and
terrorism also concern us. As to the misuse of emerging
technologies for terrorist purposes and new avenues for
terrorist financing, they highlight the need for enhanced
multilateral engagement and strengthened cooperation
in accordance with our commonly shared principles.
We must continue to work together to build upon
progress achieved, while better prioritizing and
coordinating our activities. We must ensure that our
efforts are in line with our common fundamental
values. The eighth review gives us the opportunity to
refocus our attention in that regard. The EU and its
member States welcome the fact that the review takes
into account some of these issues, but we also think
that many challenges remain. Despite several months
of inclusive consultations led by the co-facilitators in
a perfect way, the text we adopted today is close to a
technical rollover. Our sincere hope is that the next
16/26

22/06/2023

review will see the implementation of an ambitious
consensus that corresponds to the challenges we all
face. It is also necessary to ensure that actions to
address the threat of terrorism and violent extremism
are real. That requires actions that respect human rights
and fundamental freedoms and that are not used against
civil society. It is therefore all the more important that
we continue to implement the Strategy following the
direction that we set out in the previous review and
confirmed in this one. We must strengthen in particular
actions under the fourth pillar, which concerns human
rights and the rule of law.
In the face of terrorist attacks, the European Union
and our member States uphold the common values
that underpin our pluralist societies and continue to
pursue efforts to defend them with determination.
Counter-terrorism actions must always respect
international law, in particular international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law. What is more, counter-terrorism
measures must not be misused to suppress perceived
dissent and silence human rights defenders. That
includes instances of reprisal for engagement with the
United Nations.
Civil society and human rights defenders play an
essential role in guiding States in their fight against
terrorism and violent extremism. In the face of a
continued shrinking of the civic space, we should
continue our efforts to ensure better protection
for civil society representatives and human rights
defenders, as well as continue to pay due attention to
the gender dimension. We look to the leadership of
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
UN-Women and other Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact entities.
The EU and its member States fully support
a whole-of-society approach to implementing the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and we call for
strengthened collaboration and cooperation between
Governments and civil society. In addition, we cannot
insist enough on the importance of the full, equal and
meaningful participation and leadership of women in
efforts to prevent and counter terrorism and violent
extremism. We therefore welcome the new reference to
women-led civil society organizations in the Strategy.
23-18097

22/06/2023

We must also protect the humanitarian space.
Countering terrorism and providing humanitarian
assistance are mutually inclusive objectives. We
welcome the inclusion of a reference to Security Council
resolution 2664 (2022) in the Strategy. At the same
time, we regret that it proved impossible to highlight
even further the significance of that resolution. What is
more, we must step up our efforts to isolate terrorists by
drying up all their sources of financing. That requires
oversight mechanisms that follow the recommendations
of the Financial Action Task Force and addressing
developments such as cryptocurrencies. We regret that
those elements have not been included in the resolution.
We must tackle the misuse of information
and
communication
technologies
through
a
multi-stakeholder approach, including by working with
civil society and in close cooperation with the private
sector, while providing alternative narratives. More
work is needed to strengthen dialogue with information
and communications technologies companies and
to conduct research on the role of algorithms in the
spreading of terrorist material online.
Let me turn to the institutional perspective.
Building on the seventh review and in the light of the
establishment of the Human Rights and Gender Section
in the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
we encourage the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism and all Global Compact entities to continue
their efforts for the better mainstreaming of human
rights and gender as cross-cutting issues, as well as for
all counter-terrorism activities. Although we regret that
consensus escaped delegations with regard to a more
ambitious language in the Strategy, we recognize the
significance of exchanges of views during the review
process. We look forward to sustained progress and
continued reporting on those efforts.
We also wish to insist that it is crucial that the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Global
Compact enhance their coordination and coherence in
the field through consultative inter-agency efforts. They
should integrate their field-level engagement, including
among resident coordinators and within United
Nations country teams in order to support such broader
United Nations peace and security and development
agendas as the Secretary-General’s reforms and his
prevention agenda.
We welcome the fact that the Strategy calls for future
reporting on the implementation of all four pillars and
relies on a results framework. That will allow Member

A/77/PV.80

States to monitor and, ultimately, assess the overall
impact and comprehensive, integrated implementation
of the Strategy. Monitoring and evaluation standards
are a widely recognized concept for quality assurance,
and we should strive to implement them in United
Nations counter-terrorism efforts.
Finally, the EU and its member States remain
committed to multilateralism and support global efforts
to fight terrorism and violent extremism in support of
the United Nations, including by devoting considerable
financial resources to counter-terrorism capacitybuilding partnerships that underpin the implementation
of the Strategy. The EU and its member States are
among the prime contributors to the Global Compact.
We would also like to commend the proactive
engagement of the co-facilitators with civil society in
the review, and we would like to thank civil society
for its constructive partnerships and cooperation
throughout this process. We will continue to provide
steadfast support for and to collaborate with all the
Compact entities, as well as with the Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,
with a view to achieving the full implementation of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Countering
terrorism is a priority we all share. Together, we — the
United Nations, the European Union and the Member
States — have been tirelessly committed to mitigating
that scourge. Only together can we put a stop to
terrorists and their backers.
Mr. Nasution (Indonesia): Allow me to begin by
extending our appreciation to the co-facilitators of the
eighth review, Ambassador Tarek Ladeb of Tunisia and
Ambassador Robert Rae of Canada, for their tireless
efforts throughout the process.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
We echo the OIC’s concerns that the current
review has fallen short of reflecting recent events and
emerging trends, particularly acts of hatred that may
instigate violence and terrorism. However, despite
those challenges, we welcome the consensual adoption
of resolution 77/298, on the eighth review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (GCTS). We
believe that the GCTS remains an important instrument
to guide and enhance our combined efforts to counter
terrorism. As emphasized by the Secretary-General,

23-1809717/26

A/77/PV.80

while we have made some significant gains over the
years, terrorism and violent extremism continue to take
root and grow, so we must stand as one against that
global threat. On that note, allow me to underscore
several points.
The first point concerns promoting respect for
diversity, tolerance and coexistence as an investment
towards prevention. Indonesia is concerned over the
rising tide of Islamophobia and recent incidents of the
burning of the Holy Quran, the repercussions of which,
if left unmanaged, may contribute to a vicious cycle of
violence. Therefore, it is imperative to integrate those
facts and formulate a more comprehensive approach
within our strategy to effectively address conditions
that could incite acts of terrorism and also further
contribute towards a peaceful, just and inclusive society.
The second point concerns enhancing capacitybuilding and sharing best practices. With various
new and emerging threats, including the use of new
technologies, we need to continuously adapt and
innovate. Indonesia is of the view that the Strategy
provides ample opportunities for Member States
to bolster international, regional and subregional
cooperation in a more coordinated and coherent manner.
That will also lead to better synergy and effectiveness
in implementing the strategy, not only among Member
States, but also within the United Nations system itself.

22/06/2023

In closing, allow me to reaffirm Indonesia’s
commitment to strengthening efforts in countering
terrorism based on a balanced implementation of the
four pillars of the Strategy.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): Bangladesh aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC).
I would like to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Robert Rae of Canada and
Ambassador Tarek Ladeb of Tunisia for their leadership
in facilitating the eighth review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Their experience
and wisdom in tackling that complex task were truly
commendable. Despite differing views on critical
issues, the adoption by consensus of resolution 77/298,
on the eighth review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, marks a significant
milestone in our collective efforts to combat terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations.

Mr. Araba (Benin), (Vice-President), took the Chair.

This year’s review has come up with numerous
vital courses of action to address terrorism and
violent extremism on a global scale. We particularly
acknowledge the emphasis placed on engaging
community leaders and women-led civil society
organizations to achieve the objectives of the CounterTerrorism Strategy. Recognizing the importance of
capacity-building in implementing the Strategy, it calls
upon Member States and the United Nations system to
provide support for enhancing the national capacities of
Member States in countering terrorism and preventing
extremist activities that fuel terrorism. Furthermore,
the review encourages Member States, international and
regional organizations to deepen their understanding
and support initiatives aimed at addressing terrorism in
the development and execution of global, regional and
national counter-terrorism strategies.

My
third
point
concerns
strengthening
multi-stakeholder engagement. Indonesia believes
that collaboration should continue to be strengthened
among the Government, civil society organizations,
the media, religious leaders, academia and the private
sector, while taking into account the voices of women,
youth and victims of terrorist attacks. By promoting
dialogue and information-sharing, we could optimize
the different but complementary capacities of relevant
stakeholders to enhance our collective ability to prevent
and respond to acts of terrorism.

Bangladesh, under the leadership of Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina, maintains a zero-tolerance policy
on all forms of terrorism and violent extremism. We
have always stood firm in not allowing any terrorist
individual or entity to use our territory or resources. As
stated by the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina,
terrorists are terrorists. They have no religion. As such,
we strongly oppose any policy or action that allows the
profiling of terrorists based on religion. We call upon
Member States to invest further in addressing the root
causes of terrorism and, to that end, to take measures

In the context of our region, States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) have
taken significant steps to enhance regional cooperation
in countering terrorism by developing the ASEAN
Plan of Action to Prevent and Counter the Rise of
Radicalisation and Violent Extremism, and the Bali
Work Plan 2019–2025 as its implementing framework,
which is in line with the GCTS.

18/26

23-18097

22/06/2023

against economic, social and political exclusion, to stop
the flow of arms and financing to terrorist groups, and
to continue to strive for the peaceful settlement of all
international disputes.
We express our gratitude to all delegations for
their invaluable contributions during the negotiations
of the eighth review. While the adoption of the review
strategy today marks a positive step forward, our main
challenge lies in its effective implementation. We thank
the Secretary-General for his report, as contained in
document A/77/718, which outlines the progress made
by the United Nations system in implementing the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We appreciate the
continued support of the United Nations to Member States,
through the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact, in developing and implementing
responses under all four pillars of the Strategy.
In line with those efforts, we welcome the proposal
put forth by the Secretary-General in his report entitled
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) to work on a new
peace-focused agenda aimed at reducing strategic
risks, including terrorism. We anticipate the same spirit
of cooperation and leadership from the United Nations
system for the implementation of the mandate derived
from the review.
In conclusion, we reaffirm Bangladesh’s
unwavering commitment to combating terrorism and
violent extremism in its all forms and manifestations.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the co-facilitators of the
eighth revision of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy for their work during the negotiating
process. It was not an easy job.
The review of the Strategy is a golden opportunity
to improve the agreements we have reached, to take
into account what we have learned since the previous
review and to agree on more ambitious objectives.
For that reason, during the review Costa Rica
constructively presented multiple proposals for the
text on transparency, accountability, evaluation, civil
society participation and, in particular, the integration
of a specific and contextualized gender analysis.
However, we cannot hide our disappointment that the
Strategy we adopted is not ambitious enough.
While we agree with the delegations that have said
that the four pillars of the Strategy should be applied
in a balanced manner in the fight against terrorism for

A/77/PV.80

reasons of coherence, the values of promoting human
rights and advancing gender equality should also find
application in all prevention and response actions. They
must therefore be present in a cross-cutting manner in
the text. We regret most the lack of consensus on Costa
Rica’s proposal to include an analysis of human rights
and gender in the study of conditions that are conducive
to terrorism, keeping in mind that structural gender
inequality disproportionately impacts women and
girls, and exploring the link between masculinities and
structural inequality.
Despite our efforts, pillar I of the eighth review
of the Strategy still does not include any reference to
gender or women. We are not there yet. I reiterate — not
yet. This conversation is just beginning. Costa Rica will
continue to present proposals, listen to arguments and
build bridges that will one day allow us to overcome
the gender blindness that fogs all international peace
and security instruments and strategies. For Costa Rica,
it is critical that we also analyse how gender relations
influence men’s and women’s decisions to engage with
violent extremist groups, how they influence the actions
they take within those groups, and how they shape the
stories that those groups tell about themselves. Many
academic studies establish links between certain
stereotypically masculine characteristics, such as
aggressiveness, force and the perpetration of violent acts.
Another area where we have collectively failed is in
strengthening oversight and accountability mechanisms.
The General Assembly’s request to the Secretary-General
for a report that would include a study of the need for an
internal advisory or monitoring and evaluation capacity
on the effectiveness of the United Nations system’s
counter-terrorism activities was an encouraging first
step. Although we have not been able to agree on a
higher level of commitment, we hope that the call to the
Secretary-General to report on the impact of activities in
a results framework will allow us to keep moving in the
right direction.
Let us always keep in mind that the words we agree
to in the Strategy, as well as the activities we undertake
to implement it, have an impact on communities and on
the lives of people, on the victims and survivors whose
testimonies we heard this week. For Costa Rica, it is
vitally important to move forward in this and other United
Nations processes, recognizing that consensus cannot be
limited to the lowest common denominator, but must be
a solid and ambitious commitment in search of effective
and just solutions to the global challenges we face.

23-1809719/26

A/77/PV.80

Mr. Aref (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the outset,
please allow me to express my appreciation and sincere
gratitude to the President and the co-facilitators for all
the efforts made in this process.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC) by the Permanent Representative of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia.
Fighting terrorism requires strengthened will
and determination and a genuine collective effort in
the spirit of multilateralism. The United Nations, as
the utmost expression of multilateralism, remains an
unparalleled international setting for reinvigorating
the wills of nations to counter terrorism. The review
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy (GCTS) has a particularly unique status in that
regard, as it rekindles the call for concerted action and
cooperation to fight that heinous criminal phenomenon.
As a nation that has long been a victim of terrorism
and at the same time a champion in the fight against
terrorism, we attach great importance to the reviews
of the GCTS. The delegation of the Islamic Republic
of Iran actively and in good faith engaged in that
process with a view to continuing its contribution to
multilateralism in fighting terrorism. Our delegation
manifested utmost flexibility. We duly provided
colleagues with the rationale and bases of our proposals
and our very intention was to improve the ways and
means of combating terrorism.
While many supported our proposals, certain
delegations failed to even accept agreed language
without enlightening us of the possible reasons for not
considering those proposals. Regrettably, a similar
approach was taken by the same delegations with
respect to the proposals of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation. Among the very valuable and constructive
proposals of the OIC, I would like to refer in particular
to the language proposed regarding the importance of an
effective response to terrorist attacks against Muslims
that emanate from the incitement to terrorism through
deliberate desecration of the Holy Quran and mosques.
The very fact that this proposal was provided by more
than 50 Member States is axiomatic and evinces that
Muslims are unfortunately being victimized on a daily
basis by racist and supremacist groups and that the
hatred and Islamophobic narratives propagated by such
groups and individuals create a fertile breeding ground
for terrorists to target Muslims. However, the OIC
20/26

22/06/2023

proposal addressing that issue was rejected without
any concrete reason by some delegations in minority.
It was very unfortunate that during those negotiations
we, as an active member of the OIC, witnessed the
incitement to terrorism and violence against Muslims
being justified or ignored by a few.
We were willing to see the new review of the GCTS
address in a more concrete manner the incitement to
terrorism against Muslims, the main issues and the
very new developments, as well as persistent and
often deeply rooted challenges that hinder the efforts
of Member States in fighting terrorism, including a
lack of genuine cooperation on the part of the global
Internet governance system in countering terrorism,
double standards and the politicization of the fight
against terrorism. But the intransigence of the few
forestalled the many from reaching a balanced text and
thus from efficiently advancing towards the common
goal of a world free of terrorism. We will continue our
engagement with other delegations to ensure that our
joint future steps are focused on issues of common
concerns, not those that would only be divisive, often
repetitive or of no priority. That is of course without
prejudice to the commendable efforts and tireless
dedication of the co-facilitators in the process.
Nevertheless, despite our serious objections to the
exclusion of many issues of priority for us, as well as
of priority for the OIC, and in spite of the inclusion of
certain new language, the benefit of which to counterterrorism is not known, we once again demonstrated our
commitment to a collective effort against terrorism by
maintaining the consensus so that the United Nations as
a whole can utilize this singular opportunity to reinforce
the will, determination and resolve of the international
community to a genuine fight against terrorism.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has manifested its
unwavering determination and strong commitment
in the fight against terrorism by effectively assisting
affected States in combating and dismantling terrorist
groups in the region. The bravest of our people, for
the noblest of causes of humanity and divinity, have
played a determining role and sacrificed their lives
in fighting Daesh. In that respect, General Qasem
Soleimani effectively led the counter-terrorism efforts
in the region, resulting in a huge defeat of Daesh,
and without which Daesh would have expanded its
dominance of violence and terror beyond the region. I
would like to seize this opportunity to commemorate
the remarkable sacrifices of General Qasem Soleimani
23-18097

22/06/2023

and his companions in the fight against terrorism, who
were martyred in a terrorist attack in Baghdad airport
while on an official mission in Iraq.
We reaffirm that States shall desist and refrain from
promulgating and applying unilateral coercive measures
that are internationally wrongful acts that hinder
international cooperation in countering terrorism.
We condemn the systematic terrorist attacks against
the Palestinian people, which are grave violations of
fundamental human rights, as well as of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We
also condemn in the strongest possible terms all acts
of terrorism, including those targeting scientists and
Government officials of Member States, as well as terrorist
acts against and in sabotage of peaceful nuclear facilities.
In conclusion, reaffirming that measures taken
in fighting terrorism should be in conformity with the
fundamental principles of international law and the
principles set forth within the Charter of the United
Nations, we would like to reiterate our commitment
to fighting terrorism and underline the pivotal role of
the General Assembly, with universal membership,
in addressing terrorism and in ensuring a balanced
implementation of the GCTS. It is understood that
the implementation of resolution 77/298 would be
in accordance with national legislations, priorities
and contexts.
Ms. Vittay (Hungary): Allow me to begin by
applauding the consensus that has been reached on
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
review resolution 77/298. We express our deepest
appreciation to Canada and Tunisia for their tireless
work during the consultations of the eighth review and
for their strong efforts to find a compromise.
Hungary aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union and wishes to add a few remarks in its
national capacity.
The fight against terrorism is one of the key
priorities of the Hungarian Government; therefore, we
closely followed the review process. First, we commend
the efforts to preserve the carefully crafted balance
between the four pillars of the Strategy, and in that
regard we are pleased to note that the resolution now
includes references to the important Security Council
resolution 2664 (2022) and to the role of women-led
civil society organizations. However, we cannot refrain
from mentioning some missing elements that would have
been essential in making the Strategy futureproof and
reflecting current challenges.

A/77/PV.80

To illustrate our point, we inform the Assembly that
just this week the Hungarian Counter-Terrorism Centre
arrested a man who had planned to commit a terrorist
attack in Hungary. The man is believed to have been
inspired online by previous terrorist attacks. His goal
was apparently to kill as many people as he could, and
he posted videos on social media about his plans. With
respect to that recent event, we wish to highlight that
online radicalization and lone actors continue to present
a persistent security threat, as also confirmed by the
Secretary-General’s report on the implementation of
the GCTS issued this year (A/77/718). Unfortunately,
the evolving danger of lone actors is not detailed in the
text. Furthermore, we sadly note that the language on
the potential misuse of new and emerging technologies
for terrorist purposes has not been changed significantly
since the previous review, despite not only the rapid
development of those technologies, but also the human
rights implications of countering their misuse.
Allow me to conclude by reaffirming that Hungary
continues to uphold its commitment to the fight
against terrorism and is enhancing its national efforts
via international cooperation. That is exemplified by
our recent joining of the Counter-Terrorism Travel
Programme, operated by the Office of CounterTerrorism (UNOCT). In that respect, we praise the
intense work of UNOCT and its programme offices,
and we note that this work requires sustainable and
predictable financing. The implementation of the
Strategy can be carried out only on a solid basis, and
the mandate of the UNOCT can be delivered only if a
stable financial background is provided.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has the honour to take the floor on behalf
of the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We take this opportunity to express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General for submitting his report on the
activities of the United Nations system in implementing
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(GCTS), as contained in document A/77/718, of which
we have taken due note.
Terrorist acts endanger not only the territorial
integrity and stability of States, but also national,
regional and international peace and security. Not only
do they generate terror and violate human rights, but
they also seek to destabilize legitimately constituted

23-1809721/26

A/77/PV.80

Governments or the prevailing constitutional order and
political unity of States, thereby affecting the stability
of entire nations and the very basis of societies. In
addition, terrorist acts have adverse consequences,
among others, on the economic and social development
of nations, while resulting in both an incommensurable
human toll and important economic losses, including
as a result of the destruction of States’ vital public and
private infrastructure.
We therefore express our categorical rejection of
all acts of terrorism, regardless of their motivation,
wherever, whenever and by whomsoever committed.
All acts, methods and practices of terrorism are
criminal and unjustifiable and represent clear violations
of both the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the norms of international law.
Similarly, the provision of any sort of support, active
or passive, to terrorist organizations or persons for the
purpose of inciting, planning, financing, perpetrating
or participating in the carrying out of terrorist acts
is also contrary to the values, tenets and spirit of the
founding Charter of our Organization.
That being said, we should stress, on the one
hand, that terrorism shall in no way be equated with
the legitimate struggle of peoples under colonial or
alien domination and foreign occupation for selfdetermination and national liberation, and, on the other,
that terrorism shall not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group. Similarly, we
reject the political manipulation of the fight against
terrorism, including through the issuance of arbitrary
and unilateral lists accusing States of allegedly
supporting terrorism — a practice that, it goes without
saying, is totally inconsistent with international law.
We also stress that the promotion or facilitation
of terrorism, as well as the use of digital platforms
to incite and finance terrorist acts for the purpose of
advancing regime-change policies or agendas seeking
neocolonial domination is clearly inadmissible. We
cannot overemphasize that efforts to prevent and
combat international terrorism should not be used,
in any circumstance, as a pretext to interfere in the
internal affairs of States or to resort to the use or
threat of use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State, which clearly
contradicts both the very spirit and letter of the Charter
of the United Nations.
22/26

22/06/2023

The adoption by consensus of resolution 77/298,
through which the General Assembly has unanimously
renewed yet again the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, is a clear demonstration of the
unwavering commitment of the international community
to efforts to both prevent and combat terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations. We reaffirm, in that
context, the leading role and primary responsibility of
States and their respective national institutions, with
the assistance of the United Nations, in the framework
of the Global Strategy and upon request, in efforts at
the national, regional and international levels to both
prevent and counter this despicable scourge.
We recognize that, indeed, much has been achieved
since the adoption of the Global Strategy in 2006.
Nevertheless, there is still a long road ahead in achieving
our common goal of a world free of terrorism, which
requires, among other things, a balanced implementation
of the Global Strategy and full compliance with the
relevant international obligations. This is a fight
that brooks no dichotomies or double standards. We
must clearly state that there cannot be good and bad
terrorists. In that context, and mindful of the fact that
terrorism will not be defeated by military force, law
enforcement measures and intelligence operations
alone, we emphasize the importance of comprehensively
addressing the root causes of terrorism, in line with the
provisions of pillar I of the Global Strategy, with a view
to effectively overcoming conditions that may provide
breeding grounds for the promotion of criminal agendas
based on hatred, defamation, intolerance, sectarianism,
racism, extremism, including supremacism and neoNazism, and that seek to exploit the divisions and
challenges facing each nation for the sole purpose of
inflaming tensions and fostering the commission of
terrorist acts. We refer, inter alia, to poverty, social and
economic inequalities, political and ethnic intolerance
and/or conflicts, as well as colonial or alien domination
and foreign occupation, and systematic violations of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of peoples and
nations, all of which are part of the so-called drivers of
terrorism. We are therefore of the view that if we truly
want to eliminate the scourge of terrorism in both the
short and the long terms, we must decisively address
those all those factors.
The Group of Friends expresses its resolve to take
speedy and effective measures rooted in international
legality and the tenets of the founding Charter of our
Organization to eliminate international terrorism once
and for all. In that connection, we consider of utmost
23-18097

22/06/2023

importance the further strengthening and broadening of
international cooperation and the provision of technical
assistance, upon request, and based on the needs and
priorities identified by requesting States, so that we can
effectively advance towards that end. Consequently, we
also take this opportunity to reiterate our call for the
removal of unilateral coercive measures, which hinder
such cooperation and thereby deliberately keep us from
achieving the world free of terrorism to which we aspire.
Moreover, we also insist on the need to resume, as soon
as possible, negotiations on a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism, covering all aspects of that
phenomenon, as we are confident that such a treaty
would complement the set of existing legal instruments
in this field.
In conclusion, while expressing our full solidarity
with those countries that have most recently suffered
from acts of terrorism, we renew our determination
to preserve, promote and defend the prevalence and
validity of the Charter of the United Nations. We
call on all responsible members of the international
community to set aside their differences and, instead, to
engage with each other and work together, in a decisive,
inclusive and coordinated manner, in order to eliminate
that reprehensible scourge, including through the full,
effective and balanced implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

A/77/PV.80

The fight against the scourge of terrorism, which
constitutes one of the greatest threats to the achievements
obtained in the field of justice, security and freedom,
continues to be a priority for the United Nations and
the Member States. As international cooperation is
an essential component in dealing with that common
threat, the Strategy constitutes an indispensable
instrument that provides a shared collaboration
scheme. The eighth review of the Strategy is a tool that
underscores the central role of the United Nations in
global counter-terrorism, demonstrates our continuous
commitment and provides the necessary adaptation
to the transformation of terrorism. Greece actively
participates in our common effort and in that respect
wishes to highlight specifically the following issues.
First, at a time when terrorist actions are constantly
transformed and shifted in different parts of the
world, the GCTS incorporates a holistic approach to
countering terrorism. Combating terrorism requires a
wide anti-terrorist agenda focusing on prevention and
addressing, in particular, the underlying drivers of
radicalization and violent extremism by engaging with
Governments and local religious leaders.

Allow me to start by adding our voice to the
expressions of condolences to the people and the
Government of Uganda in relation to the recent attacks
that took place on its territory on 17 June, just five
days ago.

Secondly, during the current review of the Strategy,
the relevant paragraphs of the General Assembly
resolution corresponding to illicit trafficking and trade
of cultural property from which terrorists may benefit
or which may be targeted by terrorist attacks were not
significantly modified. Yet, we would like to underline
the importance of strengthening in practical terms and
concrete policies the efforts to combat illicit trafficking
and trade in cultural property so that terrorists may not
benefit from it. According to UNESCO, such looting
contributes substantially to the financing of terrorist
groups. We also need to ensure the return of exported or
imported, illicitly excavated or stolen cultural property
to the countries of origin. Greece consistently supports
the inclusion of trafficking of archaeological objects
obtained through looting or illegal excavations into the
actions to counter the financing of the terrorism agenda.

In today’s turbulent world, the complex global
security environment has become increasingly volatile
and fragmented. The re-emergence of long-term security
dilemmas and the strategic competition between nations
entangled with non-conventional and transnational
threats, such as terrorism, challenge the ability of the
multilateral system to mitigate them.

Thirdly, it is our view that civil society actors and,
as part of a whole-of-society approach, woman-led civil
society organizations in particular, should be further
encouraged and enabled to contribute to the goals of
the Strategy within an environment that respects,
protects and promotes human rights, in accordance
with international human rights law.

Mr. Papakostas (Greece): At the outset, Greece
would like to congratulate the co-facilitators, the
Permanent Representatives of Canada and Tunisia, as
well as their teams for the work carried out in preparing
the eighth review of the United Nations Global Counterterrorism Strategy (GCTS).
Greece also aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union and wishes to
make the following remarks in its national capacity.

23-1809723/26

A/77/PV.80

Lastly, we would like to underline the importance of
Security Council resolution 2664 (2022) so that, within
its terms and in accordance with obligations of States
under international law, counter-terrorism legislation
and measures do not impede humanitarian and medical
activities or engagement with all relevant actors in a
manner consistent with international humanitarian law.
Greece
welcomes
the
adoption
of
the
resolution 77/298, containing the eighth review of the
GCTS, which is strengthening and enhancing efforts
to prevent and counter terrorism. It is our firm belief
that, through unity and solidarity, we will consolidate
progress. We stand ready to contribute and cooperate in
the implementation of all pillars of the Strategy.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset,
Peru wishes to thank the Permanent Representatives of
Canada and Tunisia, as well as their respective teams, for
the professionalism and dedication with which they led
the arduous and delicate United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy review process. We welcome the fact
that, once again, the Strategy was adopted by consensus
(resolution 77/298), as has traditionally been the case since
2006, and along those lines we reaffirm its relevance and
our shared responsibility to update it in the face of new
challenges and realities. We consider it fundamental to
reaffirm that the acts, methods and practices of terrorism
in all their forms and manifestations are activities that
aim to deny human rights and democracy, for which
reason the international community is committed to
preventing and combating terrorism in a decisive,
unified, coordinated, inclusive and transparent manner
that guarantees respect for fundamental rights.
We reiterate the importance of strengthening
synergies among the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
within the framework of their respective mandates, with
a view to providing comprehensive support to States,
basing technical assistance on the appropriate needs
assessment. That will contribute to the implementation
of the Strategy in a coordinated, comprehensive and
balanced manner among all its pillars, and in accordance
with the obligations incumbent on Member States
under international law, human rights, refugee law and
international humanitarian law.
It is essential to support the victims of terrorism to
ensure that they are treated with dignity and respect.
Their right of access to justice and reparation mechanisms
24/26

22/06/2023

must be guaranteed. Strengthening the capacity of States
to assist victims is critical to honouring and supporting
the victims and survivors of terrorism, and to protecting
the full enjoyment of their human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Within that framework, care for victims of
terrorism has been one of the priority objectives for
the Government of Peru, as recognized in the National
Multisectoral Policy to Fight Terrorism 2019-2023.
We deem it necessary and important to mention
the threat posed by violent extremism that can lead
to terrorism. On the one hand, we must address
inequalities and other structural causes, in line with
national development policies and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, in particular Sustainable
Development Goals 1 and 16. On the other hand,
we must avoid the radicalization of individuals and
strengthen the social fabric, together with actors from
civil society, academia and the private sector. This is a
fight that takes place in the realm of ideas, where we
must overcome the rhetoric of violence and resentment
with a message of peace and reconciliation.
In the fight against the financing of terrorism, the
work of the financial intelligence units and customs
are decisive. The very nature of the phenomenon we
are facing requires us to improve the mechanisms for
cooperation and exchange of information among those
entities, nationally and internationally. In that regard,
we believe that the Financial Action Task Force and its
regional affiliates play an important role in promoting
and assisting States in strengthening their financial
systems. By attacking the mechanisms and their sources
of financing, we will limit the ability of terrorist groups
to attack.
In that regard, we must highlight the importance of
addressing the link between terrorism and transnational
organized crime, the mutually beneficial dynamics
between which we can list. In that vein, we highlight
the link that transnational organized crime can have
with terrorism. It is essential to improve cooperation
at the national, subregional, regional and international
levels in order to strengthen the capacity of States
to respond to the challenge. In the same way, it is
necessary to maintain a commitment and concerted
action to prevent and dismantle illicit financial flows
destined for terrorist purposes.
We welcome the incorporation of elements that
reinforce the Strategy with a focus on human rights and
gender, as well as the recognition of the threat from
23-18097

22/06/2023

the use of new and emerging technologies. We wish
to recall once again the importance of redoubling our
efforts to finalize the process of drafting a general
convention on international terrorism.
I wish to conclude by expressing Peru’s firm
commitment and support in the fight against the threats
posed by this scourge.
Mr. Peñaranda (Philippines): The Philippines
welcomes the adoption by consensus of resolution 77/298,
on the eighth review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy (GCTS). We thank the
co-facilitators, Canada and Tunisia, as well as their
teams, for their leadership. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his reports (A/77/266 and A/77/718), which
have informed that process.
A consensual and truly global counter-terrorism
strategy, reflecting balance among the diverse interests
of the Member States, as well as balance among the four
pillars of the Strategy, is critical for States confronted
with terrorism. The world has changed since 2021, when
we last adopted the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy (GCTS) (resolution 75/291). The
coronavirus disease pandemic altered the global
security landscape. With ensuing border restrictions,
terrorists have shifted operations in cyberspace, where
they spew narratives for a captive online audience and
where they continue to prowl until now.
Just six years ago, a terrorist organization inspired
by Daesh laid siege to Marawi, in southern Philippines.
A network analysis later established that the Group had
ties to international terrorist groups that facilitated the
flow of funds, foreign terrorist fighters and material
support. The Philippines acted swiftly by adopting a
national strategy based on the GCTS; partnering with
communities; countering terrorist financing; enhancing
border control, including through joint maritime border
patrols; ramping up law enforcement; optimizing
international cooperation; and revamping our counterterrorism legislation. We also work closely with partners
on the United Nations Countering Terrorist Travel
Programme in both the air and the maritime domains.
The outlook has changed, and significant progress
has been made, as our officials have highlighted in
briefings before the Security Council Counter-Terrorism
Committee. While Member States have the primary
responsibility to counter terrorism, the Marawi incident,
with its transnational elements, demonstrates the need
for a global strategy. To stay relevant, the GCTS must

A/77/PV.80

remain a living document, evolving with the times
and the shifting paradigms of terrorism but realistic
and responsive to the needs of Member States. The
Philippines, therefore, while welcoming updates in the
eighth iteration of the GCTS and the retention of key
principles, notes that the review period may be short.
We look forward to substantive updates three years from
now, when the GCTS marks its twentieth year.
We affirm the importance of human rights and international humanitarian law so that fighting terrorists is
done without the careless disregard of human rights that
recruits their replacements. The 2021 United Nations
Joint Programme on Human Rights in the Philippines is
a tool for fostering systematic and coherent engagement
among United Nations entities, Member States, international partners and civil society. As counter-terrorism
cuts across different United Nations entities — among
them, the Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, and the United Nations country team unit/resident coordinator — greater synergy and coherence are
needed. The Joint Programme provides a good model
for harnessing multilateralism towards concrete, practical and relevant cooperation at the country level. One
of the six areas of technical cooperation under the Joint
Programme is on the human rights-based approach to
counter-terrorism, in partnership with UNOCT. We
work closely with UNOCT, including on advancing the
protection of the rights of victims of terrorism, in line
with our holistic approach, which integrates the need
to address socioeconomic drivers and to strengthen
related rehabilitation and reintegration programmes.
We welcome capacity-building programmes in
partnership with the United Nations entities and other
States, while stressing that they must be constructive,
anchored in the needs of the countries concerned and
duly informed by the development and security context
on the ground. They must duly take national priorities
into account and should be pursued in coordination
with duty-bearers. Given the transnational nature
of extremism and terrorism, the implementation of
national action plans can benefit from forging stronger
cooperation among national, regional and multilateral
organizations and mechanisms.
We remain committed to the idea that counterterrorism efforts should be based on respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence and
unity of all States, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.

23-1809725/26

A/77/PV.80

Under the eighth iteration of the GCTS, we look
forward to working with UNOCT, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, United
Nations entities with the relevant mandates and other
partners for the integrated and balanced implementation
of the Strategy across the United Nations system and
to pursuing counter-terrorism efforts consistent with
respect for national ownership and national priorities.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): Nothing can
ever justify an act of terrorism. No religious pretext
can ever excuse violent methods. At the same time, we
will never be able to defeat terrorism in the long term
unless we address the conditions that are conducive to
its spread.
Unfortunately, the issue of combating terrorism
remains urgent. In that context, Kazakhstan believes
that the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy remains a unique instrument to enhance
national, regional and international efforts to counter
terrorism. The Strategy not only sends a clear message
that terrorism is unacceptable in all its forms and
manifestations, but it also resolves to take practical
steps, individually and collectively, to prevent and
combat terrorism. Those practical steps include a
wide array of measures ranging from strengthening
State capacity to counter terrorist threats to better
coordinating United Nations system activities.
Kazakhstan continues to contribute to international
efforts to combat terrorism. Our country has ratified
all 19 United Nations universal counter-terrorism
conventions and protocols and strictly implements all
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Kazakhstan
supports the implementation of the Joint Action Plan
approved in March 2022 for the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in

26/26

22/06/2023

Central Asia. Twenty-five organizations, including
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and Al-Qaida,
have been recognized by the judicial authorities of
Kazakhstan as extremist and terrorist. We take practical
steps to counter money laundering and the financing
of terrorism.
To counter the propaganda of extremism and
terrorism on the Internet, a cybercontrol information
system was put into practical operation in Kazakhstan
in 2019. We pay special attention to the rehabilitation of
Kazakhstan citizens returned from Syria and Iraq as a
result of the Zhusan and Rusafa humanitarian operations,
particularly women and children. More than 620 citizens
were brought back to Kazakhstan from conflict zones.
The overwhelming majority of them returned to normal
life and were reintegrated into society. In our region,
we implement, alongside the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, the
Strengthening Resilience Against Violent Extremism in
Asia programme, which is aimed at fostering resilience
in countering violent extremism. We also continue
to financially support the implementation of those
measures. Last year, Kazakhstan allocated $50,000 to
the project activities of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism. The same amount was allocated
this year.
In conclusion, I reiterate our strong support for
bilateral and multilateral actions aimed at achieving a
world free from terrorism.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker on this item for this meeting.
We will hear the remaining speakers this afternoon
at 3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

23-18097
