A/65/PV.34

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

34

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 20 October 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

It was so decided.

Agenda items 7 (continued) and 132

Agenda items 9 and 13

Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items

Report of the Economic and Social Council

Pattern of conferences
Letter from the Chair of the Committee on
Conferences addressed to the President of the
General Assembly (A/65/337/Add.1)
The President (spoke in French): Members are
aware that, pursuant to paragraph 7 of section I of
resolution 40/243, no subsidiary organ of the General
Assembly may meet at United Nations Headquarters
during a regular session of the Assembly unless
explicitly authorized by the Assembly.
Authorization is thus sought for the United
Nations Appeals Tribunal to hold one meeting in New
York during the main part of the sixty-fifth session of
the General Assembly, on the strict understanding that
the meeting will have to be accommodated when
facilities and services can be made available without
adversely affecting the activities of the General
Assembly and its Main Committees. It is also the
understanding that everything possible will be done to
ensure the most efficient use of conference services.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to authorize the United Nations Appeals
Tribunal to meet during the main part of the sixty-fifth
session of the General Assembly?

Report of the Economic and Social
Council (A/65/3)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/65/216)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Report of the Secretary-General (A/65/84)
The President (spoke in French): In connection with
agenda item 9, I recall that, pursuant to resolution 58/316 of
1 July 2004, the Assembly, on the recommendation of the
General Committee, decided at its 2nd plenary meeting, on
17 September 2010, to consider agenda item 9 in its
entirety in plenary, on the understanding that the
administrative, programme and budgetary aspects would be
addressed by the Fifth Committee.
At the same meeting, the Assembly took note of
the clarification that, in implementing resolution
58/316 with respect to considering item 9 in its entirety
in plenary, the relevant parts of chapter I of the report
that are under agenda items already allocated to the
Main Committees will be considered by the Committee
concerned for final action by the General Assembly.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-59295 (E)

*1059295*

A/65/PV.34

In connection with agenda item 13, members will
recall that, pursuant to resolution 57/270 B, the
Assembly decided to consider under the item the
chapters of the annual report of the Economic and
Social Council relevant to the integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits, including through the participation in its
discussions of the President of the Council.
I give the floor to the President of the Economic
and Social Council, His Excellency Mr. Hamidon Ali, to
introduce the report of the Economic and Social Council.
Mr. Ali (Malaysia), President of the Economic
and Social Council: I have the honour to introduce the
2010 report of the Economic and Social Council,
contained in document A/65/3.
The Council’s work for this year should be seen
in the context of the overall effort to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which
culminated in the MDG summit in September, shortly
after the substantive session of the Economic and
Social Council.
Last month, some 89 heads of State and
Government adopted a collective road map for the
achievement of the MDGs by 2015.
With the multiple crises — food, energy, climate,
financial and economic — exposing the weaknesses in
our international financial and economic system, and
with economic recovery still faltering, the summit sent
a clear message that Member States remain fully
committed to the Goals set 10 years ago. The outcome
of the summit (resolution 65/1) also identified the
continuing role of the Economic and Social Council in
its follow-up.
I would like to take this opportunity to first
reflect on the outcome of the Council’s work in that
context and then turn to areas for future action.
The 2010 annual ministerial review focused on
gender equality and the empowerment of women. The
review confirmed that both issues sit squarely at the
heart of development and peace worldwide. Further,
the review coincided with the establishment of the
UN Women entity. In that regard, the 13 countries that
gave national voluntary presentations provided rich
information on success factors and experiences at the
country level. National voluntary presentations have
grown into a vital platform for lessons learned,

2

characterized by sincere and transparent presentations
that share successful policies and identify challenges
for the benefit of others.
The ministerial declaration adopted at the close
of the high-level segment serves as a pivotal action
point on progress, challenges and implementation gaps.
It identifies strategies to effectively implement
international commitments on gender equality and
opens new windows for collaborative actions,
partnerships and the engagement of new and diverse
stakeholders. The declaration served as a useful source
for agreement on the MDG outcome document on
issues of gender equality and empowerment.
The impact and visibility of the substantive
segment were further enhanced by an extensive series
of side events on a range of cross-cutting themes
related to gender equality and women’s empowerment.
Those were organized by Member States, entities of the
United Nations system and non-governmental
stakeholders. Together, those activities served as the
Council’s hub for promoting and catalysing tangible
multi-stakeholder partnerships for implementing the
United Nations development agenda.
The prevailing complex economic and financial
climate gave special relevance to the Economic and
Social Council’s second Development Cooperation
Forum. The Forum’s interactive policy dialogues
produced action-oriented policy messages on changes in
the development cooperation architecture, aid allocation
and effectiveness, and policy coherence. The Forum also
sent a clear political message to the General Assembly’s
High-level Plenary Meeting on the MDGs on the
importance of sustaining and improving development
cooperation against the backdrop of the crises.
As a global independent platform, the
Development Cooperation Forum was encouraged to
engage more countries and stakeholders in discussions
on aid effectiveness and mutual accountability, and to
promote more balanced aid relationships with more
robust Government systems to manage aid funds. The
meetings underscored that the policies of developed
countries need to be coherent with development
objectives. At the same time, the catalytic role of aid in
increasing other sources of development finance was
emphasized. The deliberations called for greater
political momentum and a focus on turning pledges
into implementation. It was also felt that the aid
effectiveness agenda should be broadened to include

10-59295

A/65/PV.34

concerns such as conditionality or flexibility to combat
exogenous shocks.
On South-South cooperation, a variety of positive
experiences were shared. Overall, there was
unprecedented participation from relevant development
cooperation actors, including national Governments,
parliamentarians and representatives of civil society
and local Government. I remain convinced that the
Development Cooperation Forum should be annualized
to fulfil expectations of it as a forum for keeping
development cooperation under review.
This year, the coordination segment proved to be
a rich source of ideas and elements for the High-level
Plenary Meeting on the Millennium Development
Goals, in particular on the health-related MDGs and
MDG 8, on a global partnership. There was strong
support for accelerating progress to achieve the targets
for women and children, and the Council gave impetus
to the Secretary-General’s action plan on women and
children, which was launched during the MDG summit.
The 2010 operational activities segment was a
rallying call for the United Nations system to gear up
towards the next comprehensive policy review in 2012.
The Council made a successful attempt to strengthen
the participation of national policymakers in that
segment. The debates, with a strong focus on countrylevel realities, provided a compass for preparation of
the next quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities in 2012. There were also broad
calls on the United Nations system to maintain a spirit
of reform following the system-wide coherence process
by continuing the pursuit of effectiveness and
efficiency at the country level.
Turning to the humanitarian affairs segment,
Member States’ decision to focus on the complex
issues of operating in high-risk environments,
vulnerability and humanitarian response amplified the
importance of those issues to our work. Overall, it was
heartening to witness significant participation by
Governments, the global civil society network, and
senior officials of the United Nations system.
Moreover,
the
number
of
non-governmental
organizations that made oral presentations through the
new online system of the Department of Economic and
Social Affairs has doubled and the submission of
written statements has tripled.
I am also pleased to report that significant
progress has been made in strengthening the Council’s

10-59295

work in the area of peace and development. In that
regard, the special policy dialogue on the role of
women in countries in special situations and the joint
special event of the Economic and Social Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission on peacebuilding and
the MDGs, held during the substantive session,
attracted widespread support and interest.
Haiti remains a focus of the Council’s work. The
Economic and Social Council remains committed to
ensuring that Haiti recovers from the humanitarian
disaster and resumes its path to long-term
development. As an expression of that commitment,
Council members extended the mandate of the
Economic and Social Council’s Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti for two years and asked the Group to
report on its activities twice a year. I believe that a
more focused programme of activities by the Group, in
close collaboration with the United Nations system and
in support of a Haitian-led recovery process, will go a
long way in helping the recovery. The determination of
the international community to deliver on its
commitments will be paramount.
The Council looks forward to the General
Assembly’s review of the strengthening of the
Economic and Social Council during the current
session to see how its role could be further enhanced,
most importantly, in regard to the annual ministerial
review, assessing the progress made in implementation
of the United Nations development agenda, including
the Millennium Development Goals and the
Development Cooperation Forum, and reviewing
trends and progress in international development
cooperation. Members will also have an opportunity to
consider how to strengthen the Council’s link with the
Peacebuilding Commission and ad hoc meetings on
humanitarian emergencies as and when they are
requested.
Looking ahead, we have already set in motion
preparations for the next annual ministerial review,
which will focus on education. As we all know,
education is fundamental to the economic and social
development of societies and interlinks strongly with
the sustainability of our planet in the long run. The
ministerial reviews of past years have demonstrated
that no true progress is achievable in any field,
including gender equality, global public health,
sustainable development and poverty eradication,
without the clear inclusion of education on an action
agenda.

3

A/65/PV.34

I consider next year’s review to be a crucial
element in building our shared knowledge of
development imperatives. And we must ensure that the
recommendations of the previous year’s annual
ministerial reviews will be carried through. I urge
everyone to engage fully in the national, regional and
global preparatory activities to set the stage for a
successful and path-breaking session next year.
Building on our progress and defining new actions
informs the spirit with which the Council embraces its
work.
Mr. Ali (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to greet this gathering and express the
hope that the discussions here will lead to tangible
progress on the various issues and challenges that must
take priority on the General Assembly’s agenda this
year, especially agenda item 9 on the report of the
Economic and Social Council.
We are extremely pleased to see you, Sir,
presiding over this session. We fully trust your
wisdom, experience and ability to guide us to the light
at the end of the tunnel in order to achieve the
aspirations of the international community to peace,
progress and sustainable development.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report under agenda item 13 (A/65/84) and to
welcome the 2010 report of the Economic and Social
Council (A/65/3). We would also like to commend the
extreme efficiency with which Mr. Hamidon Ali has
led the Council’s work and the members of his Bureau
for their extensive efforts.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of brotherly
Yemen on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
This year’s session of the Economic and Social
Council has developed great momentum thanks to the
international and regional climate and the need to
create a peaceful and prosperous world based on the
common values and principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter, first and foremost respect for the
sovereignty of States and their choices, the peaceful
settlement of disputes, and joint cooperation in all
economic and social aspects in order to build an
effective and capable community of nations that enjoys
full and multilateral cooperation integrating the
richness and diversity of the international community.

4

We live in a world where many challenges where
the threats confronting us are interrelated. There is no
doubt that the international community is convinced
now more than ever that, given their rapidity, variety
and effects, we cannot face these challenges alone. We
need collective action embodied in an international
organization that is effective and efficient, like the
United Nations, and that launches creative initiatives
commensurate with these challenges.
Given its universal membership, legitimacy and
global mandate, the United Nations can play a critical
role in achieving international cooperation to
accelerate the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). We affirm the need for
the United Nations system to bolster the abilities of
developing countries to implement their development
goals. My delegation stresses the importance and
vitality of the outcome of the High-level Plenary
Meeting on the MDGs held in September. The Meeting
was an opportunity to renew our commitments and to
muster resources and collective action to meet the
MDGs by 2015.
It was made evident at the Meeting that there is
an urgent need to expand the scope of the global
partnership for development, to bridge existing gaps,
and to meet the challenges confronting developing
countries. We believe that the outcome document of the
High-level Meeting (resolution 65/1) is a road map
helping developing countries to increase their
development efforts by ensuring more official
development assistance; lifting unjust trade barriers,
including those preventing products from developing
countries from reaching international markets; and
facilitating access to fair prices for their exports and
commodities. Protectionist policies must be eliminated
and foreign debts alleviated, given the negative impact
of such debts on socio-economic development.
The annual special meeting of the Economic and
Social Council with the Bretton Woods institutions, the
World Trade Organization and the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development was an
opportunity to strengthen the ties between the United
Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions in the
manner laid out in the Monterrey Consensus. In turn, it
serves to enrich a constructive debate on seeking the
best means and methods to deal with the global
economic and financial crisis.

10-59295

A/65/PV.34

My delegation is in favour of greater efforts and
support being extended to ensure fair representation for
developing countries, to strengthen transparency and
credibility, and to undertake comprehensive reform of
the Bretton Woods institutions on the basis of
qualifications and merit and in a manner that would
guarantee additional resources for developing
countries, including multilateral, bilateral and private
resources. This would allow for the implementation of
measures and the undertaking of the action necessary
to overcome the impact of the global economic and
financial crisis.
The high-level segment of the Economic and
Social Council focused on the need to implement the
internationally agreed development goals and to
honour commitments to gender equality and the
empowerment of women. It was a good opportunity to
evaluate progress made, exchange experiences and
lessons learned, and discuss ways to overcome current
and future challenges and obstacles to achieving
equality between the sexes.
My delegation welcomes the formation of the
new United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women and expects it to bolster the
Organization’s ability to support gender equality and
the empowerment of women in a manner consistent
with national ownership and leadership of social
development programmes in developing countries.
The coordination segment also gave us a chance
to focus on the coordination of the implementation of
the MDGs. Discussions were held on last year’s
ministerial declaration regarding the implementation of
internationally agreed development goals pertaining to
public health. These discussions were a value-added
element to the discussions of the MDG summit held
last month.
As for the humanitarian affairs segment of the
Council’s session, the obstacles, challenges and lessons
learned pertaining to the coordination of United
Nations emergency humanitarian aid were discussed.
Humanitarian challenges arising from emergencies and
natural disasters are increasing throughout the world,
especially in developing countries. Moreover, these
challenges have exacerbated the negative effects of the
global financial and economic crisis, the food and
energy crises, and climate change. There was a
discussion of the various international organizations
dealing with funding for development, especially the

10-59295

Monterrey Conference and the Follow-up International
Conference on Financing for Development held in
Doha.
In the same context, this year marks the end of
the Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the Decade 2001-2010, which has sought
to alleviate poverty, combat hunger and limit maternal
mortality rates in order to increase the productive
capacities of least developed countries (LDCs),
especially in the agricultural sector, to increase
investment in infrastructure and to enhance
technological capacities. We express our deep concern
over the slow progress made by the LDCs, especially
in Africa.
As for United Nations operational activities, we
confirm the need to enhance the international
development partnership based on national ownership
of development strategies in developing countries,
which should be the guiding principle of all United
Nations operational activities.
Peace and stability in the Sudan have been and
continue to be the essential and established goals of the
Government of National Unity, which affirmed its
genuine commitment to peace in the historic signing of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. That Agreement
put an end to one of the longest-running civil wars on
the African continent, a legacy of the colonial period.
Our quest for peace arises from our understanding that
it will create a new atmosphere conducive to
accelerated development and to the exploitation of the
Sudan’s great wealth and resources.
From this rostrum, we therefore call on the entire
international community to support efforts to bring
peace and stability to the Sudan, in view of the fact
that such support will strengthen peace and stability in
Africa as a whole. We should avoid anything that might
harm or have a negative effect on such efforts. In that
context, we call on the international community to
support the work being done to hold the upcoming
referendum and to ensure that it is a fair, transparent
and free event at which the people of Southern Sudan
can express their genuine desires, with no negative
repercussions or pressure that could lead to false or
unrealistic results.
While my country has resolutely striven to meet
all the MDGs, it has achieved tangible progress in
implementing projects that target vulnerable sectors of
society, attempt to alleviate poverty, offer services in

5

A/65/PV.34

public health and education, including childhood and
maternity services, and combat diseases.
In the area of poverty reduction, the Sudan has
prepared a 25-year economic development plan,
beginning with the first five-year plan for the period
2007-2011, which seeks to implement socio-economic
development and alleviate poverty. We have also
formed a high-level council, chaired by the President
of the Republic, to prepare and oversee the national
anti-poverty strategy. As a result of these efforts, our
spending on the poor increased to 9 per cent of our
gross domestic product for 2009. We have also directed
that 12 per cent of commercial bank credit lines be
allocated to funding small projects. Besides this, the
Zakat mechanism, a social equality project, has
contributed more than $200 million a year to
combating poverty.
The Sudan has also seen positive developments in
primary education. Universal free primary education is
now official State policy. We have also formulated a
national strategy for the education of girls.
We have adopted a national strategy for the
advancement and empowerment of women. In 2005,
we formulated a national policy to combat violence
against women. We have established a department
within the Ministry of Justice to combat violence
against women and children, along with a unit
established in 2006 within the Ministry of the Interior
for the protection of children and families. Our 2008
national strategy for combating female genital
mutilation has also been given high priority. The penal
code has been amended to incorporate an article aimed
at protecting women during conflicts. We have
allocated 25 per cent of seats in the National Assembly
and municipal legislative councils to women, and the
number of female parliamentarians has thus grown to
300.

the United Nations on 28 March 2007. The
communiqué guidelines have been successfully
implemented thanks to the important role played by the
supreme mechanism designated to follow up its
implementation, which required the Government to
make special efforts to open a corridor to Darfur that
enabled humanitarian aid to be delivered there.
However, we emphasize the need to intensify efforts to
overcome the challenges in this area, particularly those
involving the shift away from humanitarian aid to
development and reconstruction, especially in Darfur.
Focusing on reconstruction and development is one of
the most important strategic solutions to the Darfur
issue.
The economic, trade and financial changes and
world development are interrelated. The imbalances in
the economic structures of developing and leastdeveloped countries are still hindering development
and progress towards achieving the MDGs. The current
world economic order, with the unfair conditions it
imposes on developing countries’ exports, as well as
the heavy weight of foreign debt, which is paralysing
regional economic activity, hinder the progress of
development. That is especially true in Africa, which,
as the Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2) states,
enjoys special status and requires more international
development aid, stronger development partnerships
and relevant initiatives, such as the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development.

Moreover, the country has adopted policies and
measures in support of child health, aimed at ensuring
free medical care for children under the age of five.
These efforts were crowned by the promulgation in
2010 of the Child Law. The Sudan attaches great
importance to the improvement of reproductive health
and to that end has formulated a national strategy and
road map for reducing maternal mortality.

In this context, I must emphasize the dangerous
impact of such natural phenomena as climate change
and environmental degradation, which have been
primary causes of war and conflict in Africa. The
Darfur conflict is a real-life testament to the
implications of these phenomena, with direct effects on
citizens and their daily livelihood. As a party to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change since 1993, the Sudan affirms the need to step
up multilateral global action in order to confront
climate change, mitigate it more effectively, and ensure
the necessary participation of developing countries in
addressing its causes and consequences. Developed
countries must fulfil their obligations in this area in
terms of capacity-building and financial and technical
aid to developing countries in order to help them
confront this problem.

In the humanitarian sphere, the Government of
the Sudan is committed to implementing the
international humanitarian communiqué signed with

In closing, I reiterate that the ongoing role of the
United Nations imposes on us a collective
responsibility, based on the firm will and determination

6

10-59295

A/65/PV.34

to make the Organization a global and multilateral
forum for engaging fairly and effectively in solving the
problems of the world, in a manner that reflects the
provisions of the Charter, and in cooperation with
regional organizations, in order to achieve international
and regional peace and security. The Sudan, an active
and committed Member of the United Nations,
continues to be committed to these objectives, the fruit
of our collective efforts.
Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen): On behalf of the Group of
77 and China, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
the report contained in document A/65/84, and I
welcome the report of the Economic and Social
Council for 2010 in document A/65/3.
Indeed, 2010 has been another critically eventful
year. The Group would like at the outset to recognize
the dynamic leadership of the President of the
Economic and Social Council, Ambassador Hamidon
Ali, and his Bureau in guiding the work of the Council
in 2010. His leadership brought an innovative and
invigorating spirit to the work of the Council this year.
Our gratitude also goes to all the facilitators of draft
resolutions for their tireless efforts.
The High-level Plenary Meeting on the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), held from 20
to 22 September, offered us an opportunity to renew
our commitments, rally support and spur collective
action to achieve the MDGs by 2015. The summit
clearly showed that there is an urgent need to scale up
the global partnership for development in order to
mobilize additional resources to address the remaining
gaps and continuing challenges facing developing
countries.
We consider the summit’s outcome document
(resolution 65/1) to be a plan of action that demands
immediate implementation. Likewise, we stress the
need for an annual review of this plan of action within
the United Nations system in order to make the
achievement of the MDGs a reality by 2015.
The annual special meeting of the Economic and
Social Council with the Bretton Woods institutions, the
World Trade Organization (WTO) and the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD) has provided us with an opportunity to
review and strengthen the relationship between the
United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions, as
set out in the Monterrey Consensus, by pursuing a
constructive and helpful debate among them in order to

10-59295

find ways and means to remedy the world financial and
economic crisis.
During that meeting, the Group reiterated its call
for the governing structure of the Bretton Woods
institutions to be reformed, ensuring the promotion of
fair and equitable representation by developing
countries, improving transparency and credibility in the
appointment of the senior leadership of the Bretton
Woods institutions through a transparent and meritbased selection process. We also emphasized the urgent
need for adequate resources to be mobilized at the
national level and for new and additional resources to
be allocated to developing countries from all available
funding mechanisms, including multilateral, bilateral
and private sources, for the implementation of actions
and measures to help them overcome the impact of the
current crisis.
The Group stresses once again that the United
Nations is the only global body with universal
membership and unquestioned legitimacy, and is
therefore well positioned to address global economic
governance with the objective of achieving sustainable
and socially balanced economic development. It is
critical that Member States commit to the United
Nations process and to multilateralism and its
underlying values in order that it may fulfil its role in
global economic governance.
Another important event was the high-level
segment on the Development Cooperation Forum, a
principal venue for global dialogue and policy review
on international development cooperation. The Forum
could be an appropriate high-level forum that allows
for the broader participation of key actors and
promotes an effective dialogue among them. Our focus
this year was at three levels: mutual accountability and
aid transparency, South-South and triangular
cooperation, and aid policy coherence with a view to
moving from aid to more long-term sources of
development financing.
The Group of 77 and China is of the view that the
Development Cooperation Forum should not be
diverted to specific agendas pursued outside the United
Nations framework. The best ways and means of
enhancing international development cooperation, as
well as the principles that should be applied in that
regard, should be discussed and decided by all Member
States in an inclusive and transparent manner, drawing
from a very wide range of experiences and practices.

7

A/65/PV.34

The 2010 substantive session of the Council
marked the first full cycle of implementation of the
new intergovernmental follow-up mechanism of the
financing for development process adopted last year.
We were therefore pleased by the adoption by
consensus of the resolution entitled “Follow-up to the
International
Conference
on
Financing
for
Development and the 2008 Review Conference”.
The high-level segment of the Economic and
Social Council also focused on the implementation of
the internationally agreed goals and commitments on
gender equality and the empowerment of women. This
segment provided us with a timely opportunity to
assess the progress made, share experience and lessons
learned, and find appropriate ways to overcome
remaining obstacles and challenges to the gender issue.
In this regard, the Group welcomes the establishment
of the new United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women and pledges its full
support to its operationalization. We hope that the new
Entity will strengthen the ability of the United Nations
to support the achievement of gender equality and the
empowerment of women all over the world.
This year’s coordination segment of the Council
allowed us to focus on the implementation of existing
mandates on coordination. We discussed at length the
role of the United Nations in implementing the
ministerial declaration of last year’s high-level
segment of the Economic and Social Council, which
dealt with implementing the internationally agreed
goals and commitments on global public health. Our
discussion provided a useful contribution to the MDG
review summit that was held last month.
The humanitarian affairs segment of the Council
offered a valuable opportunity to discuss the
challenges, obstacles and lessons learned with respect
to the strengthening of the coordination of the
emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations. The humanitarian challenges resulting from
complex emergencies and natural disasters continue to
increase, especially in developing countries. Moreover,
these challenges have been compounded by the
negative impact of the global economic and financial
crisis, the world food crisis and continuing food
insecurity, energy crises and the challenges posed by
climate change. The Group reaffirms the urgent need to
redouble our efforts to address these challenges.

8

Given the fact that this year marks the end of the
Brussels Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries (LDCs) for the Decade 2001-2010, the
Group expresses its concern at the uneven and
insufficient progress in achieving the targets and
implementation of the Programme of Action, especially
with respect, inter alia, to alleviating poverty,
combating hunger, achieving gender equality and
reducing maternal mortality. We therefore reiterate our
call for the enhanced productive capacity of LDCs,
particularly in the agricultural sector, and for greater
investment in physical infrastructure and technological
development.
The Council’s operational activities segment
constitutes a critical element fundamental to
strengthening the development pillar of the United
Nations. The Group reiterates the need for a
strengthened global partnership for development, based
on the recognition of national leadership and
ownership of development strategies, which should be
a guiding principle of United Nations operational
activities at the country level.
Among other agreements reached this year by the
Council was resolution 2010/25, entitled “Recovering
from the world financial and economic crisis: a Global
Jobs Pact”. The resolution reaffirms that employment
creation is essential to recovery efforts and recognizes
that the Global Jobs Pact is an important instrument for
promoting job-intensive growth. We are pleased by the
progress registered in that regard by the International
Labour Organization and the United Nations
Development Fund, and we encourage other entities of
the United Nations system to work towards meeting the
objectives of the Second United Nations Decade for the
Eradication of Poverty, whose theme is “Full
Employment and Decent Work for All”.
In conclusion, let me stress once again that the
Group of 77 and China welcomes the new format of the
Council’s high-level meeting with the Bretton Woods
institutions, UNCTAD and WTO, since it represents a
clear improvement over our past experiences with the
financing for development process. We particularly
welcome the participation of the President of the
Economic and Social Council in the spring meetings
with the Bretton Woods institutions, and we hope that
that practice can be regularized and expanded in the
future.

10-59295

A/65/PV.34

Mr. De Bassompierre (Belgium): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and
Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia align themselves with this
declaration.
The European Union (EU) thanks the SecretaryGeneral for the comprehensive report of the Economic
and Social Council (A/65/3).
We meet today as we are about to engage in the
review of resolution 61/16, on the strengthening of the
Council. In that regard, this intervention will focus on
three points. First, the EU is encouraged by the
progress in the revitalization of the Council. Many of
the instruments put in place in recent years have amply
proven their worth. Second, while we primarily need to
build upon that progress, there is room for
improvement in some areas. Third, the relevance of the
Council ultimately depends on our own willingness to
make it work. The EU is encouraged by recent
experience, although we can do better here, too.
Looking back at this year’s substantive session,
as well as the other three that have taken place since
the adoption of resolution 61/16, the EU believes that
we have good reason to be encouraged by the progress
made in revitalizing the Council.
Over the years, the annual ministerial review has
developed into a key high-level forum to discuss broad
thematic issues related to development, including a
review of the implementation of the internationally
agreed development goals, with a wide range of
stakeholders participating. It has thereby become the
very embodiment of the Council’s role as the principal
coordinating organ of the United Nations in economic,
social and related fields and as the place to integrate
the follow-up of the major United Nations processes in
that area.
The ministerial declarations adopted on those
occasions have become important reference documents.
This year’s debate, coinciding with the decision to
establish the new entity UN Women and ahead of the
recent Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
summit, confirmed that by providing an important
contribution on the crucial issue of gender equality and
women’s empowerment.

10-59295

The national voluntary presentations, in
particular, provide a valuable opportunity for
exchanges of best practices and lessons learned. Both
the number of countries volunteering to make
presentations and the size and quality of the audience
at those presentations demonstrate the high interest that
they generate.
The second Development Cooperation Forum
confirmed the Forum as an important meeting place for
global dialogue on international development
cooperation. It also provided a very useful and
qualitative contribution to the debate ahead of the
MDG summit last month.
The operational activities segment and the
humanitarian affairs segment continue to make the
Council the central forum for discussion of issues
related to development and humanitarian operations at
a policy level and with a cross-cutting perspective,
both through the resolutions adopted and through the
interactive dialogues that precede them. The recent
Assembly resolution on system-wide coherence
(resolution 64/289) once again confirms the Council in
that role and is another good example of the fluid
distribution of tasks that has developed between the
Council and the General Assembly in that area.
Of course, complacency is never advisable. The
EU will fully engage in the upcoming review of the
organization of the work of the Economic and Social
Council, with a mind open to partners’ suggestions, but
it will do so with the conviction that, while there is
always room for improvement, we primarily need at
this stage to build upon the progress already achieved.
Let me mention here some particular elements
that may deserve attention in our deliberations.
The coordination segment plays a useful role in
the follow-up to the ministerial declarations. This year,
it was the framework for the first implementation of
the decisions taken in 2009 on strengthening the
follow-up to the Financing for Development process,
fully utilizing the comparative advantages that the
Economic and Social Council offers in terms of
multi-stakeholder engagement. We could, however,
carry the reflection on the identity and function of that
segment further, particularly in relation to the general
segment.
The
general
segment
remains
woefully
overburdened, leading to superficial debates and hasty

9

A/65/PV.34

consideration of issues that require more attention, as
well as to the deferral to resumed sessions of issues
that tend to clash with the agenda of other bodies. We
should explore how to better prepare the ground for
that part of the session and whether some of that work,
especially decisions of a more administrative nature,
can be carried out outside the substantive session. We
should also examine carefully how to avoid duplication
between the work of the General Assembly,
particularly the Second and Third Committees, and the
Economic and Social Council.
The relationship with the Peacebuilding
Commission, and more generally consideration by the
Council of the link between peace and development,
certainly deserve more attention. Initial steps have
already been taken through the organization of joint
meetings. We should build upon those steps to make
the relationship more substantial, as appropriate.
Mr. Mac-Donald (Suriname), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
To conclude, the EU would like to refer to the
important message of the Economic and Social
Council’s President, Ambassador Hamidon Ali, in his
address at the beginning of this year’s session of the
Council. While improvements can be made to the
Council’s hardware — that is, to resolution 61/16 —
the relevance of the Council ultimately depends on the
software, that is, our own attitude to the body and our
willingness to make it work.
In that regard, the EU would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the President of the
Council, Ambassador Hamidon Ali, as well as his
predecessor, Ambassador Sylvie Lucas, for their role in
steering the revitalization of the Council. The EU is
also encouraged by the positive atmosphere that
prevailed at the spring meeting and the spirit of
renewed cooperation with the Bretton Woods
institutions, the World Trade Organization and the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
as well as by the constructive spirit that prevailed
during the negotiations in the Council this summer,
leading to good results and consensus agreements.
Nevertheless, here, too, there is room to do even
better, in line with the “musts” outlined by President
Ali — a proactive agenda, more focused outcomes,
better atmospherics, and avoiding stale arguments.
Better discipline in the timely tabling of resolutions, in
particular, would contribute to alleviating some of the

10

burden of the general segment. Better respect by the
Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations for
the guiding principles for granting consultative status
in the Economic and Social Council is also urgently
needed.
The European Union stands ready to engage
constructively in further discussion about the
organization of the Council in the coming weeks.
Ms. Kaur (India): Allow me to begin by
reaffirming India’s conviction in the leadership of
Mr. Joseph Deiss as President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-fifth session. I also take this opportunity to
warmly thank Member States for electing India a
member of the Security Council for the 2011 and 2012
term.
India aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Yemen on behalf of the Group of
77 and China.
India welcomes the theme the President chose for
the current Assembly session, “Reaffirming the central
role of the United Nations in global governance”. A
stronger United Nations, reflective of contemporary
realities, is indeed the need of the hour. It would ensure
that the imperatives of maintaining international peace
and security are addressed and that there is an
integrated and coordinated follow-up of the United
Nations development agenda.
The United Nations conferences and summits
held since the 1990s have generated an unprecedented
global consensus on a shared vision of development.
We emphatically reiterated that common understanding
at the high-level events on the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), the Mauritius Strategy
and biodiversity held in September 2010 in New York.
The MDG declaration clearly articulated that the
allocation of resources, the development of appropriate
national and international policies and integrated
follow-up and implementation are absolute imperatives
for the realization of our cherished Millennium Goals
by 2015.
Interlinkages and overlaps among the various
United Nations development summits and conferences
are strong. The Mauritius Strategy would derive
immense benefits and strength from a comprehensive,
ambitious and equitable outcome of the climate change
negotiations. Similarly, the Conference of the Parties to
the Convention on Biological Diversity under way in

10-59295

A/65/PV.34

Nagoya, Japan, must fully address the various social
and economic development challenges along with its
core environmental concerns so as to maximize,
through such global action, protection against loss of
biodiversity.

economic crisis highlighted the grave imbalance in the
structures of global governance, including on the
economic side. India, along with fellow developing
countries, has been in the forefront of demands for a
greater voice in the Bretton Woods institutions.

The multiple United Nations conferences and
summits focused on attainment of internationally
agreed development goals must have a seamless,
holistic and integrated working relationship with each
other. We must work to develop work models that
ensure synergetic resource flows, coordinated
assessment and planning, and a holistic approach to our
global development programmes. In that context, India
sees the creation of UN Women as an important step
towards an integrated approach to development within
the United Nations.

To make the process as inclusive as possible, the
United Nations, with its unique position, has a key
role. Still, as I mentioned earlier, it needs urgent
reform, and nowhere in the United Nations is reform
more needed than in the Security Council. Council
membership must be expanded in both the permanent
and non-permanent categories, as is the desire of an
overwhelming majority of Member States. I am glad
that the General Assembly decided in its sixty-fourth
session that the text-based negotiations must be
immediately taken up in the sixty-fifth session. It is
important that those negotiations are moved forward on
an urgent basis.

The strengthened interaction and institutional
linkages between the Economic and Social Council and
the
Peacebuilding
Commission
are
equally
encouraging. Our successful follow-up efforts on
pivotal conferences having significant bearing on
global development goals — such as the Monterrey
Consensus and the June 2009 Conference on the World
Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on
Development — deserve special mention. We must
sustain those efforts. However, it is important to
remember that no one size fits all, and it is imperative
that national priorities of countries always have
primacy in the pursuance of the development agenda
by United Nations bodies.
India fully realizes the importance of a strong
global partnership supported by international and
national development strategies on trade, debt,
investment, technology transfer, food security, energy
access, climate change and a host of other issues to
create an environment conducive to development. India
will push for an ambitious, comprehensive and
equitable outcome at the climate change negotiations,
one that is based on the principle of common but
differentiated
responsibilities
and
respective
capabilities. We also look forward to a developmentoriented outcome of the Doha Round.
To ensure that international policies are
pro-development, concerns of developing countries
must be effectively taken on board in their formulation
and
implementation.
Unfortunately,
current
institutional structures do not permit that, even though
developing countries are the ones most affected. The

10-59295

Also, the United Nations system cannot be
strengthened without revitalizing the General
Assembly. Here too, I am glad that in adopting
resolution 64/301 on this subject, there was some
progress for the first time in several years.
The Economic and Social Council has a crucial
role in fostering a comprehensive United Nations
development
agenda
through
integrated
and
coordinated implementation of its commitments. The
Council has an acknowledged role as a principal body
for coordination, policy review, policy dialogue and
recommendations on issues of economic and social
development. It is satisfying that the Council’s annual
ministerial review and its Development Cooperation
Forum have become important events to review efforts
to achieve the internationally agreed development
goals, including the MDGs.
The July 2010 session of the Economic and
Social Council focused on promoting greater coherence
between policy and development goals and making
development partnership more participatory and
transparent. Over the years, the Council has played an
important role in advancing a holistic and coordinated
approach to global economic and social development,
taking into account the interrelatedness of the different
goals and targets of major United Nations conferences.
We must work to make the Economic and Social
Council even more meaningful than what was
originally envisaged in the United Nations Charter and
subsequently strengthened by the various United

11

A/65/PV.34

Nations resolutions, particularly Assembly resolution
61/16.
My delegation looks forward to the President’s
proposals on strengthening the centrality of the United
Nations system in global governance and its
development role. He can count on our express support
in that regard.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I am happy to
take this opportunity to discuss the report of the
Economic and Social Council (A/65/3), as my
country’s first tenure on the Council is coming to an
end, later this year.
During our membership we have experienced the
Council as a forum of substantive discussion where
important governance mandates come together. We
have seen, particularly this year, how important the
strategic input of the Council can be to major United
Nations agenda items, such as the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). In the
Development Cooperation Forum and the annual
ministerial review the Council set the tone for a
successful negotiation process, leading to the
consensus outcome of the MDG summit. In that regard,
the Council has contributed to strengthening the central
role of the United Nations in the governance of
international development policies.
The Council also has an important role in the
governance of its functional committees and in the
election and supervision of the executive bodies of
specialized agencies, funds and programmes.
Currently, the Council is acting swiftly to guarantee a
smooth transition for the new gender entity,
UN Women. In particular, where its subsidiary bodies
do not live up to the standards of transparency,
inclusiveness, objectivity and good faith in applying
rules of procedure, the Council itself must take
leadership. It has done so in the past, for example in
the context of the Committee on Non-Governmental
Organizations. Such action by the Council shows that it
can and will assume its responsibility to rectify
decisions of subsidiary bodies, if need be.
Moreover, there are areas where the Council
should consider structural reform. In that regard, we
hope that the report of the Secretary-General that will
examine
the
strengthening
of
institutional
arrangements to promote international cooperation in
tax matters will reflect the view of many Member
States — including ours — that the work of the

12

Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in
Tax Matters must become more transparent, accessible
and inclusive.
Another field of particular importance to us, and
one where the Council is mandated to assume a policy
governance function, is the humanitarian dimension of
the work of United Nations funds, agencies and
programmes. The Council has the specific mandate to
strengthen the coordination of emergency humanitarian
assistance in the United Nations system.
We are aware of the high political sensitivity of
these matters, but we also believe that the Council
could contribute more to United Nations policy
coherence on the ground, without entering notorious
fields of political disagreement. The inclusion of
concrete policy guidelines of a cross-cutting nature —
such as a health- and environment-friendly approach to
nutrition-processing in emergency situations — would
strengthen the Council’s humanitarian policy guidance
and contribute directly to its governance capacity in
this field.
We acknowledge that during our tenure the
Council has considerably streamlined its agenda and
focus. There is much less overlap now in the work of
the Council and of other forums, most importantly the
Second Committee. The Council now has a clearer
understanding of its mandate as the central United
Nations body for strategic financial and economic
policy coordination.
We
must,
however,
strive
for
more
complementarity in order to strengthen the legitimacy
and authority of the Economic and Social Council.
Only on that basis can the Council contribute in a
meaningful way to the work of all major United
Nations bodies, including the Security Council and the
Human Rights Council, in accordance with the threepillar approach reflected in the outcome document of
the 2005 summit (resolution 60/1). With the experience
of our membership in the Council, we will continue to
contribute to those efforts as we continue to see a
potential in the Council that exceeds its current impact
by far.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the President
of the Economic and Social Council, the Permanent
Representative of Malaysia, for the leadership he has
shown in carrying out his function.

10-59295

A/65/PV.34

Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to express its gratitude for the
presentation of the report of the Economic and Social
Council (A/65/3) to the Assembly. We would also like
to acknowledge the work of the President and members
of the Council and reiterate our commitment to
supporting and cooperating with them.
Honduras endorses the statement made on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China.
Ten years have gone by since, in this same world
forum, the historic convergence of the end of a century
and the dawn of a new millennium motivated a very
promising summit of world leaders and led to a unique
set of visionary commitments. The Millennium
Declaration (resolution 55/2) and the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) promised, on the basis of
an unprecedented global alliance, to address the most
urgent needs of the poorest people of the planet. Only
five years are left until the deadline for reaching the
Goals set in that ambitious Declaration, signed by
heads of State and Government. Though there are
achievements to be celebrated, we are not holding our
breath that the task can be accomplished in the time
remaining.
The bleak spectre of extreme poverty still haunts
and keeps its hold over hundreds of thousands of
households in various parts of the world. We listened
with the greatest heartfelt interest as, during this latest
session of the Assembly — thanks to the initiative of
the Secretary-General in convening another special
summit to review the road we have travelled in pursuit
of complying with the noble Millennium Goals —
many of the most developed nations renewed their
commitment to make a priority of this unending
struggle without borders.
We appreciate this opportunity to add light where
light has previously been lit by others. We do that with
the greatest hopes, those of us who come from
elsewhere — not from what has wrongly been called
the poor countries of the world, because I will never
accept that my country, so rich in intangible values, or
that our people, with serious economic hardship but
with the power of their faith, the legacy of their inner
resources and the greatness of their dreams, are poor.
We lack the necessary development, perhaps, and
maybe we missed the good fortune to avoid
marginalization, exclusion and inequities, but we are
not poor.

10-59295

We will attempt to summarize some of the
setbacks that have impeded the full realization of
laudable statements. The reluctance of some rich
nations to fully meet their obligations is added to the
devastating impact of the financial crisis — springing
from wild actions, speculative transactions and
immoral, greedy practices — on vulnerable markets, a
crisis that the victims did not cause.
If the disparities of international trade force the
corn-and-tortilla nations to sell the sweat of their
strenuous labour cheaply in order to pay dearly for
goods and supplies imported from industrialized
countries, it is insult added to injury that to that already
unfair exchange are added subsidies, quotas, tariffs and
barriers to our export products, each more ingenious
than the last.
How can the weak be expected to compete fairly
with the strong when, in addition to the disparity in
productive capacity, the strong try keep them down in
order to inundate them with their products at exorbitant
prices and to acquire the fruit of the subjugated labour
of the weak at dirt-cheap rates that do not correspond
to the magnitude of their work? Nor is the entire
production of the more than 500,000 families in my
country who make a living by growing coffee enough
to pay half of our oil bill to the cartels that sell that
resource, which we lack, at ridiculous prices.
To this we must add the cyclical damage of the
erratic environment that ends life, destroys
infrastructure and kills our crops. The effects of
climate change do not come from developing countries,
but just the same, they must pay with a high share of
sacrifice their undeserved share of its consequences.
The terrible attacks of violent nature have devastated
many communities across the globe, which struggle
tirelessly to emerge from their precarious state of
prostration only to succumb again to such devastating
catastrophes.
Only a few years ago, we suffered the impact of a
hurricane of biblical proportions. In an instant, we saw,
before our tear-filled eyes, the accumulated efforts of
more than 50 years of hard work and modest progress
vanish. We felt as if the fierce winds and the turbulent
flooding of the rivers were sweeping away any hope of
moving forward. A great many communities that had
finally been glimpsing a promising horizon were
suddenly pushed back to the abyss of extreme poverty.
However, thanks to the miracle of faith and the virtue

13

A/65/PV.34

of our internal unity, and bathed in the soothing balm
of international solidarity for which we are eternally
grateful, we climbed from that deep pit with a renewed
spirit to overcome adversity.
Since then, we have stumbled many times, as the
path we have travelled and the path that lies ahead is
stony. And we have suffered many setbacks. However,
we are not overcome by the difficulty, nor are we short
of breath or, much less, determination.
There are valuable achievements that we cherish
and must care for — the good fortune of coexisting in a
civilized manner, under the protection of a system that
respects freedoms, rights and gains. In a non-liquid
economy, where almost all income goes to expenses
that barely cover basic needs and requirements, we
value the possibility of having some resources for
social investment — the commitment to invest in our
people or in programmes designed as part of the
poverty reduction strategy and in the school meal
programme that reduces the school dropout rate and
enhances the physical and moral state of our little
promises of the future, to cite two examples among
many. Those are minimal resources to ensure that the
national plan recently adopted by the current
Administration does not become a useless document
taking up space in a forgotten desk drawer.
We must confess that we feel overwhelmed,
sometimes even discouraged, by those critical
limitations and tremendous negations that undermine
the possibility of living a life with dignity. There is no
peace when justice is lacking. There will be no
tranquillity as long as one part of the population enjoys
the benefits of the system, flourishes in its blessings
and participates in all its opportunities while a vast
majority feels bad, powerless and marginalized,
afflicted because daily living seems more like a slow
and cruel agony, awaiting the inevitable.
We must not leave any room for extreme poverty
to destroy the possibilities of the future. We cannot
accept excuses or pretexts while in so many corners of
the world entire families go to bed hoping that the
caress of needed sleep will pacify the hunger in their
empty stomachs. We must shorten the wait so that
patience will not run out. Hence the renewed
commitment emerging from the recent Assembly
meeting that ordered the review of the Millennium
Development Goals and the accelerated march imposed

14

on us, so that we can fill the dimension of words with
action.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): At the outset, I
wish to state that the Philippines aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative
of Yemen delivered on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report in document A/65/84 and to commend His
Excellency Ambassador Mr. Hamidon Ali of Malaysia
for his untiring efforts, as President of the Economic
and Social Council, to revitalize and improve the
working methods of that body. His “five musts”
strategy may prove to be a worthy legacy for his
successors and should indeed be applied to all other
areas of work in the United Nations.
The full record of the Economic and Social
Council’s activities as contained in the pages of
document A/65/3 reflects the comprehensive approach
that that vital United Nations organ takes to its
deliberations on the relevant topics. The rapid
institutionalization of the Development Cooperation
Forum and the annual ministerial review shows the
keen interest of Member States in participating in our
discussions. The enhanced format of the Council’s
meeting with the Bretton Woods institutions also
signals the crucial role that the Council and the United
Nations have in discussions on global financial and
economic matters, especially in the midst of the so
called great recession from which we are now — or
still tentatively — recovering.
The Philippines, as an active member of the
Economic and Social Council, notes the landmark
achievement of the creation of UN Women, which took
place in the same year that the annual ministerial
review focused precisely on the theme of implementing
the internationally agreed goals and commitments with
regard to gender equality and the empowerment of
women.
The Philippines — a country that has had two
female Presidents and that considers itself to be a
passionate advocate of the advancement of women’s
rights and welfare — similarly took significant steps
forward with the passage of the Magna Carta of
Women in August 2009 and the issuance of its
Implementing Rules and Regulations in June this year.

10-59295

A/65/PV.34

The Magna Carta of Women is a comprehensive
women’s human rights law that seeks to eliminate
discrimination against women by recognizing,
protecting, fulfilling and promoting the rights of
Filipino women, especially those in the marginalized
sectors. Similar to what UN Women has done in the
United Nations system, the Magna Carta has brought
together the different government agencies and
functions that deal with women’s issues under the
supervision of the Philippine Commission on Women.
The continued monitoring by the Economic and
Social Council of issues relating to the advancement of
women’s rights and welfare is a reassuring fact that my
country recognizes and supports. The Philippines
similarly supports calls for strengthening the
Development Cooperation Forum in order to reap the
full benefit of its potential in harnessing the lessons
learned in the Forum and linking them with the various
development activities implemented within and outside
the United Nations. The active exchange of ideas and
the participation of countries during the Forum policy
dialogues signify the value of the process in our
discussions.
We would also like to underscore the importance
of the past year’s discussions of the Economic and
Social Council’s various segments, which cover a
broad spectrum of issues. To go into each of those
items would take too much time, but suffice it to say
that such activities represent key development issues
that affect all of us on a daily basis. Who would
disagree that economic, social and environmental
issues are the most crucial topics and preoccupy the
majority of, if not all, members of the United Nations?
If only to highlight a few of the many issues in
which the Philippines has particular interest, let me say
that they would be the areas of humanitarian
assistance, climate change, biodiversity and sustainable
development in general. As a country that suffers from
frequent natural disasters, many of which are weatherrelated, we can only hope that our discussions in the
Economic and Social Council and its functional
commissions will be based on the greater common
good and the legacy that we wish to leave to future
generations.
Allow me then to conclude by pledging the
Philippines’ full support for the ongoing improvement
of the working methods of the Economic and Social
Council as it fulfils its pre-eminent role in key global

10-59295

discussions that will affect the lives of our peoples. We
look forward to continuing our work under the very
able leadership of Ambassador Hamidon Ali and share
his hope that the Council will change with the times in
order to remain relevant and proactive.
Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Peru associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Yemen on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for the report submitted under this agenda item
(A/65/84), and we note with satisfaction the 2010
report of the Economic and Social Council (A/65/3).
We also wish to express our gratitude to the Council’s
President, Ambassador Hamidon Ali, and the Bureau
supporting him for the important work undertaken.
This year, the effects of the international
economic and financial crisis continue to affect the
economic and social prospects for developing countries
and, therefore, their possibilities of achieving the
Millennium Development Goals. The outcome of the
review carried out at the High-level Plenary Meeting
on the Millennium Development Goals, held in
September, showed that we, the developing countries,
have made great progress towards achieving those
Goals, but also that work remains for which greater
commitment and cooperation by all global actors is
needed (resolution 65/1).
With regard to efforts to recover from the crisis,
it is extremely important to strengthen employment and
social protection policies and to promote greater
international cooperation so as to speed up and sustain
the recovery, with particular attention to low- and
middle-income countries. In that regard, the resolution
adopted by the Economic and Social Council to
accelerate implementation of the Global Jobs Pact was
a very significant outcome of its work (Economic and
Social Council resolution 2010/25). I would like to
point out that the measures proposed by the Global
Jobs Pact, in particular those related to investment in
labour-intensive infrastructure and support for smalland medium-sized enterprises, have proved to be
effective mechanisms to promote employment and to
combat poverty in my country.
The possibility of developing countries, such as
mine, continuing on the path of growth and addressing
the effects of the crisis also depends, to a large extent,
on a positive international environment. In that regard,
we believe that the efforts to develop a constructive

15

A/65/PV.34

dialogue among all actors involved in creating a new
international financial architecture are particularly
significant. To that end, the points of view of the
smaller countries, which comprise the greater part of
the United Nations, must be taken into account.
Similarly, we underscore the importance of
international trade as an engine for development for a
large number of countries, including mine, Peru. Thus,
we reiterate the need to avoid any protectionist
tendency and to move towards a prompt conclusion of
the Doha Development Round. The annual meeting of
the Economic and Social Council with the Bretton
Woods institutions, the World Trade Organization and
the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, held last spring, is an important forum to
move our work forward in the appropriate direction.
The second Development Cooperation Forum,
held in June, provided innovative discussions on that
issue and concluded that, in the current global
economic situation, official development assistance
and financing for development continued to be crucial
to guarantee progress in achieving the Development
Goals.
We firmly believe that financial and technical
development cooperation is also indispensable and
such cooperation should seek to mobilize resources for
micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises, whose
development and strengthening provide an effective
mechanism to combat poverty, as has been seen in my
country. In that regard, promoting and strengthening
financial cooperation for research, innovation and
technology, as well as human resource training, are
absolutely essential.
In that regard, we would like to point out that the
operational activities segment, which focused on the
work of Economic and Social Council at the country
level, concluded that the United Nations system
remains a reliable partner for developing countries in
the area of capacity-building.
The ministerial meeting of the high-level segment
of the Economic and Social Council adopted the
important
declaration
on
“Implementing
the
Internationally Agreed Goals and Commitments in
regard to Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women” at nearly the same time as the new United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, UN Women, was
established. We believe that action to have been one of

16

the Council’s most significant contributions in 2010,
acknowledging that gender equality and the
empowerment of women play a central role in
development and peace in the world.
The coordination segment of the Economic and
Social Council adopted a resolution on the role of the
United Nations system in implementing the 2009
ministerial declaration on global public health
(Economic and Social Council resolution 2010/24).
The Peruvian Government has made great
achievements in the area of health. To continue along
that path, we would like to reiterate the need for
cooperation benefiting middle-income countries in the
fight against HIV/AIDS and for greater attention to be
given to non-communicable diseases.
To conclude, I must point out that a topic that
must not be overlooked in our current and future work
is climate change. Peru is particularly vulnerable,
without having been a cause of that phenomenon. The
worrying situation of the environmental degradation
that we are currently experiencing means that
adaptation to climate change must be a central element
in international decisions on financing for
development.
For all those reasons, we believe that the
Economic and Social Council must keep on its agenda
the item “Follow-up to the International Conference on
Financing for Development”, including the many
decisions that I have mentioned in this statement.
Mr. Kurlovich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus commends the work of the Economic and
Social Council in the reporting period and the
Ambassador of Malaysia, Mr. Hamidon Ali, for his
skilful leadership. I would like to emphasize the
efficient organization of the 2010 substantive session
of the Economic and Social Council, whose outcome
made an important contribution to the work of the
summit meeting on the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). I would emphasize, in particular, the
strengthening of the practical importance of that highlevel segment for the entire United Nations system.
Belarus favours further strengthening of the role
of the Economic and Social Council as the main body
responsible for coordinating the various funds and
programmes of the United Nations system, including
reviewing policies and monitoring implementation of
the MDGs. As part of that work, special emphasis
should be placed on ensuring a system-wide

10-59295

A/65/PV.34

environment conducive to stimulating fair international
trade and providing expertise and technical assistance
to developing and middle-income countries.
We welcome the relatively new methodologies in
the work of the Economic and Social Council. We
believe that the Economic and Social Council has
considerably strengthened its structure and capacity
through annual ministerial reviews. We believe that
that mechanism, with its powerful mobilizing impact,
should be further strengthened. The Development
Cooperation Forum has become an important
mobilizing and coordination factor of the Economic
and Social Council.
We think that the ministerial meetings, annual
reviews and the Development Cooperation Forum
should become the main platforms for discussing
agenda issues related to achieving the MDGs and the
United Nations development agenda after 2015. In that
connection, Belarus believes that the Assembly should
consider enhancing the role of the Forum, including
strengthening its institutional status and the frequency
of its meetings and the preparation of its outcome
documents.
One of the most important aspects of the
ministerial reviews is the system of voluntary national
presentations on the achievement of development
targets, which serve as a unique mechanism for
accountability and feedback on the achievement of the
MDGs. They clearly point the way towards
implementation of global priorities at the national
level. That is why we welcome the positive trend to
expand this practice. My delegation notes that Belarus
will submit its national report at the 2011 session of the
Economic and Social Council.
Belarus believes it is necessary to take into
consideration the consequences of climate change in
the long-term strategies on financing for development
and developing a green economy.
An important factor in achieving the MDGs is to
shape a new architecture in the energy field in order to
ensure universal access to energy services. As part of
this process, special attention should be paid to the
open exchange of environmentally friendly and
affordable energy technologies. Unfortunately, energy
issues have not yet become a priority on the United
Nations agenda. At the same time, without access to
modern energy resources, an adequate level of human
development will clearly be unattainable.

10-59295

Belarus supports the practice of periodic reviews
of operational activities for development under the
auspices of the Economic and Social Council. At the
same time, in order to make this work more efficient,
the Council agenda should include periodic
Government opinion surveys on the impact and
significance of support provided by the United Nations
system.
We support further review of the predictability
and adequacy of funding sources for development
activities. Given the reduction in core resources, we
believe it is important to strengthen the transparency of
the donor system to finance development and to
establish a flexible system of cooperation between
recipient countries, donors and the United Nations
system.
Belarus commends the holding of high-level
meetings of the Economic and Social Council with the
participation of representatives of the Bretton Woods
institutions, the World Trade Organization, the
International Labour Organization and the World
Health Organization. We think that this practice should
be continued. At the same time, we suggest considering
optimizing the agenda of the joint meetings with
special emphasis on their efficiency with regard to
restructuring the international financial architecture
and turning it into a driving force of equitable
economic growth.
The main responsibility for ensuring that
decisions adopted at the various conferences and
summits of the United Nations are implemented lies
with the specialized agencies of the United Nations. In
order to ensure successful monitoring of the
implementation of those decisions and the resulting
activities a closer relationship among the governing
bodies of the United Nations is important — first and
foremost between the Economic and Social Council
and the other specialized agencies. We wish the
Economic and Social Council every success in
implementing this important task.
Mr. Savostianov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset I would like to express our
gratitude to the President of the Economic and Social
Council for presenting the Council’s report (A/65/3)
and also to thank the Secretariat for supporting the
work of the Council during the current year. The
Russian Federation has consistently favoured
strengthening the role of the United Nations as one of

17

A/65/PV.34

the principal forums for coordinating multilateral
development efforts and developing the basic standards
on international cooperation in the economic,
humanitarian and environmental spheres. In that
context, the work of the Economic and Social Council
is now of significant priority. It possesses all of the
necessary mechanisms to conduct fruitful discussions
on all key global and intersectoral economic issues
with the participation of all relevant stakeholders.
In the current year, the Council’s agenda included
important tasks related, inter alia, to preparations for
the United Nations summit meeting on the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), also to promoting the
international agenda in the area of financing for
development and strengthening the capacity of the
United Nations system with a view to ensuring a more
effective response to the negative consequences of the
global financial and economic crisis.
Russia is satisfied with the results of the main
session of the Economic and Social Council this year,
including the Annual Ministerial Review of the
progress in implementation of the MDGs and the
Development Cooperation Forum.
We note the intensive and useful work
accomplished in the framework of the coordination,
operation and humanitarian segments of the session.
That clearly confirmed the very important role played
by the Economic and Social Council in ensuring the
coherence of the entire system, which is very important
for comprehensive, coordinated implementation of
decisions by global forums in the economic, social and
related fields.
This year, the Economic and Social Council has
effectively shown itself to be an integral part of the
intergovernmental process of follow-up to the outcomes
of international conferences dedicated to financing for
development. We welcome the successful organization
in March of the special high-level meetings of the
Economic and Social Council with the participation of
the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the
World Trade Organization and the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development. We are
convinced that the Council should continue to make a
tangible contribution to the development of mutually
beneficial cooperation between the United Nations and
the international, financial and trade institutions, as well
as other key participants in the post-Monterrey process,

18

which includes non-governmental organizations and the
private sector.
In the course of the current session of the General
Assembly, the Assembly will have to review progress
in implementing resolution 61/16, which defined the
new functions of the Economic and Social Council as
decided in the political agreements reached at the 2005
World Summit. We think that any decisions on any
future strengthening of the Economic and Social
Council should be aimed first and foremost at ensuring
the effective work of the Council in support of efforts
by Member States and United Nations entities
implementing the programme of action adopted at the
United Nations summit on the Millennium
Development Goals. Work to implement the decisions
of the summit will require a comprehensive and
coordinated approach. It will require articulating the
policies and programmes of the United Nations system
with national priorities and strategies and with the
goals and challenges of the development agenda. It will
require
organizing
effective
intergovernmental
monitoring and evaluation of its implementation. We
are convinced that those goals can be reached within
the current format and structure of the main session of
the Council.
The main platform for a systematic and
comprehensive monitoring of progress in the
implementation of the MDGs is, in our view, the
annual ministerial review. The choice of theme for the
reviews for the period covering 2012-2015 will be
decisive. We support strengthening the Development
Cooperation Forum as a useful multilateral format in
which the major, dynamically developing economies
can participate fully in the process of decision-making
and in developing new approaches to providing
assistance. That is one of the priority goals and is a
premise for strengthening the international architecture
for development assistance.
An important area of work in optimizing the
agenda of the Economic and Social Council, bearing in
mind the decisions of the United Nations High-level
Plenary Meeting on the Millennium Development
Goals, is to adjust the mandates of the segments of the
main session of the Council, including a clearer
definition of the goals of the coordination segment. We
also think that there is potential for strengthening the
Council in the process of moving away from
emergency assistance and towards more long-term
assistance in cases of natural disasters and also in the

10-59295

A/65/PV.34

context of post-conflict peacebuilding. It is clear that
this work should be carried out with the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission in mind. Of course, all of
these steps should not undermine the role of the
Council as the coordinator of the programme activity
of the various socio-economic bodies of the United
Nations.
The delegation of the Russian Federation is ready
to cooperate in a constructive fashion with all partners
in order to further strengthen the Economic and Social
Council. We think that the upcoming review of the
implementation of resolution 61/16 during this session
of the General Assembly will give further impetus to
the work of the Council as the most important
mechanism for developing and agreeing on the major
political decisions in the area of development. The
review will also make it possible for the Council to
become a more dynamic and more effective body of
the United Nations.
Mr. Koterec (Slovakia): Slovakia associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Belgium, who spoke on behalf of the European Union.
The most recent session of the Economic and
Social Council had many significant moments. We
witnessed the establishment of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women, known as UN Women, which was an
important step towards eliminating all forms of
discrimination against women and strengthening their
voice worldwide. The annual ministerial review has
proved itself to be a strong instrument for discussing
key issues in the economic and social fields. The
ministerial declaration that was adopted was very
results-oriented and presented a solid base for a
successful High-level Plenary Meeting on the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which was
held in September. The numerous national voluntary
presentations during the review revealed national
approaches and experiences, pointing out success
stories as well as shortcomings. All the best practices
that were presented offered valuable ideas in helping
many countries to move forward faster.
A year ago, Slovakia was one of 18 Member
States elected to serve on the Economic and Social
Council. During the initial period of our term, we have
done our best to be an active and transparent team
partner in one of the most important bodies of the
United Nations system. We consider the Economic and

10-59295

Social Council to be a body with great potential to
make significant contributions to solving the problems
of today’s world.
Nearly four years have gone by since the
adoption of resolution 61/16 on the strengthening of
the Economic and Social Council. A lot of work has
been done, and I would like to thank the President of
the Council, His Excellency Ambassador Hamidon Ali,
as well as his predecessors, for the work they have
done, especially since 2007.
Nevertheless, there is still much work to do to
strengthen the role of the Council as the principal body
for coordination, policy review, policy dialogue and
recommendations on issues of economic and social
development, as well as for implementation of the
international development goals agreed at major United
Nations conferences and summits, including the
Millennium Development Goals.
It is crucial that more emphasis be put on systemwide coordination and integration, on carrying out new
programmes and policies in the economic, social and
humanitarian fields, and on promoting global dialogue
and closer cooperation with other bodies of the United
Nations system. For example, why do we not attempt
to take advantage of the potential for closer
collaboration between the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council? Many of the issues
dealt with by those two bodies are linked, and I am
convinced that more visible results could be achieved
in a shorter amount of time, if those linkages were
explored. The Peacebuilding Commission is an
important aspect of that link. The current review of the
Commission’s work suggests that it could play a
greater role in the future.
In this period of pressing need for the innovative
use of resources, one can see a possibility for another
pragmatic change in the work of the Economic and
Social Council, namely, in the general segment. With
each passing year, the Council’s agenda is increasingly
overburdened. Many of the issues it deals with overlap
with those addressed in the General Assembly and its
Committees and are thus unnecessarily discussed
twice. We must reverse that negative trend, if we are to
save the expertise and energy of the Council for the
core issues in its purview.
Furthermore, Slovakia supports strengthening the
position of the Development Cooperation Forum,
which should evolve into a forum that generates new

19

A/65/PV.34

ideas and models, emphasizes wide coordination, and
speaks with a stronger political voice. For that reason,
we suggest considering holding Forum meetings on a
yearly basis.
Slovakia will continue to strive to be a
trustworthy and innovative partner. All of us can
contribute to the work of the Economic and Social
Council by being responsible and pragmatic in our
efforts.
Mr. Saripudin (Indonesia): It is my honour to
address the General Assembly in the joint debate on
agenda items 9 and 13. Indonesia associates itself with
the statement made by the representative of Yemen,
who spoke on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Let me express my sincere and deep appreciation
to Ambassador Hamidon Ali of Malaysia for his able
leadership during this year’s session of the Economic
and Social Council. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his note submitted under agenda item 9 (A/65/216)
and for his reported submitted under agenda item 13
(A/65/84).
The General Assembly of the United Nations has
advanced the reduction of poverty, together with other
related development issues, either individually or in
combination, through United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic and social fields. The
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), whose
deadline has been set for 2015, have served as an
important platform for emphasizing the synergies
among the outcomes of the conferences and summits.
Each of the Goals has a direct impact on the others.
Therefore, to succeed in any one of them requires
progress on all of them. Accordingly, the progress with
regard to the MDGs is a vital part of the effective
implementation of resolution 57/270 B.
During the High-level Plenary Meeting on the
Millennium Development Goals in September, there
was broad consensus in favour of more vigorous action
to enable all countries to achieve the MDGs. Economic
growth and development were recognized as an
important avenue for meeting the Goals. However,
none of us can perform that task in isolation — no
Government, however well-intentioned, no private
sector, however generous, no non-governmental
organization, however determined.
We can meet the MDGs only through a genuine
global partnership for development. The Monterrey

20

Consensus, the Doha Declaration on Financing for
Development and the Doha Development Round
provide the frameworks for the global partnership for
development, and it is important that the commitments
laid out in those frameworks be fully implemented.
Just as we reached the 10 year mark for the
MDGs this year, the Economic and Social Council
emphasized the strategic link between gender and the
achievement of the MDGs. Indonesia therefore
welcomes the decision to establish UN Women. We
hope that having a dedicated gender entity in the
United Nations, led by Ms. Bachelet, will enhance
coherence, effectiveness and efficiency in United
Nations operational activities and norm-setting on
gender matters. We hope that it will further support the
implementation of action-oriented strategies and
integrated, comprehensive, multisectoral and genderresponsive approaches.
Recognizing prevalent gender inequalities, the
2010 ministerial declaration of the high-level segment
of the Economic and Social Council rightly
emphasized measures to address the inequalities
constraining women, through their root causes. Health
was identified as a major obstacle to the advancement
of women. The Global Strategy for Women’s and
Children’s Health and its Joint Action Plan are
important initiatives that Indonesia has been supporting
from their inception. Gender gaps have been further
compounded by the economic and financial crisis. It is
therefore crucial to effectively address that crisis in
order to advance the gender theme of the Economic
and Social Council this year.
Given the importance of accelerating progress on
the MDGs, all stakeholders, including the United
Nations, need to continue to play an active role.
Indonesia appreciates and commends the efforts of the
entire United Nations system to improve its
effectiveness through various actions. Furthermore, the
Secretary-General’s report in document A/65/84
recommends that a United Nations-based mechanism
be established to review the implementation of the
outcome of the 2010 High-level Plenary Meeting on
the MDGs (resolution 65/1). The strengthened function
of the Economic and Social Council makes it
strategically placed to fulfil that role. The Economic
and Social Council could perform this function through
the annual ministerial review and the Development
Cooperation Forum. The recommendation in the
Secretary-General’s report merits further consideration.

10-59295

A/65/PV.34

As for Indonesia, we have integrated the MDGs
into our national development strategy. Through two
presidential decrees this year, the Government is going
to accelerate implementation of the 2010 national
development priorities and promote justice in a
national development programme. The decrees provide
a vital link among development actors from the
national to the subnational levels to coordinate and
integrate
pro-people
development
with
the
establishment of justice for all and the accelerated
achievement of the MDGs.
Mr. Barton (United States of America): First of
all, I would like to thank the President of the Assembly
for convening this meeting and the Secretary-General
for his report on recent improvements to the working
methods of the Economic and Social Council and its
role in follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits (A/65/84).
We wish to commend the strong leadership of
Ambassador Ali and his predecessors in advancing
meaningful improvements to the working methods of
the Economic and Social Council and greatly
enhancing its relevance and contributions to the United
Nations development system. The strengthening of the
annual ministerial review and its focus on key thematic
issues related to the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) ensured that the
Economic and Social Council played a vital role in the
MDG summit. The United States was pleased to have
joined others this year in making our national
voluntary presentation on gender equality and women’s
empowerment and to have an opportunity to exchange
views and valuable information and experiences with
other delegations.
Our delegation was also pleased at the balance
and breadth of discussion at this year’s biennial
Development Cooperation Forum, which continues to
develop in its discussion of development assistance and
cooperation. In this regard, the United States supports
maintaining the current format and frequency of
biennial Development Cooperation Forum meetings,
which allows more time for broader reflection than
annual meetings. The United States also wishes to
express support for ongoing efforts to streamline and
better rationalize the agenda items of the Council.
Regarding follow-up to the MDG summit, we note that
the outcome document clearly outlines follow-up
arrangements, which can be found in paragraphs 79
through 81.

10-59295

Mr. Almeida (Brazil): Brazil fully endorses the
statement made by the representative of Yemen on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China. We would also
like to take this opportunity to warmly commend the
President of the Economic and Social Council,
Ambassador Hamidon Ali, for his leadership at the
head of that important body, particularly during its
substantive session in July.
The current debate on the report of the Economic
and Social Council (A/65/3) and on the integrated
follow-up of major United Nations conferences and
summits in economic, social and related fields further
underscores the importance of the Economic and Social
Council as the mandated body within the United
Nations structure for promoting coordination,
coherence and cooperation in the United Nations
system. Brazil believes that only a strengthened and
revitalized Economic and Social Council can fully
contribute to international policy discussions and
deliberations on substantive issues of development.
During the current session of the General
Assembly, Member States will have an important
opportunity to review the progress to date and examine
additional measures to further improve the workings of
the Economic and Social Council. As an enthusiastic
supporter of the Council, Brazil is certainly ready and
willing to participate actively in this discussion.
Brazil recognizes that there have been important
initiatives over the past few years to improve
inter-institutional and intergovernmental coordination
by the Economic and Social Council. The annual
ministerial review has evolved and matured to become
an increasingly important event on the international
agenda, capable of mobilizing high-level officials from
developing and developed countries alike. It offers a
key opportunity for reviewing progress on specific
policy questions relevant to the international
community and for making concrete recommendations
that can be acted upon by all Member States. It
certainly can be improved upon, but its general design
rests
on
solid
foundations
and
important
accomplishments.
The Development Cooperation Forum is also a
significant innovation that merits our full support. It
has contributed to promoting coordination and
exchanging information on relevant development
cooperation issues, such as official development
assistance and South-South cooperation. It is one of the

21

A/65/PV.34

rare bodies that brings together practitioners and
policymakers to discuss issues related to the quality
and quantity of cooperation for development.
Despite the progress achieved so far, Brazil
believes that the Development Cooperation Forum
should be further strengthened as the main forum for
discussions in the United Nations system on
development cooperation issues. In this regard, we
should explore the possibility of increasing the
frequency of the Development Cooperation Forum’s
meetings and of introducing a negotiated outcome to
its deliberations.
The Chief Executives Board for Coordination is
playing an increasing role in promoting coordination at
the administrative level among the 28 agencies that
form the United Nations system. Brazil notes with
appreciation the progress achieved in various areas,
including in relation to the integrated response of the
United Nations system to the economic and financial
crisis. However, we would also like to highlight the
fact that some of the initiatives proposed by the Board
to address the crisis seem to lack both a clear definition
and a precise mandate from Member States. This is the
case, for instance, of initiatives related to the concept
of green economy, which has not yet been fully
discussed by Member States.
It is encouraging to learn that the Chief
Executives Board for Coordination has attempted to
strengthen substantive dialogue with Member States on
its ongoing work in opportunities such as the systemwide coherence consultations and on the global crisis.
But Brazil would once again insist on the need to align
the Secretariat’s substantive action with existing
intergovernmental mandates and priorities.
Brazil also believes that additional measures are
warranted to improve coordination and oversight of
actions and initiatives taken by the United Nations
funds, programmes and specialized agencies, including
the Bretton Woods institutions. In view of the
responsibilities of the specialized agencies in the
follow-up, implementation and monitoring of the
outcomes of United Nations conferences and summits,
we would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the
call for closer cooperation between their governing
bodies and the United Nations, most notably the
Economic and Social Council.
Brazil is generally pleased with the progress obtained
in the first full year of operation of the strengthened

22

intergovernmental follow-up mechanism to the
financing for development process. We welcome in
particular the participation by the President of the
Economic and Social Council in the Bretton Woods
institutions spring meetings, and hope this practice can
be expanded in the future to include the World Trade
Organization.
The multifaceted follow-up mechanism adopted
by the Economic and Social Council in 2009 is a step
in the right direction, ensuring the continuous
consideration of financing for development issues
throughout the year. Nevertheless, we would like to
recall that the Monterrey Conference is the only major
United Nations summit in the field of development that
did not result in the establishment of a permanent
intergovernmental body to oversee and promote the
implementation of its outcome. Brazil considers that
this shortcoming needs to be redressed with the
establishment of a functional commission on financing
for development.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda items 9 and 13.
I join with colleagues who have commended
Ambassador Ali of Malaysia for his sterling leadership
of the Economic and Social Council.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda items 9 and 13.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/65/L.5)
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 32nd and 33rd plenary meetings, on 18 October
2010, the Assembly considered, in a joint debate,
agenda item 14, “Global Agenda for Dialogue among
Civilizations”, and agenda item 15.
I now give the floor to His Royal Highness Prince
Ghazi bin Mohammad, Personal Envoy and Special
Adviser to His Majesty the King of Jordan to introduce
draft resolution A/65/L.5.
Prince Ghazi bin Mohammad (Jordan): I have
the honour to introduce on behalf of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan and the 27 other sponsors —
Albania, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Costa Rica,
the Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Georgia,
Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,

10-59295

A/65/PV.34

Liberia, Mauritius, Morocco, Oman, Paraguay, Qatar,
the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Tanzania, Turkey,
the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay and Yemen — draft
resolution A/65/L.5, entitled “World Interfaith Harmony
Week”.
Allow me to explain in brief the reasoning behind
this draft resolution, which was launched by his
Majesty King Abdullah II Bin Al Hussein before the
General Assembly on 23 September 2010 (see
A/65/PV.12).
As this Assembly is well aware, our world is rife
with religious tension and, sadly, mistrust, dislike and
hatred. These religious tensions can easily erupt into
communal violence. They also facilitate the
demonizing of the other, which in turn predisposes
public opinion to support war against peoples of other
religions. Thus, for example, according to the results of
a 2008 Gallup poll, one of the largest international
surveys on religion in history, 53 per cent of
Westerners have unfavourable or very unfavourable
opinions of Muslims and 30 per cent of Muslims polled
worldwide hold negative views of Christians.
The misuse or abuse of religions can thus be a
cause of world strife, whereas religions should be a
great foundation for facilitating world peace. The
remedy for this problem can come only from the
world’s religions themselves. Religions must be part of
the solution, not part of the problem. Much good work
has already been done towards this, starting really with
the Second Vatican Council from 1962 to 1965, by
hundreds of intra-faith and interfaith groups all over
the world and of all religions.
Yet the forces inciting interreligious tensions,
notable among them being religious fundamentalisms
of various kinds, are better organized, more
experienced, better coordinated, more motivated and
more ruthless. They have more stratagems, more
institutes, more money and more power and garner
more publicity, such that they by far outweigh all the
positive work done by the various interfaith initiatives.
The sad proof of this is that religious tensions are on
the rise, not on the decline.
The draft resolution before us seeks to turn the
tide against this negative movement, first, by
coordinating and uniting the efforts of all the interfaith
groups doing positive work with one focused theme at
one specific time annually, thereby increasing their
collective momentum and eliminating redundancy.

10-59295

Secondly, the draft resolution seeks to harness
and utilize the collective might of the world’s secondlargest infrastructure, that of places of worship — the
largest being that of education — specifically for peace
and harmony in the world, inserting, as it were, the
right “software” into the world’s religious “hardware”.
Thirdly, the draft resolution seeks to permanently
and regularly encourage the silent majority of
preachers to declare themselves for peace and harmony
and to provide a ready-made vehicle for them to do so.
Moreover, if preachers and teachers commit
themselves on the record once a year to peace and
harmony, this means that when the next interreligious
crisis or provocation occurs, they cannot then relapse
into parochial fear and mistrust, and will be more
likely to resist the winds of popular demagoguery.
Turning to the text itself, allow me to explain
some of its most essential terminology and concepts.
First, in the very title of the draft resolution and
in the second operative paragraph and elsewhere, the
word “harmony” is used in the Chinese sense of the
term. We add it to the term “tolerance”, which we have
also used, because tolerance can suggest that the other
is so negative that it has to be tolerated. We cannot use
“acceptance” because it implies that religions accept
each other’s doctrines, rather than their right to those
doctrines, and this is not the case. We cannot use the
term “peace” alone because it suggests merely the
absence of war and not necessarily the absence of
hatred. Only the Confucian concept of harmony can
rescue us here because it suggests not merely peace,
but also beautiful and dynamic interaction between
different elements within a whole.
Secondly, in paragraph 3 there is a mention of
“love of God and love of one’s neighbour or love of the
good and love of one’s neighbour”. Why is this
religious reference necessary in a United Nations
resolution? In answer to this question, it will be noted
first that the draft resolution is unique because it is
specifically about peace among religions and not about
anything else; therefore, some religious references in
this particular case are only natural. To rigidly maintain
the contrary would be to disregard the feelings of 85
per cent of the world’s population that belongs to one
or another faith.
Thirdly, and more importantly perhaps, we include
these references because, while we all agree that it is
clearly not the business of the United Nations to engage

23

A/65/PV.34

in theology, it is nevertheless the primary goal of the
United Nations to make and safeguard peace, and
without the specific mention of God and of the two
commandments of love, many — if not most — devout
Muslims, Christians and Jews will consider a secular
call for an interfaith harmony week to be a feckless
platitude that they cannot fully or sincerely support. For
in the Holy Bible, Jesus Christ said, “man shall not live
by bread alone, but by every word of God” (Matthew
4:4) and “hallowed be thy name” (Matthew 6:9). Similar
meanings are to be found in the Holy Koran, wherein it
is stated that no act is rewarded save for seeking “the
Countenance of the Lord, the Most High” (XCII:20) and
that verily “the remembrance of God is of all things the
greatest” (XXIX:45).
In other words, for many Muslims, Christians and
Jews — who together make up perhaps 55 per cent of
the world’s population and, I regret to say, are involved
in most of the world’s conflicts — it is necessary to
mention the substance of their faiths. Otherwise,
hoping to foster peace between religions by foisting
upon them an external and purely secular and
bureaucratic language is simply a house divided
against itself that shall not stand.
Fourthly, it will be noted that this language
excludes no one of any religion or of no faith at all.
Every person of goodwill, with or without faith, can
and should commit to love of the neighbour and love of
God or love of the neighbour and love of the good.
Loving one’s neighbour and the good is, after all, the
essence of goodwill, and referring to the good
obviously does not necessarily imply belief in God or
in a particular religion, even though for many believers
the good is God precisely. Jesus Christ said, “No one is
good but God Alone” (The Holy Bible, Mark 10:18)
and “the good” — “Al-Barr” — is one of God’s names
in the Holy Koran. Thus, speaking of the good is a
theologically correct but inclusive formula — insofar
as it goes — that unites all humankind and leaves out
no one.
Fifthly, there is another reason why it is
specifically necessary to mention love of the
neighbour. It sets an invaluable, practical standard
based upon which people can ask themselves and each
other if their actions stem from caritas — love —
towards their neighbour or not. Indeed, as the Prophet
Muhammad said, “None of you has faith until you love
for your neighbour what you love for yourself”.

24

Also in paragraph 3, the phrase “on a voluntary
basis” is used because the entire proposal must be
purely voluntary. No place of worship should be forced
to observe the World Interfaith Harmony Week for,
while we hope to encourage interfaith harmony, the last
thing we want is for anyone at all to feel that anything
is being imposed on his or her faith, beliefs or
convictions. Nevertheless, one can conceive of positive
incentives to encourage and help support and monitor
the implementation of the draft resolution.
Finally, and also in paragraph 3, the phrase “each
according to their own religious traditions or
convictions” is vital because the different religions do
not necessarily interpret love of God and one’s
neighbour in exactly the same way and do not want it
said that they do. This phrase thus avoids the dangers
of syncretism or reductionism and allows for religious
differences within the same goal of working towards
interreligious peace and harmony.
In summary then, I very humbly ask the Member
States of the General Assembly to adopt draft
resolution A/65/L.5 on the World Interfaith Harmony
Week, noting that it excludes no individual,
compromises no one, commits no one, forces no one,
harms no one and costs nothing, and, on the contrary,
includes everyone, celebrates everyone, benefits
everyone, unites everyone and has the potential to
bring much-needed peace and harmony to the entire
world.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/65/L.5, entitled
“World Interfaith Harmony Week”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat to announce the additional co-sponsors of
the draft resolution.
Mr. Zhang (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I wish to inform the
General Assembly that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Suriname and Tunisia have asked to be added to the list
of sponsors of draft resolution A/65/L.5.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/65/L.5?
Draft resolution A/65/L.5 was adopted (resolution
65/5).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of position, may I remind

10-59295

A/65/PV.34

delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Burniat (Belgium): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union on resolution
65/5, entitled “World Interfaith Harmony Week”,
which was just adopted.
The European Union would like to extend its
thanks to the delegation of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan for the constructive spirit in which it led the
consultation process on the resolution, as well as for its
readiness to incorporate in the resolution a number of
suggestions put forward by the European Union.
The European Union welcomes any call for
dialogue, peace, tolerance and mutual understanding
among peoples and nations. It is in this spirit that the
European Union joined the consensus on the resolution
based on the following understanding of some
fundamental issues raised therein.
It is an established fact that religions, beliefs and
faith cannot be considered actors under international
law. Therefore, the European Union joined the
consensus in the understanding that the reference to
dialogue among religions, faiths and beliefs in the
second preambular paragraph and paragraph 1 refers to
dialogue among individuals with different religions,
faiths and beliefs. As in other areas, any obligation of
States with regard to religious affairs exists not vis-àvis any religion, faith or belief as such, but solely
towards individuals or groups of individuals and in full
respect for both the individual’s freedom of religion or
belief and the independence of religious institutions in
matters of belief.
The European Union is therefore of the view that
the fourth preambular paragraph and paragraph 3
cannot be read as giving States a mandate to influence
the manner in which individuals relate to their faith or
beliefs or to impose their views on the substance or
manner of any interreligious or intra-religious
discourse.
Furthermore, some European Union member
States have regulations and policies whereby the State
is strictly separated from any religion. Therefore, we
do not feel compelled to intervene in religious
discourses in places of worship. However, the
European Union fully subscribes to the wish expressed

10-59295

in the resolution for respect and understanding among
followers of all religions, faiths and beliefs.
While acknowledging the importance of
interreligious dialogue, the European Union wishes to
state that both interreligious and intra religious
dialogues
are
additional
and
complementary
components of intercultural dialogue and a culture of
peace. Religion or faith may constitute part of the
multiple identities of individuals, but it is our
understanding that by solely addressing one of the
sources of identity, the resolution does not wish to
imply the lesser importance of the others. In this
respect, the European Union would like to highlight the
roles of UNESCO in promoting all aspects of
intercultural dialogue and of the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations in promoting understanding
and cooperative relations among nations and peoples
across cultures and religions.
Finally, the European Union wishes to state its
understanding that the call for interfaith harmony
expressed in the resolution and for dialogue among
religions, faiths and beliefs in the second preambular
paragraph and in paragraph 1 is not limited to specific
monotheistic religions or beliefs, for example, but is in
fact meant to include all followers of any religion, faith
or belief in a universal and inclusive manner.
Mr. Michelsen (Norway): Norway would like to
thank Jordan for the manner in which it conducted the
negotiations up to their successful conclusion today.
Norway welcomes this important initiative, as we
recognize the importance of peaceful coexistence
among individuals of different religions and faiths and
the importance of interreligious dialogue in promoting
peace and understanding.
For the record, we would like to add that we fully
subscribe to the understanding just provided by the
representative of Belgium on behalf of the European
Union of some of the fundamental issues raised in the
resolution.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
I give the floor to the representative of Jordan.
Prince Ghazi Bin Mohammad (Jordan): Forgive
me for taking the floor again, but I wish only to thank
delegations, and in particular the now 31 sponsors, for
the constructive spirit in which they engaged with us
throughout the process of negotiations. In this context,

25

A/65/PV.34

we would like to assure the members of the European
Union that we agree with the fine distinctions they
presented in their explanation after the vote, and we are
grateful to them for their support and contribution.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): We welcome the adoption
of resolution 65/5 on World Interfaith Harmony Week
and the initiative undertaken by the delegation of
Jordan. On this occasion, I would like to extend a
warm welcome to His Royal Highness Prince Ghazi
Bin Mohammad and to thank Jordan for introducing
this noble initiative. We are honoured to co-sponsor the
resolution and pleased to see it embraced by the wider
membership. This shows the commitment of the world
community to making the world more peaceful and
harmonious for future generations.
We believe that this call for peace, tolerance and
mutual understanding will further contribute to the
promotion of a global culture of peace around the
world. For its part, Turkey will continue its efforts to
promote our common values of peace, tolerance and
respect for humanity.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Holy See.
Archbishop Chullikatt (Holy See): My
delegation takes this opportunity to thank the
delegation of Jordan for having brought forward
resolution 65/5 on promoting goodwill among religions
in order to advance a culture of peace. For several
years now, the United Nations has taken up
consideration of this agenda item. Over 10 years ago,
Member States adopted the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace (resolution
53/243), and not long thereafter adopted the first
resolution on the promotion of religious and cultural
understanding, harmony and cooperation.
The creation of a culture of peace among the
peoples of the world is not a task to be taken lightly.
All persons have a responsibility each and every day to
promote peace, tolerance and mutual respect among all
persons of the various religions traditions. Setting
aside a week in the coming year for the purpose of
raising consciousness regarding our common

26

commitment in this regard certainly highlights the
importance of this responsibility and can be
instrumental in concretely translating love of God into
love of neighbour, which means not only those of our
own religious tradition, but each and every person,
because everyone has dignity and value.
My delegation commends the manner in which
the mission of Jordan carried out consultations
regarding the present resolution. Some of my
delegation’s proposals were taken into consideration.
At the same time, however, my delegation hoped that
the resolution would have focused more on the
importance of dialogue among religions at the
institutional and authoritative levels.
In this regard, for example, one thinks of the
various formal responses to A Common Word Between
Us and You, including the Catholic-Muslim forum,
which is an ongoing initiative in which many scholars
of both religions have been meeting on a regular basis
to advance interreligious dialogue. Moreover, the
resolution does not clearly express the difference
between faith at a personal level and religion at a more
institutional level. In this sense, my delegation would
have liked to have the title of the resolution changed
from “World Interfaith Harmony Week” to “Worldwide
Week of Interreligious Dialogue/Understanding” or
“Worldwide Week of Interreligious and Interfaith
Dialogue”. So too, my delegation would have preferred
the word “interreligious” in the text, instead of
“interfaith”; and the misleading word “harmony”
replaced with “dialogue”, “respect” or “tolerance”.
Respect for religious and cultural diversity in an
increasingly
globalized
world
contributes
to
international cooperation and promotes enhanced
dialogue among religions and persons. On the occasion
of the adoption of the text before us, my delegation
takes this opportunity to reaffirm its ongoing
commitment to promoting mutual understanding,
respect, dialogue and collaboration between Catholics
and the followers of all other religious traditions.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 15.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

10-59295
