A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/279
30 June 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 97 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/54/L.82)]
54/279. Preparations for the substantive preparatory process and the high-level
international intergovernmental event on financing for development
The General Assembly
1. Welcomes the report of the Bureau of the Preparatory Committee for the high-level international
intergovernmental event on financing for development on modalities of the participation of all relevant
stakeholders in the substantive preparatory process and the high-level intergovernmental event on financing
for development;1
2.

Approves:

(a) The proposals contained in paragraph 7 of the report regarding modalities of the participation of
the World Bank, and requests the Bureau to seek clarification on paragraph 7 (c) thereof, taking into account
the views expressed in the Preparatory Committee;
(b) The recommendations regarding the participation of the Bretton Woods institutions and the World
Trade Organization in the work of the Preparatory Committee, as contained in paragraph 10 of the report;
(c) The recommendations regarding the participation of intergovernmental organizations, the
specialized agencies, the funds and programmes of the United Nations and other relevant official or quasiofficial organizations, as contained in paragraph 13 of the report;
(d) Paragraph 11 of the report regarding the holding of regional consultative meetings during the
second half of 2000 on substantive matters before the Preparatory Committee;

1

A/AC.257/6.

00 50043

/...

A/RES/54/279
Page 2

(e) The recommendations regarding the participation of non-governmental organizations and the
business sector, as contained in paragraphs 14 to 19 of the report, and requests the Bureau to submit to the
Preparatory Committee for its approval the applications for accreditation of those non-governmental
organizations which do not already have consultative status with the Economic and Social Council;
3. Requests the Bureau, in connection with the modalities proposed by the World Bank, to convey
to the Bank the desire of the Preparatory Committee that the Bank participate actively in the Preparatory
Committee, to reinforce the impact of the cooperation envisaged under the proposed modalities;
4. Also requests the Bureau to continue consultations intensively with the institutional stakeholders
indicated in paragraph 11 (e) (i) of General Assembly resolution 54/196 of 22 December 1999 on modalities
of their participation and to report to the Preparatory Committee as soon as possible with proposals and
recommendations thereon, as well as possible proposals and recommendations for additional modalities of
the participation of the private sector;
5. Further requests the Bureau to make proposals and recommendations to the Preparatory Committee
at its resumed organizational session on subparagraphs (a), (b), (c) and (g) of paragraph 11 of resolution
54/196, taking into account discussions in the Preparatory Committee;
6. Requests the Bureau to make arrangements for open-ended informal consultations on subparagraph
(d) of paragraph 11 of resolution 54/196 before the convening of the first substantive session, taking into
account paragraph 3 of the resolution and the elements indicated in the report of the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Working Group of the General Assembly on Financing for Development;2
7. Requests the Secretary-General to assist in the implementation of the recommendations contained
in the report of the Bureau, as approved by the Preparatory Committee and in the present resolution, and to
continue to provide all needed support to the Preparatory Committee and to the Bureau, including
arrangements to facilitate the travel of Bureau members to take part in consultations with the major
institutional stakeholders;
8. Reiterates its decision that the first substantive session of the Preparatory Committee should be
held beginning on 15 May 2000, at United Nations Headquarters;
9. Decides that the Preparatory Committee should hold its second substantive session, of two weeks’
duration, in the first quarter of 2001 and its third substantive session, of two weeks’ duration, in the second
quarter of 2001, at Headquarters;
10. Also decides that the Preparatory Committee should suspend its resumed organizational session
and reconvene it at the earliest possible date in order to complete its work.
98th plenary meeting
15 June 2000

2

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 28 (A/54/28).
