UNITE’D NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1887”’

MEETING:

JUN 2 9 1984

5 FEBRUARY

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/1887)

... ... .. ... .. .. ... .. ... .. .. ... .. ... ..

1

... .

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

1

The situation in the Comoros:
(CI) Telegram dated 28 January -1976 from the head of State of the Comoros
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S:11953);
(h) Letter dated 3 February 1976 from the Permanent Representative of GuineaBissau to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council(W11959)
. ... .. ... ... .. .. .. ... .. ... .. .. .. ... ... .. .. ... .. .. .

1

Expression of sympathy in connexion with the earthquake in Guatemala
Adoptionoftheagenda

S/PV. 1887

;

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Offkigl Records of the Security Council.
The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in’ yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Scxwity
Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1887th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,

5 February

President: Mr. Daniel P. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America).

the Secretary-General’s
envisaged therein.

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan,
Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania and United States of
America.
Provisional

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Comoros:
(u) Telegram dated 28 January 1976 from the head
of State of the Comoros addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/11953);
(h) Letter dated 3 February 1976 from the Permanent Representative
of Guinea-Bissau
to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/l 1959)
The meeting

Adoption

message

and

the

action

of the Agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Comoros:
(a) Telegram dated 28 January 1976 from the head of
State of the Comoros addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/11953);
(ZI) Letter dated 3 February
1976 from the Permanent
Representative
of Guinea-Bissau
to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/11959)

agenda (S/Agenda/l887)

1.

1976, at 3.30 p.m.

of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken yesterday [188&h meeting], I invite the
representative of the Comoros to take a place at the
Council table. I also invite the representatives
of
Algeria, Equatorial
Guinea, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Kenya, Madagascar and Somalia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the usual understanding that they will be invited
to take a place at the Council table when they address
the Council.

was called to order at 4.15 p.m.

Expression of sympathy in connexion
with the earthquake in Guatemala

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Omar Ahdullah (Comoros) took a place ut the Council table;
Mr. Ruhal (Algeria),
Mr. Ecua Miko (Equatorial
Guinea),
Mr. Camara
(Guinea),
Mr. Fernandes
(Guinea-Bissau),
Mr. Maincr (Kenyu), Mr. Rahetafika
(Maduguscur)
und Mr. Hussein
(Somulia)
took
plQces at the side of the Council chamber.

1. The PRESIDENT:
Before I turn to the provisional agenda for the afternoon, I should like to read
out for the members of the Council a telegram which
has been sent by the Secretary-General
to General
Kjell Eugenio Laugerud Garcia, President of Guatemala:

3. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will
now continue its consideration
of the item on its
agenda. The first speaker is the representative of the
Comoros, whom I welcome and invite to make his
statement.

“I am deeply distressed to learn of the severe
earthquake
which has struck your country and
your capital city. I wish to extend my most sincere
sympathy to you and to the people of Guatemala
who have been affected by the reported loss of life
and tragic damage which has resulted. The United
Nations stands ready to provide to your Govemment whatever assistance may be possible. In this
respect the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator inmediately
set in motion the appropriate
procedures to mobilize emergency assistance from
the United Nations system and the international
community.”

4. Mr. .OMAR
ABDALLAH
(Comoros):
I must
start by expressing my appreciation of and admiration for the Security Council which, I believe, is the
guarantor of peace in our perplexed world. The work
that has been done by the Council from the time of its
creation to this day and the part played by successive
Presidents deserve our thanks. And I must thank, in
particular, the current President, who has shown a
lot of widsom and prudence in conducting the meetings
of the Council. At the same time, I must thank the
Council for the interest it has taken in the affairs of

I am sure that the members of the Council would
wish to join with me in associating themselves with
1

our small and new country. But, of course, as representatives realize, however small any country is
nowadays, that country is a part of the body which is
the world. And even if the smallest finger is unwell
the whole body feels that it is not very well and’ the
whole body might run a high temperature. Therefore,
whatever happens in any place in our world today
must concern other countries,
however small or
remote that particular place might be.

8. Whoever was born in these islands became a
Comorian
in every respect. This is unique. This
absorption was inevitable because the society of the
Comoro islands has always remained matrilineal.
Therefore, there has never been in the Comoro islands
any racial or religious conflict or problem. The reli‘gion of the overwhelming
majority is one, Islam.
They all belong to the Shafi school of thought and
they have firmly rooted customs and traditions,
binding all to the same outlook, attitudes and behaviour.

5. I shall’ begin my address with an introduction.
I wish to explain the political situation in the Comoros
in connexion with its independence and to state that
France, according to its own laws and Constitution,
has no right to attempt to cut off Mayotte from the
body of the Comoro Archipelago,
because the fact
remains that, since the separation of the islands from
the mainland of Africa, Mayotte has remained part
and parcel of the Comoro islands, playing a very
important part in the life of the country in give-andtake and co-operation
in all circumstances.
These
four islands together form the State of the Comoros.
It is a fact accepted by the United Nations, and the
General Assembly in its resolution 3385 (XXX) voted
to admit the Comoros as a Member of the United
Nations as four islands and not three. That is irreversible. The world has accepted that situation. It is
now a fact, and the fact will remain. Independence
for those four islands is here to stay, and France, like
any other nation, knows that. But there are, of course,
minor differences of opinion which, I am sure, with
the help of the Council will be removed; the situation
will be improved, and ultimately
those small islands
off the eastern coast of Africa will not be the cause of
any trouble in this vast world.

9. One reads or hears on the radio that in Mayotte
there are Christians who deserve protection from
France and that this is enough of an excuse to separate
Mayotte from its sisters. This statement is misleading
and erroneous because all those Christians belong to
three families only, and their number is only 152,
while the population
of Mayotte consists of more
than 40,000 people, all of them Moslems. Is it justifiable that this minority should be the cause of cutting
off a part of the country on the pretext that their
interests must be safeguarded? Their interests and
rights as citizens of the Comoros are already safeguarded. In fact, not only are they safeguarded but,
in addition, the islands.and their successive Governments have always considered them to be citizens of
one country, the Comoro islands. Because the people
of these islands do not know discrimination,
whether
racial or religious, whoever settles in the Comoro
islands is a Comorian, to the extent that Frenchmen
who consider themselves to be Comorians enjoy all
the opportunities
and privileges open to the other
Comorians.
10. The best example of this is the fact that a Frenchman born in France is now, after independence, one
of the only three roving ambassadors of the young
State, in spite of the misunderstanding.
existing between France and the Comoros. This has no parallel
in, the history of politics. It is a tremendous instance
of social and political justice which deserves to be
applauded by the. whole world, particularly. France,
which believes very strongly in liberty, equality and
fraternity. In the Comoros, we see a unique example
of equality in opportunity and endeavour. The Christians in Mayotte have been allowed to participate
fully in the political and social life of the ‘Comoros.
Some of them belonged to the Assembly. There was
one who was a Minister, who was actually, in the
absence of the then President, appointed as an Acting
President. The Government
of the Comoro islands
therefore is not prepared to give any community,
let
alone a family, any special rights. How therefore can
an integral part of it be cut off from the other parts
for an excuse which does not hold water?

6. Naturally
the first people who settled. in the
Comoro islands were Africans from the coast, and
then other people from the continent of Asia followed.
Whatever the case may be, the historians agree that
settlement in those islands stated more than 4,000
years ago-and
there is historical evidence of this,
but we will not go into that; it would be irrelevant to
do so. What is definite is that Arabs from Yemen and
the Gulf arrived at these islands before the prophethood of Mohammed and they have since then continued to visit those islands. Some have settled there
and their descendants comprise the citizens of those
islands.
7. The earliest people to settle in the Comoros-some
of the earliest people at any rate-were the Malayans,
as is revealed by history and the Mongolian features
in the faces of some Comorians. Someone actually
has remarked that I have some Mongolian features.
How far that is right I do not know. Then the Shirazis
followed, and many of their relics are still standing.
These various elements mingled together to form one
Comorian ‘community,
in such a way that .they ,a11
lost the customs and traditions of their’origin, whether
that was Arabia, Iran, Malaya or India.

11. From time immemorial,
these islands’ have
always lived together there, operating like organs of
of the,same body. No one can deny this because it is
impossible
that it should be otherwise, since the
islands are so near to each other, each one relying
2

upon its sister in all its affairs. Geography, nature and
human ‘needs have united them just like any other
part of the world which is considered to be a unity.

taing himself followed these steps with interest, and
n’ever uttered ‘a word which could be interpreted as
rejecting the unity of the islands. In fact, he made it
perfectly clear on 24 October 1974 that the Comoros
were indivisible, as they had always been. It was only
natural that they should so remain and .have a common destiny. These are the words of the President of
France.

12. If there have been differences in ,authority’ in
these islands, it is like’ what has .happened to other
countries, such as-France itself. Just as France will
not allow the division of that noble country, so it is
the case..with the Government of the Comoros; It will
never accept a division, of whatever nature, in its
new, unique young State. In fact, the unity of Mayotte
and the other islands is demonstrated by an historical
fact-that
in 1513, one Mohammed
Bin Hassan, a
Sultan of Anjouan, became a Sultan of Mayotte as a
result of his marriage to the queen of that island. As
a consequence of the natural unity of these islands,
France itself also discovered that there was no alternative to combining these four islands together under
one Government.

16. In this spirit, serious work started at the end of
1974 to promote the application of .article 53 of the
French Constitution.
That article welcomed the fact
that the people of these islands wanted a referendum,
which should be p;Lobal, to show whether they wanted
Independence or no?T17. The global vote came and the answer was aftirmative. This did not come as an accident. The unity
of the islands, as was pointed out before, was an
undenrable fact which was
-__ accepted by the French
themselves. A?lafiZfiKt
text which revealedihat
was
tl%%%&
9 September 1889, to the effect that there
should be political and administrative
unit-he
Comoro ‘Archipelago.
That article was never abrogated by any other texts in spite of a number of statements made later in connexion with various subjects
which concern the Comoro islands. -Amongst those
statements made later on various subjects connected
with the Comoros is the French law of 9 May 1946,
the law of 16 April 1952, the law of 22 July 1956, the
law of 22 December 1961, and the law of 3 July 1968.
In fact, every time the French legislators wished to
make a resolution concerning the Comoros they have
always taken the archipelago as one country. One can
even say that the legisla%%ii%?ie?hi~iear
in the law
of 9 May 1946, which was the consequence of a previous law, which stated the following as a proof of
the unity of the Comoro islands: “It is stated in the law
that the religion of Islam gives the islands their power
in unity and so does the local dialect which combines
all the people of these islands”.

13. In 1841, France tried in vain to cut off Mayotte
-from its sisters. Actually, in 1843, it made Mayotte a
dependant of the Isle of Bourbon, which is now called
Reunion. Then, it discovered that this was not practicable and as a result, between 1843’and 1844, put
Mayotte under Nossi-Be, an island off Madagascar.
Still it discovered that such a combination
was art&
cial and did not work. Such a marriage could not be
successful, and therefore it reversed the whole thing
and placed Nossi-Be under Mayotte from. 1844 to
1878. Experience taught it that this would not work
either and, therefore,
France combined
Mayotte
with Madagascar. That did not serve any purpose
either and France was forced to go back to reality in
1912, when it recognized that Mayotte could .not be
separated from its sisters. It therefore combined all
four islands to form one colony under the rule of the
Governor of Madagascar, a situati,on which obtained
until 1946.. Then, hard facts forced France to’separate
the archrpelago from Madagascar completely
and
absolutely.
14. It is relevant to mention here that,. in fact,
Mayotte was the base for extending political and
administrative
authority to all the islands, as is revealed by the Decree of .1889, which mentioned
Mayotte and its dependants. By this France accepted
the incontrovertible
fact that Mayotte and the other
islands formed one indivisible State. They had always
been so and have remained so. They were like that
before colonialism.
They remained so, in that natural
;condition,
in the time of colonialism and will remain
so after colonialism.

18. No wonder then that both France and the Comores agreed that the vote should be global. The
referendum took place and the population
voted in
favour of independence.
The French law by which
the referendum was held clearly stated that the vote
would be global. Definitely, those who have the intention of holding another vote in one of the islands
again would be contradicting
French law, which
would be definitely unbecoming to France. This idea
of a global vote and the results did not come as a
surprise to Comorians.
For them-itme~rely-~.empha-.
sized the stntus quo.

15. It is significant that the Republic of France has
never questioned the unity of the archipelago, and
that it made it known to the world that the four islands
all formed one country under French rule. In these
circumstances
the French Government
and the
Chamber of Deputies in the Comoros agreed on 5 June
1973 that steps should be taken to hasten the islands’
progress to independence.
President Giscard d’Es-

19. It is worthwhile’mentioning
again that the French
law by which the referendum was held asserted that
the’referendum
would be global and not held for each
island in isolation. It appears as if the French thought
the Comorians were not serious in their demand for
independence
or that there would be an element
which would stand against those who declared that
3

.,

independence
should be given immediately.
For
these reasons, France was perplexed when it saw the
results of the eEtEns,
and had to take Mayotte as
&n excuse tor extendmg
coloniahsm in the Comoros.
-I_
This shows clearly that it was determined under all
circumstances to remain in Mayotte because, immediately after the people .of the Comoros voted for
independence,
France manifested a strong intention
to stay there indefinitely.
It nominated its representative, Mr. Vet-an, as High Commissioner
and he has
already established the French administration
there.
The French Public Treasury was opened to pay the
civil servants in Mayotte with French money, of
course. Also, the island was invaded by French soldiers. All types of soldiers were sent there, such as
the French Foreign Legion, military forces, parachutists, special cadets, and men-of-war,
one of
which goes constantly around the island while the
others remain alert in port.

22. It is clear, therefore, that to hold another refe- _
rendum in Mayotte alone and to require the agreement of the French Parliament is a pretence of ignorance of the celebrated French Constitution.
On top
of that, it is an interference in the affairs of a foreign
country because, once again, the referendum already
held was on the basis of a French law, the citizens of
the four islands voted in it as one nation, and the
overwhelming
majority voted for independence for
the four islands as one country. And, in addition, the
vote was held under the supervision of the French
themselves and the administration.
23. Immediately
after the results of the referendum
were known, the Comoros were free and independent, but it was in July 1975 that the Comorians made
an official declaration of their independence.
What
would the world and the United Nations think of the
French attitude and behaviour? The mistake is not
with the French people nor with the French Govemment, but with certain individuais who have overrun
the French Constitution
and the French sense of
justice.

20. Aeroplanes keep on moving and flying over the
heads of the people and this frightens the inhabitants
of Mayotte, especially those who dare to express
their views on independence. On 16 July the French
attempted to exile all the die-hard nationalists. Some
of these were put in small boats and others in small
ships without engines. I am pretty sure that was not
done with the agreement of the Government in Paris,
and I would not be surprised were the French representative here to find this something quite new. But
that is actually what has happened, and the point
which must be emphasized is that the Security Council must face facts and realities. The Council is here
to solve problems. The French representative himself
is, I am sure, one of those people who are keen to
have this problem solved, somehow peacefully. I am
pretty sure that he as much as the French people
believes in human rights and the fact that every person in the world must enjoy freedom of expression.
Therefore, I am not saying this in an attempt to destroy the name of France. I am just making statements
which are facts and, if the Council wishes, it can find
out whether what I say is true or not. I suggest that
the French Government
in Paris should start trying
to find out about these things because these things
create a bad impression of France. It is only certain
individuals who are doing all this.

24. The main point is that the four islands of GrandeComore, Anjouan, Mayotte and Moheli are free and
independent. It is not a question whether there should
be another referendum or not. That is absolutely out
of the question. That is not what we are discussing
here. The discussion here is connected with the fact
that these four islands are free. That was admitted by
the United Nations and all the nations in the world
have accepted it. It is a fact, and that fact remains
-that
the Comoros are absolutely independent and
definitely free just like any other country.
25. Of course it has four main parts. We have GrandeComore, Anjouan, Mayotte and MohCli, all together
forming one State, the State of the Comoro islands,
a fact which I am sure the French sooner or later will
accept, beacause the French have been known
throughout
their history to be a race of thinking,
understanding people who believe that humanity all
over the world must be respected, that the wishes of
the people themselves must be followed, and that a
great nation like France must keep its word.
26. Down through history France has said that the
Comoros form one State, and I am pretty sure that,
after the removal of these misunderstandings,
which
I am confident will be achieved very soon with the
Council’s help, the. French will accept this fact that
the Comoros, comprising four islands, are free and
independent.
The Comoros have no intention other
than to live in friendship and amity with the nations
of the entire world, and particularly
with France
which has ruled the Comoros for so long. The destiny
of the Comoros was bound in one way or another
-whether
the Comorians liked it or not-with
the
destiny of France. They fought the Great Wars together. France instituted its ideas of democracy, and
the Comorians cherished those ideas. They want to

21. These ships were made actually to transport
goods. There is evidence of this in the writings of the
French themselves which state that, in the list of the
intended referendum, 4,000 names are missing. They
learned this by comparing it precisely with the list of
the last referendum. What is the point then of having
a referendum if 4,000 voters are absent? That is a
mockery. To make the situation worse, those who
remained behind are frightened, and men and women
who are courageous enough to express their disgust
for another referendum suffer persecution. There is
nothing in this, therefore, except an attempt to
extend colonialism
on the islands for one reason or
another.
4

continue to have very good relations with France, of
course, as much as they wish to continue their friendship with other people and to co-operate with the
Security Council and, with the United Nations as a
whole.

31. In all fairness it must be recognized that when
the question of the Comoro islands was discussed in
the Security Council France made it clear that it
intended to follow a policy involving respect for the
right of self-determination
of the peoples of the world.
The French delegation in the Council foresaw the
grave difficulties
which might be involved in the
independence of the Comoro islands from the point
of view of French constitutional
order. France realized at the time that a conflict might occur between
the wishes of the executive and the decision of the
legislative, and that is indeed what took place. That
has caused some embarrassment
and is not, to our
way of thinking, a matter which should properly be
considered by the Security Council.

27. I think that what I said is sufficient to convince
the Security Council that the Comorians are peaceful
people who are not intent of fighting or quarreling but
wish, like any other nation, to be free and independent
and to have no interference in their internal affairs.
The French? gave their word and they will keep it; the
Comorians have given their word that they will remain friends with the French and all other nations in
the world and they will keep it. Let us hope for the
best.
28.

32. The people of Panama, under the leadership of
General Omar Torrijos, have for many years been
negotiating a new treaty with the United States to put
an end to the colonial enclave known as the Panama
Canal Zone that divides our country in half and disrupts its territorial
integrity and unity. One of the
many obstacles
to the adoption of that treaty has
been an American
Senator from South Carolina,
Strom Thurmond,
who has assigned himself the task
of recruiting opposition to the just cause of Panama,
which claims sovereignty over its entire territory.

Mr.

BOYD
(Panama)
(interprctution
from
,Spu&h):
Mr. President, I wish to fulfil a painful duty
by joining with the Secretary-General
and you in
conveying to the delegation of Guatemala our deep
distress upon hearing the news of the earthquake
which took place in the sister Republic of Guatemala
early yesterday. It took a heavy toll of human life and
material loss. It is our hope that the assistance to be
given to Guatemala
by the Secretary-General
will
become a reality and that it will reach its destination
as soon as possible.

33. Similarly,
we have learned from the French
press that in the French National Assembly there is a
deputy from Mayotte, Mr. Marcel Henri, who is doing
his utmost to obstruct the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago, placing the island of
Mayotte outside. the independence movement.

29. Mr. President, very briefly, may I congratulate
you now that the United States has assumed the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. I wish you every success as you perform
your sensitive functions. I should like also to pay a
tribute to Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, who did such a
splendid job as President of the Council during the
past month of January. We wish, too, to extend congratulations
to Mr. Omar Abdallah, the preceding
speaker, who spoke with great wisdom and eloquence
in defending the cause of the people of the Comoro
islands.

34. Both in the case of the Comoro islands and in
that of Panama, respect for the principle of the territorial integrity and unity of States, as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations, is required, and
any residual rights which certain foreign Powers
might lay claim to are contrary to the rules of modern
international
law.

30. In accordance with the terms of the Charter of
the United Nations, on 12 November last the General
Assembly
adopted by consensus resolution
3385
(XXX) admitting
the’ Republic of the Comoros to
membership in the United Nations. In that resolution
the need was stressed to respect the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago,
made up
of the islands of Anjouan, Grande-Comore,
Mayotte
and Mohili. At the memorable meeting of the Assembly when that resolution was adopted, we wished by
our vote to convey Panama’s firm belief in the universality of the Organization.
In that particular case,
Panama’s position was merely a reflection of the feelings of solidarity that we traditionally
express as a
Latin American country. In addition to respecting the
desires for freedom and independence of the people
of the Comoro islands, we have always been in favour
of any decision promoting
the complete freedom’ of
Africa from the colonial yoke.

35. It is quite clear that, legally speaking, the Security Council and the General Assembly were quite
correct in accepting for membership the new State in
question as an independent republic made up of the
archipelago
comprising
the islands of Anjouan,
Grande-Comore,
Mayotte and MohCli. It is our duty
now to maintain the territorial integrity of the Comoro
islands as a sovereign and independent nation. It is a
Member qf the United Nations and, at the same time,
it is also a member of the Organization
of African
Unity (OUA) and has been since 18 July 1975.
36. The Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of Non-Aligned
Countries, in which Panama participates, decided in its Lima Programme
for Mutual
Assistance and Solidarity’
to support the just claims
of the Government of the Comoro Archipelago, which
wishes to maintain its territorial unity and integrity.
In the opinion of the delegation of Panama, the four
5

islands just mentioned
constitute
an inseparable
entity, which has been recognized by the international community.
At this stage it would be inconveivable to adopt any measures implying that we are
questioning the territorial
integrity or unity of that
country. That would be action contrary to the purposes and principles of the Charter and contrary to
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

Comoro Archipelago. In spite of all our good will we
really cam&follow
the argument of France in its
attempts to justify its rejection of the charge of aggression against this young State Member of the
United Nations.
42. After all, .we know that it is not necessary for
there to be resort to arms, confrontations
and military force to justify talk of aggression. There can be
and, indeed, geo-sociological
economic I political
aggression, and it is within this context that we ‘see
the complaint
of the Comorian authoiities.
So the
reasons why the Comorian Government
called for
the convening of this meeting are not only convincing
but entirely acceptable and justified, in the view of
my delegation.

37. The President of the French Republic, Mr. Giscard d’Estaing, on 24 October 1974, said the following:
“The population
of the Comoros is a homogeneous population,
where there is no colony of
French origin, or at least only a very limited colony.
Would it be reasonable to imagine one part of the
archipelago becoming independent
while another
part, regardless of the feelings of its inhabitants,
retained a different status? I think that we should
face’the realities of the world today. The Comoros
are indivisible;
they. have always been so; it is
normal .that they -should have a common destiny,
even if some of their inhabitants wish for another
solution. We do not have the right, at the .time of
the granting of independence
to a‘ Territory,
to
propose that the unity which has always characterized the Comoro Archipelago be terminated.”

43. If we look back and attempt to follow the vicissitudes marking the accession to independence
of
the archipelago in July 1975 and its admission to the
United Nations, we shall not find it difficult to understand-that France, from the very outset, had no intention of giving up the Comoros entirely. Otherwise, how
are we to explain the persistent refusal of France, to
recognize the results of a certain number of democratic .consultations held under its authority? Initially,
the major political parties between which the Comorian electorate ,was divided and which’ were later
joined by the Parti pour l’evolution
des Comores
merged and made a statement, the political part of
which stipulates in paragraph 3:

38. We believe that the solution to this problem
would be for the parties to negotiate an acceptable
agreement as soon as possible, so that the referendum
which the Government
of France seems determined
to hold at all costs on Mayotte on 8 February will not
be interpreted as a hard and fast position adopted by
the entire French nation against the unity and territorial integrity of the State of the Comoros.

I

“The essence of the action of the new Party
created by the merger of the other parties will fundamentally be based on two objectives: first, the
establishment
of an administrative
and political
system that will make it possible to associate the
mass of the Comorian people, through their elected
political representatives
of whatever level, in the
work of the development of each island, and consequently of the whole of the archipelago;
secondly, the accession of the Comoro Archipelago
to independence in frienship and co-operation with
France.”

39. .We wish to make an appeal to immortal France,
which has so many friends in Panama, to settle this
problem in an amicable manner, so that good relations among the parties to this seeming conflict may
prevail and so that the Comoro Archipelago
may
progress and live in peace.

44. ‘The elections held subsequently on the basis of
that. clear and precise programme, which demonstrates the political maturity of the Comorians, brought
to. the Assembly an overwhelming majority of elected
representatives
who campaigned for independence.
Those results should have been enough for France to
understand the will of the Comorian people and negotiate -with the Comorian authorities the transfer of
international
sovereignty and, in consequence, the
confirmation
of the independence of that country.
But, far from taking that course, after having noted
the desire for independence in the archipelago, France
decided to hold a referendum and acted as if it was
not convinced of the impact of that option on the
Comorian people.

40. Mr. PAOUI (Benin)(intsr~~etation
from French):
First of all, my delegation would like to associate
itself with .the Secretary-General’s
appeal for. assistance for the people of Guatemala, which suffered
an earthquake ,yesterday morning, and we should like
to convey the sympathy of the Government
and
people of Benin to the Government
and people of
Guatemala on the tremendous losses they have suffered in human life and property.
41. It was not without genuine interest that my
delegation listened to the statement made here by the
representative
of France [see 1886th meeting].
In
that statement we sought acceptable justifications
for the reasons and motives that led France;a country recognized as a champion of decolonization,
to
engage in a process obviously designed to divide the

45. France’s attitude and its determination
to hold
a referendum in Mayotte are quite incomprehensible’
6

to my delegation, because, after all, how is it possible for the country whose motto is “Liberty,
.Equality, Fraternity”,
for France which administered
the
Comoro islands as a unit, to fail today to accept the
consequences of. the process which it itself stated,?
How can it possibly persuade the members of the
international
community
that the reasons of convenience which in former times brought about the
union of those islands under a single administration
today cannot permit the authorities of the Comoros
to govern the archipelago as an indivisible
whole?
Whatever the French delegation ,may say, it cannot
convince us that this is not a manmuvre aimed against
the unity and territorial
integrity of the Comoro
Archipelago.
This is not a simple conflict about the
geographical boundaries of a new State. Those boundaries have been recognized by the General Assembly, since, in resolution 3385 (XXX) in which the
Comoros were admitted to the United Nations, it was
made quite clear that that State was made up of four
islands, including Mayotte.

49. However that may be, speaking in the Security
Council when the Council adopted resolution
376
(1975) recommending
to the ‘General Assembly that
the Comoros be admitted to membership in the United
Nations, the representative of Benin sought to issue
a warning against the present situation when he stated
the following on behalf of the Group of African States,
of which he was Chairman at the time:
“The Group would not wish-to see, in the position taken by France, an expression of any desire
to manoeuvre, in the future, in the archipelago of
the Comoros, where governments could be made
and unmade, or indeed, of any encouragement,
intentional or unintentional,
to any urge for secession.” [1848th meeting, pm-a. 113.1
50. However, the organization
of the referendum
planned for 8 February constitutes not only intervention in the internal affairs of the Comorian State,
but actual encouragement
of the urge for secession
which we mentioned.
That is why the invitation
issued by France for international
observers to be
sent to witness the carrying out of the referendum is
quite unacceptable, because if France wanted to invite
those observers it should have done so when it organized the first referendum. At that time that country
did not feel that it needed to agree to the request of
the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation
of the Declaration
on the
Granting,of Independence
to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to send observers to the Comoros. In any
case, there is a great temptation today to believe that
if France is insisting on its invitation it is because it
is sure of the outcome. The Council must‘ not allow
itself to become a party to this manoeuvre.

46. .Nor can there be any doubt in the minds of the
French authorities with regard to the territorial limits
of that State. Proof enough can be found in the statements of the head of the French State at the press
conference he gave on 24 October 1974, from which
the representatives of the Libyan Arab Republic and
Algeria read out extracts yesterday afternoon [i&d.],
and the statements of certain French politicians. The
international
community
was quite justified in believing that the announced referendum
would not
take place, particularly
because, when the Council
studied the application of the Comoros [S/11848] for
admission to the United Nations [see 1848th meeting],
the attitude of France was welcomed with satisfaction.

51. It was not a secret to anyone then, any-more
than it is today, that at least two thirds of the population of Mayotte would declare itself in favour of an
association with France. My delegation, in the light
of this fact and in the interests of France itself and the
people of the Comoros, would like to appeal to France
to refrain, in so far as it can, from organizing this
referendum, which can only be a blot on its escutcheon, its traditional
reputation and the high esteem
in which it is held in Africa. We believe that, as between honour and the concern to preserve the political ambitions
of certain individuals,
France will
have no hesitation in choosing, we venture to claim;
honour.

47. Surely no one will come and tell us now that
France and the international
community
at that time
were under a misunderstanding,
since neither the
members of the Security Council nor the members of
the. General Assembly thought for a moment that
they were admitting a State with one’of its parts missing or can France really be telling us today that it
recognizes the independence of only three’ Comorian
islands?
48. The French attitude might be comnrehensible
today if the law establishing a referendum had stipulated clearly at the time that the results of those consultations would be considered on an island-by-island
basis, instead of globally. To say today that Parliament ,decided to organize this referendum is tantamount to saying that Parliament went back on its own
decision. So the problem which arises here is no
longer just a problem of a conflict between the legislative and the executive, or just a question of a simple
misunderstanding,
but rather a contradiction
within
the legislature itself. Those who rely on the statements of politicians are right, and the causes of the
conflict have .to be sought elsewhere.
1

.

52. Mr. President, I would not like to conclude my
statement without conveying to you our sincere congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for February. We are convinced that this
post will enable you to take a view of international
affairs different from the one you held before. Knowing
your fighting spirit as we do, knowing you as a zealous
champion of democracy, we have no doubt that you
will do everything in your power to see to it that true
democracy, and not a travesty of democracy, prevails in the Comoros.
7

‘I

53. I should also like to take this opportunity
to
express the satisfaction of my delegation at the masterly way in which our brother Mr. Salim conducted
the proceedings of the Council last month. His performance had no equal. His youth, his intrinsic worth,
his courtesy, proved the truth of the saying, “Noble
spirits de not require years to prove their worth”.

can bear repetition in brief, although they will no
doubt be recounted over and over again. The Comoros, sometimes styled the Comoro Archipelago,
has been under French colonial rule for many years.
It has been ruled as one country, and all the steps the
French Government has taken in the past leading the
Comoros to freedom have been fully recorded by the
United
Nations.
The significant
events are: the
agreement reached by the French and Comorian
Governments in the Joint Declaration on the Accession to Independence of the Comoro Archipelago2 of
June 1973, the referendum of 22 December 1974, and
the assumption of independence
by the Comorian
Government on 6 July 1975.

54. The PRESIDENT:
I now invite the representative of Kenya to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
55. Mr. MAINA (Kenya): Mr. President, may I first
of all express my gratitude to you and the Council
for inviting Kenya to participate in the debate. Nor
would I wish to let this opportunity
pass without
paying a tribute to you personally for taking swift
action to bring this matter before the Council. I would
also like to take the opportunity,
Mr. President, to
state that the news of your departure, your decision
to leave this international
community
to rejoin our
common profession-I
am a teacher myself; that is
why I say this-is
sad, but I am sure that the good
relations that you and I have been seeking to promote
between our two countries will continue to grow, and
I trust that your interest in promoting world peace,
economic well-being and good relations between all
nations will find room for expression and focus in the
academic world you are about to rejoin. We wish you
well. We also pay a tribute to your predecessor,
M. Salim, for the very valuable tasks he accomplished during the month of January.

60. The next significant events include the public
position assumed by the Government
of France. It
appears that the Government of France was distinctly
displeased by the assumption of freedom and independence by the Comoros, and a forceful armed
action was contemplated.
This was abandoned, and
a partial occupation of the Comoros took place in the
province of Mayotte. Instead of France organizing
the withdrawal of its forces from the Comoros, it
took action calculated to dismember the Comoros.
61. In the General Assembly on 26 September last
year, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France stated
the following:
“Quite recently France consulted the people of
the Comoro islands regarding their future. The
great majority favoured independence and, without
waiting for completion
of the constitutional
process, decided through their deputies to take over
management of their own affairs. The French Government recognized that, and announced that it
was prepared to begin talks immediately
regarding
the transfer of responsibilities.
We still hope there
can be agreement among Comorians
permitting
establishment
of a framework within which this
new State will begin its future. In this case, as in
others, France is true to its continuing policy of
respect for the right to selfdetermination”.-1

56. May we also join with others in expressing our
sympathy with the people of Guatemala during this
period of their difficulties.
It is our hope that the
international community will join in giving Guatemala
material assistance as this time of need.
57. The issue before the Security Councii is extremely important to all Members of the United Nations.
What we are discussing concerns the unity and territorial integrity of one of the new Members of the
United Nations, a member of OUA and also a member of the non-aligned movement.
58. We all recall that on 17 October 1975 [18481/r
nrperirrg], the Security Council, in its resolution 376
(1975), which was adopted by a vote of 14 votes to
none, in which France did not participate,
recommended to the General Assembly the admission of
the Comoros to the United Nations. On 12 November
1975 the Assembly, in its resolution 3385 (XXX),
acted on the recommendation
of the Council and
admitted the Comoros to membership
in the United
Nations by consensus. These formal and solemn
motions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly made the Comoros a Member of the United
Nations enjoying all rights and privileges, as well as
the burdens which that membership implies.

62. It is significant that when the Security Council
met on 17 October to consider the admission of the
Comoros to the United Nations, the representative
of France repeated the statement of the Foreign
Minister and, in declaring the non-participation
of
France in the Security Council proceedings, stated,
inter

“Since my Government,
which has set this new
State on the road to independence, would not like
to see the first steps of the Comoros in intemational life give rise to a contradiction which, in our
view, it would be inappropriate
to bring before the
Organization, we do not feel that we can participate
in either the discussion or the voting on this item of
the agenda.

59. The developments
that led to the events I have
just described are well recorded and known, but they
8

------k

dia :

-

“Although we shall not be participating in today’s
vote, France would voice the hope that the Comoros and the international
community
win construe
that attitude as proof of its desire to assist, as soon
as possible, in the adoption of a final solution
acceptable to all the parties concerned. Negotiations between the French and the Comorian representatives have just taken place in Paris. For the
time being, they have been suspended so as to provide both parties with additional time for reflection.

ber of the Security Council. When the application for
the admission of the Comoros was considered by the
Council, France was represented in the Council but
declared its wish not to take part either in the discussion or in the voting. The question that arises now is
whether France is a party to Council resolution 376
(1975), which recognized the Comoros as a sovereign
State and recommended
its admission to the United
Nations. It is the view of my delegation that France
is fully a party to that decision, and if there are any
doubts it can seek a legal opinion. There is, however,
no need to do so because there are numerous precedents to confirm that France is fully a party to the
decision. This is even further confirmed by the fact
that as a permanent member of the Council, it had
the power to produce a different result.

“It goes without saying that my country, as it
has always proved in the past, has at all times been
aware of the particular responsibilities
incumbent
upon it by virtue of the application of the principle
of self-determination.
It likewise goes without
saying that in this matter France is not seeking any
particular advantage”. [Ibid., purrs &IO.]

67. Since France cannot rely on the disunity of the
Comoros to continue to occupy one part of the Comorian territory and to take actions which give the
impression that it has sovereignty over the Comoros,
it would be interesting to know the basis of its actions.

63. Inasmuch as the representative
of France had
institutional
difficulties which he did not resolve, the
United Nations has even more serious difficulties in
dealing with the continued French occupation of the
territory of the Comoros and with the present illegal
activities of the Government of France in the Comoros. France lost sovereignty over the Comoros when
that State assumed national responsibility,
which act
was confirmed by its admission to the United Nations.

68. In view of the foregoing we are bound to ask:
Is it French national advantage which France is
seeking in the Comoros? We have been told that this
is not so. Is it national pride, in that the Comoros
speeded up the date of its independence? This would
be untenable in the case of a mature and experienced
nation of the status of France, in that national affairs
are not handled like the affairs of a private individual.
Perhaps in this as well as in other undeclared interests in the Indian Ocean is contained the answer. It is
difficult
otherwise to understand
why France is
encouraging and taking actions that could lead to the
dismemberment
of a State Member of the United
Nations. We consider that it is not too late for France
to change this course of illegal action in the Comoros.

64. France has declared on more than one occasion
its respect for self-determination.
There must be a
limit to self-determination
and a context in which it
is viewed and implemented.
The United Nations must
have been aware of the dangers of a loose expression
of the principle of self-determination
from the beginning. In the oft-quoted
resolution
of the General
Assembly which codified this principle of self-determination it is no accident that the last two paragraphs
deal with this problem. In paragraphs 6 and 7 of resolution 1514 (XV), the Assembly declared:

69. In conclusion,
I should like to appeal to the
Council to impress on, the French Government
the
need to honour its obligations under the Charter and
the principles of the United Nations by refraining
from taking .any actions which may interfere with the
soyereignty and territorial
integrity of the State of
the Comoros.

“Any attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national unity and the territorial
integrity of a country is incompatible
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

65. In the view of my delegation,
Prance cannot
logically rely on the principle of ‘self-determination
to dismember the Comoros, a sovereign Member of
the United Nations.

70. Yesterday evening the representative of France
made a statement to clarify the positions held by the
executive arm of his Government
which were not
upheld by the French Parliament.
The dialogue that
followed was clear enough to show that our coileague, the representative
of France, would be the
first to suffer if internal disagreements of his Government were made a subject of debate in the Council.
Merely to illustrate this difftcuity, and without in any
way intending to embarrass our colleague, one can
legitimately
ask whether he represents France, the
French executive or the French Parliament or all at
the same time.

66. The United Nations also has another serious
institutional
problem. France is a permanent mem-

71; We cannot agree to be drawn into this type of
discussion since it would make the Organization

“All States shall observe faithfully and strictly
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
the rJniversa1 Declaration
of Human Rights and
the present Declaration
on the basis of equality,
non-interference
in the internal affairs of ail States,
and respect for the sovereign rights of all peoples
and their territorial integrity”.

9

unworkable.
When we call on the Government
of
France to stop taking actions calculated to dismember the Comoros, we mean “the. Government
of
France” in the ordinary sense. -attached to that
expression.

and in spite of the appeal issued by the Council of
Ministers of OUA in its resolution 421 (XXVY and
that of the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Lima,’ France is
illegally occupying part of the State of the Comoros,
namely, the island of Mayotte.

72. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Guinea. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

78. What is worse, it has decided to organize a referendum on 8 February -1976 in that island, a referendum which it claims is a way of consulting the population of the island in an attempt to determine whether
it wishes to choose freedom or slavery. And what are
known as the conditions of security have been created
to make possible this “free” choice-for
we are perfectly well aware of the existence in that area of legionnaires, police, warships, .an aircraft carrier and
French commandos. This has just been confirmed by
the representative of the Comoros. This situation is
not only a flagrant violation of the territorial integrity
of a State’Member
of the United Nations, but also a
threat to international
peace .and security.

73. Mr. CAMARA
(Guinea) (interpretution
from
Fl’ench): First of all, I should like to ,associate my
delegation with the appeal of the Secretary-General
and, on behalf of the Government of the State Party
of Guinea, I’ should’ like to express our sympathy to
the people of Guatemala in connexion with the catastrophe that country has just suffered.
74. Mr. President, ‘before turning to the item before
the Security Council permit me, on behalf of my
delegation to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security, Council for February, and at the same time to pay a well-deserved
tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Ahmed Salim of the
United Republic of Tanzania for the courage, wisdom
and tact with which he conducted the proceedings of
the Council in January.

79. France has its own social and cultural history.
How can France deliberately deny the social and cultural history of the Comoro Archipelago
with its
natural constituents,
which are: Anjouan, GrandeComore, Mayotte and Moheli?
‘:
80. Let us’ remember that the unity and territorial
integrity of the Comoros have’ been established by
French legislation itself; from the law of 25 July 1912
which made a colony of all these islands, right up to
the law of 1974 on the referendum, and including the
law of 1947 ‘making of the territory an autonomous
administrative
unit, the law of 22 December 1961 on
the political organization of the Comoro ‘Archipelago
and the law of 3 January 1968 which modified and
supplemented this last one.

75. It was on 6 July 1975 that the heroic people of
the Comoros, fully aware of their history,and the responsibilities imposed on them by present-day society,
proclaimed their independence. That date in itsa historic significance mirked the first manifestation
of a
specific+.desire,
freely expressed by an overwhelming majority of the Comorian people in the course
of the referendum which took place on 22 December
1974, Under resolution 3385 (XXX),
the General
Assembly -decided’, by consensus, to admit this new
independent and sovereign ‘State to membership
of
the international community.
‘,

81. We hope that France will abide by its obligations
under these various pieces of legislation which retognize in’ their entirety the unity and- territorial inte;’
grity of the Comoros. In this regard President Valery
Giscard d’l+taing stated on 24 October 1974 at a press
conference:

76.’ As have all other States ‘present here, my ‘coun.try, the Republic of Guinea, has always been devoted
to the ‘sacred principle of the right of all peoples to
self-determination
and independence+ a principle laid
down in the Charter of the United Nations and in
resolution 1514 (XV), the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
Consequently,. we, the. members of the international
community,
should denounce and condemn
any
attempt’ to disrupt the -national’ unity and territorial
integrity of the Republic of the Comoros.

“‘The population of the’ Comoros is a homogeneous population,
where there is no colony of
French origin, or at least only a very limited colony.
Would it be reasonable to imagine one part of the
archipelago becoming ‘independent
while another
part, regardless of the feelings of its inhabitants,
retained a.different status? I think that we should
face the realities of the world today. The Comoros
are indivisible;
they have always been so; it is
normal that they should have a ‘common destiny,
even if some of their inhabitants wish for another
solution. We do not have the right, at the time of
the granting of independence
to a Territory,
to
propose that the unity which has always characterized the Comoro Archipelago be terminated.‘.’

77. It is unfortunately’ deplorable and tragic to note
that, in spite of the provisions of resolution
1514
(XV), in which .the Assembly stipulates, infer dirt,
that
“Any attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national unity and the territorial integrity of a country is incompatible with the,purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations”
10

82.. This statement of President Giscard d’Estaing
was ciuoted ‘yesterday, by our brother from Algeria
[1886th meeting,. para. 88J and today again ‘it. was
repeated by other speakers before us. We repeat it
here in turn because this is not only an authoritative
voice but,. above all, the voice. of reason, the only
voice worthy of the greatness of France and in keeping
with the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations.
In our view, the French Parliament, in its traditional
wisdom, should have heeded and still should heed
that voice in these present deliberations. and,‘indeed,’
should allow itself to be guided by that voice.

planned for i February 1976, thus respecting not only
the Charter of the United Nations but alsd the wish
so widely ejtpressed by the Comorian
people on
22 D&ember
1974.’
87.

Mr. de GUIRINGAUD

(France) (interpretation

from French): I have listened with close attention

to
th,e delegations that participated
in the debate, and
I believe that they all have undertaken the discussion
of this subject in good faith. I noti in turn-should like
to bring further clarity to the debate and try to dispel
some confusion by reverting to the two points host
frequently
mentioned
in the statements that have
been made here. The ‘first is the situation in Mayofte
and in the Comoros, and the second is the constitutional and decisibn-making
process in France.

83.. It is clear that France .is obliged ‘to acdept the
logical and juridical consequences of an act of sovereignty in its totality and spare us any further consultations in’ flagrant contradiction
with its present position. We cannot believe that France, faithful to its
policy of ‘decolonization
since 1960 and its policy of
non-intervention
in the internal affairs of other States
which h&e been recognized as independent
and
Members ,of the United Nations, can fail to give up a
practice so similar to that of ,bantustanization,
which
France itself condemned and repudiated at this’ very
table in ‘the course of the recent-debate on Namibia.
The .Fre&h Government should give up this practice,
which is contrary to good French ttiditions
and the
ideals which have always inspired and guided it in its
work of decolonization.
The United Nations can and
must safeguard the unity and territorial
integrity of
this young, independent and ‘sovereign State, and call
on France-to put an end to its unjustifiable and unjustified presence in the island of Mayotte, because its
presence there is an open violation of the sovereignty
and independence of a State member of OUA, infernationally
recognized,
a State which the General.
Assembly, at its. thirtieth session, admitted to membershij, on the recommendation
of ‘the Security
Council,
.

88. On the first point, I believe that we all agree that
the. results of the referendum of 22 December 1974 1
reflected the views of the Comorians regarding their
future. It is true that the over-all figure of 94 per cent,
of the votes in favour of independence is very impressive, It reflects the intentions that had been expressed
earlier by France. I hasten to explain however, that
the 6 per cent of the voters who rejected iridependence are not scattered in various villagks. I fear that
the African representatives
who spoke of dismemberment or Balkanization
did not perhaps percei.ve
reality accurately. The 6 or 7 per cent who voted “no”
represented 40,000 inhabitants on one single island.
89. An island’cannot
be said to be an area designed
by men. It is a natural fact, the ,particular features of
which sometimes impose themselves on us more than
we would wish. It is true that the ethnic’ make-up,
religion and living habits of the people in the Comoro
islands are very similar. There is some geographical
homogeneity in the four islands and, at least logically,
one would assume that they could be considered
indivisible. That was indeed the view of the President
of the French Republic, who expressed the intentions
and the preferences which were referred to yesterday
and today by a number of speakers.

84. “.&nseque&ly‘,
permit us, on behalf of our delegation,. .on behalf of the Government
of the State
Party of Guinea, and in the name particularly of the
new bases for co-operation
between France and
Guinea, to appeal urgently to France to stop the referendum planned for 8 February 1976 in the island of
Mayptte and to withdraw all its forces from the te*tory.

90. But the figures are there; they have confiried
that .at the present time-1
stress “at the present
time” -there is a problem in Mayotte. That problem ’
is general!y rccognized, and we have invited those
who may still have doubts on this point to send ,io
Mayotte on 8 February their government observers,
who could .testify the situation.
If that’ is considered superfluous, we shall take note of it. It will
mean that the sincerity of the consultstion
is not in
question, But that will not remove the problein.

85. Permit me once again ‘to repeat to France the
appeal made to it at Kampala, in-resolution 42 1 (XXV)
of the Council of Ministers of OUA, and at Lima by
the Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned
Countries,’ calling upon it to withdraw in good faith
from the island of Mayotte, ‘an ilitegral part of the
Republic of the Comoros.

91. I should like to draw the Council’s attention to
a truly fundamental point. Whether or not we like it,
there is a difficulty in Mayotte; a problem exists.
Mr. Salim’is well aware of that, I am sure. He cannbt
at one and the same time recognize the sincerity of
*the consultation and criticize its timeliness. He cannot say: “Do the best you can, pretend that Mayotte

86. Fiance,‘we repeat, began the process of decolonization at .the.beginning
of 1960. This is something
we’ have not forgotten, and we believe that, faithful
to its ideal of ‘liberty and its democratic traditidns,
France Gill refrain from drganizing the referendum
11

does not exist.” He cannot disregard that dissenting
view, simply because he is an honest man and because
he himself in a recent debate on Belize in the Fourth
Committee mentioned the opinion of a distinguished
South American jurist, Mr. de Castro.

French territory, if it so desires, or it can still become
a part of the State of the Comoros if it so desires.
Whatever the solution, there will ‘not be one more
State than was anticipated when France recognized
that the Comoros were moving towards independence.

92. What .did that jurist say? That distinguished
member of the International
Court of Justice stated
that “the primary issue is the interests of the inhabitants of a territory.
The legal bonds arising from
colonization cannot be allowed to obstruct the implementation of the principle of self-determination.”

97. The renresentative of Guinea-Bissau.
in a very
interesting statement yesterday, said that Portugal, if
it had so desired, could have created several States
in Cape Verde. I might reply that if the new Portugal
did not desire that in Cape Verde, France is no more
desirous of it in the Comoros. France did not even
want to keep part of that archipelago. I do not know
what would have happened in Cape Verde if there
had been a referendum in that archipelago.
I note
however that one did not take place. But I would
remind representatives that a referendum is an integral and necessary part of French constitutional
procedures.

93. Applying that principle to Mayotte, I would say
that the primary question is implementing
the will of
the people and the right to self-determination
of the
inhabitants of the island. In other words, if the inhabitants are to be given the means to exercise self-determination particular desires which they want no part of
cannot be imposed on them. If we say that unity
cannot be imposed, that is stating the answer of
France to the problem of Mayotte.

98. France, I might add in passing, is not prepared
to give up what it feels is the highest expression of
the principle of self-determination
and of true democracy. I might also say, this time for the benefit of
Mr. Kikhia, if he allows, that France has never imposed any prior conditions to the unity of the Comoros, nor have we endeavoured to have a principle of
territorial division take precedence over the principle
of territorial integrity. It simply finds itself faced with
certain facts.

94. I insist that people take positions here. I ask:
What would the opponents of the referendum
of
8 February suggest by way of an alternative solution?
What solution is suggested? Should force be used, or
be allowed to be used? Then, and only then, would
it be proper to speak of aggression.
95. I am sure that our African friends and our friends
of the third world who are genuinely concerned with
a new and just political order will recognize that the
major concept of self-determination
is a complex one.
I can appreciate their antipathy with respect to what
is called “Balkanization”,
but I would make two
points. The first is that it is puerile to believe that
the danger of the territory’s breaking up arises from
manceuvres ascribed to the abominable colonial masters or to a mythical imperialism.
Those slogans do
not correspond to reality, which is much more mundane. The truth of the matter is merely that neighbouring populations at times do not get along very
well; they may wish to indulge in rivalries or clan
conflicts. The truth i.n this case is that France did not
find the Comoro Archipelago united when it set foot
on Mayotte first, and then much later on the other
islands. We are sorry indeed that at the time of decolonization three islands had not yet reached agreement with the fourth. We would have preferred
harmony to reign to a greater extent. We have not
spared any efforts along those lines and we shall not
do so in the future.

99. I now turn to the constitutional
principles in
effect in France. The French Government,
when it
organized the referendum in the four islands, GrandeComore, Anjouan, MohCli and Mayotte,
sincerely
wished to act in accordance with the over-all results.
And when I say the Government,
I mean all the
branches of the executive, beginning, of course, with
the President of the Republic, and then the Prime
Minister,
the Ministers
who are members of the
Cabinet, and the whole chain of the executive which
leads, as far as the United Nations is concerned, to
myself, your humble servant. All have explained the
situation to the best of their understanding.
They
have expressed their intentions. Those intentions, as
I said yesterday, were not commitments,
nor could
they have been.
100. The French Government
had no intention of
dividing
the inhabitants
of the archipelago.
The
Mahorians
themselves established that division in
accordance with the desire they expressed, by a twothirds majority, not to join the inhabitants of the other
islands but to remain French. One should perhaps
seek the reason for that attitude not in any alleged
machinations on the part of the French Government,
which did not desire such differences, but perhaps in
the particular character of the Mahorians,
which
antedates the establishment
of French authority in
the area.

96. My second comment is that the region in question has not been Balkanized. Mayotte, quite obviously, does not wish.to become a new State Member of
the United Nations, and the French Government will
not encourage it in that direction. The State of the
Comoros has become independent,’
and that was
recognized by France. Mayotte can remain part of
12

101. All the French Parliament
could do was to
draw appropriate conclusions from the consultations
which took place in the Comoros in accordance with
the process of self-determination
in which the French
Government
had taken the initiative.
The French
Parliament alone has supreme constitutional
powers
when it is a question of modifying the composition
of
French territory. Nothing is clearer in this connexion
than the rule which gives the Parliament
decisionmaking powers in this respect. It is set -forth in
article 53 of the French Constitution,
which I feel it
might be appropriate to read here:

unable to enter into any legal commitments
regarding
the territory of their country. Therefore, as I stated
yesterday, the French statements which have been
referred to by several speakers in this matter have
been, are and will indeed always be declarations of
intent similar to those which we hear daily from Governments
or their representatives
in the United
Nations. It is no right to say that there are ulterior
motives, even less that some have been guilty of
machinations.
Those statements were uttered in good
faith by the executive power, within the limits of the
powers which are laid down in constitutional
provisions which are public and published and to which
anyone may refer.

“Peace treaties, trade treaties, treaties or agreements relating
to international
organizations,
those which engage the finances of the State, those
which modify legislative provisions,
those which
relate to the status of individuals,
those which
involve the cession, exchange of, or addition to territories cannot be ratified or approved except by
virtue of a law. They take effect after ratification
or approval. No cession, no exchange of, addition
to territory is valid without the consent of the
people concerned.”

106. There is no problem of honour here, as some
have thought fit to suggest, nor any problem of dignity. There is only a constitutional
question. If we
were to take as commitments,
in the strongest legal
sense of the term, all official pronouncements
in this
establishment,
I believe that we would be soon reduced either to silence or needless disputes.
107. If I may, I should now like to refer to two or
three statements that have been heard in the debate
this afternoon. The representative
of Guinea spoke
of the presence of French warships in the area of the
Comoros. May I deny that as forcefully as I can.
There is a French fleet in the Indian Ocean which
normally cruises from the Red Sea to the Kerguelen
Islands. It has been in the Indian Ocean for the past
20 years at least. Those vessels do not threaten the
Republic of the,Comoros any more than they do the
other States in the area, any more than do other .far
larger fleets belonging to other Powers, which also
constantly cruise in that area.

102. It is obvious-and
all interpretations
agree in
this connexion-that
this absolute rule set forth in
the constitutional
text for treaties applies LI fhiori
to any unilateral procedures with the same scope,
that is, here, to the results of a referendum relating to
self-determination.
There is nothing very special
about that provision; it may be found in the constitutions and constitutional
practices of the democratic
States whose representatives are seated at this table.
I might mention article 80 of the Italian Constitution
of 1942, which is very close to our article 53.
103. I am sure that you would not disagree with me,
Mr. President, if I said that only the American Congress can consent to the withdrawal of or cession of
a territory of the Union, and that the President of the
United States must submit for the authorization
of
the Congress any treaties, in accordance with article II, section 2 of the Constitution of your country,
which is practically two centuries old.

108. I might also add that in Mayotte, where there
are 36,000 inhabitants,
the total number of French
military men present is no more than 24tiompared
with 36,000. Those 240 men’ are in the only military
installation on the island, which takes up a total area
of less than half a hectare, and really what is involved
is only buildings and land that are being leased. No
French military air, ground or maritime facilities exist
in the Comoros. France established no military bases
there during past decades and, indeed, does not
intend to do so today.

constitutional
principles,
though
104. English
unwritten, are I think similar to ours on this point,
without mentioning
the constitutions
of other members of the Council, with which I am not so familiar.
I might recall, however, article I of the Convenant of
1924 on the creation of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, paragraph B of which specifies that the
supreme bodies of the Union, and in particular the
legislative bodies, alone have the power to modify the
boundaries of the Union. I suppose that, generally
speaking, territorial
acquisition,
like territorial
cession, must be ratified in the Soviet Union by the equivalent of the French parliamentary
bodies.

109. The representative of the Republic of the Comoros, who spoke at the beginning of our meeting,
referred to movements of populations
and alleged
deportations ordered by French authorities in Mayotte.
In that connexion,
may I say that as soon as the
French Government
learned of the departure from
Mayotte of Comorians who came from other islands
of the archipelago, it called for a legal inquiry. The
first results of that inquiry indicate that the departures were limited to a few hundred in number, and
not a few thousand as has been claimed. In most cases
the persons involved were Comorians who had recently settled in Mayotte encouraged by the pre-

105. It follows from those considerations
that several of the representatives seated at this table are also
13

,:,

ceding President of the Council of Government of the
Comoros. Most of them came from the island of
Anjouan. They freely chose to join the Comorian State.
It goes without saying that the French local authorities
received instructions to be particularly careful about
ensuring that no pressure of any kind be brought .to
bear on the inhabitants of Mayotte forcing them to
leave the island. It goes without saying also that those
same authorities are in no way obstructing the freedom
of movement of the inhabitants of Mayotte.

National
Assembly should have taken
before the referendum took place.

a .decision

115. That having been said, we are told that France
did not want to keep any part of the Comoro Archipelago. We tried to show that even’ the very process
followed right up to independence was not such as to
inspire all that much confidence. The independence
of this State and its entry into the Unit,ed Nations
was brought about precisely because France; at that
time, even if ,it did not vote in favour of resolution
3385’ (XXX), was none the less bound by, Security
Council resolutions. The fact that it accepted the idea
that the Comoros should be admitted to the United
Nations’ as an indivisible
entity composed of four
islands binds France,‘and that is why we fail to understand today the argumentation
whereby France
wishes to prove to us that it was acting in good faith
in this operation.

110. Finally, some speakers have referred to .the
admission of the Republic of the Comoros to the
United Nations and to the resolutions which were
adopted in that connexion by the Security Council
and by the General Assembly. They thought they
could infer therefrom that France, which did not
oppose those resolutions, had implicitly accepted the
State of the Comoros with the territory ‘it claims.
I wish to remind those speakers that in both votes,
France ‘was very careful not to participate.
I even
believe that this is the only time that has happened.

116. The representative
of France quoted a statement of a distinguished Latin American jurist to the
effect that juridical bonds could not impede the application of the right to self-determination.
Very well,
but what are these ties? What juridical
ties bind
France to Mayotte .today?

111. :We’did not want to prevent a State from coming
into the United Nations, a State which we ourselves
had ,said .wished independence
and which we ourselves had helped to attain independence. A negative
vote by us would, quite obviously, have prevented
that State from entering the United Nations..,We’did
not want to deprive that young State of the”support
it could have in the Organization or of the recognition
which it was thus able to receive from the intemafional community.
We called upon our friends to vote
in favour of the admission of that State.

117.. The representative
of France said that q the
Comoros did not form an entity. The question which
may be ,asked in connexion with territories formerly
under French domination
is to know which of the
States that are today.Members
of the United Nations
had ‘their present territorial limits at the time when
France began ,colonization.
Because if .we say that
there was no territorial unity in this case, one can say,
too, that there was no territorial unity in any of the
other States either. ,France regrouped the archipelago
for reasons of convenience and therefore there is no
reason why it should not consider the Comoros. an
entity. This is where we differ from the French delegation. We should like to be told if, for example, the
French Government had the right to organize a referendum, in the Comoros saying that that referendum
would be considered from a global viewpoint, without
the authorization of the French National Assembly.

112. The fact that we did’ not participate in the vote
clearly conveyed that we .had certain reservations
about some aspects of the candidacy of the State of
the Comoros, and one of those aspects was the territorial make-up claimed by theState of the Comoros.
Once again, I repeat that France did not recognize the
territorial
make-up of the Comoros as that State
defined it and as it appears in the resolutions that
were adopted when the Comoros joined the United
Nations.
‘113. Mr. PAQUI
(Benin)
(infcr~retalion
from
French): Unfortunately,
I was not in the room when
the representative of France began his statetirent but
I was abe to follow a good deal of his argumentation,
and it seems to me that there is something missing,in
the reasoning of the representative of France.
114. He laid careful stress on the role of the French
Parliament. Now the question I would like to raise is
whether or not the French Government had the right
to organize a referendum in a French territory without
the authorization
of the French National Assembly.
If the French Government
had that right I really do
not seee how today people can take refuge behind
the opposition in the National Assembly. But if the
French Government did not have the right, the French

118.’ Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation from French): To reply immediately
to the representative of Benin, of course, the French Government
could not organize a referendum without a law. The
executive in France is subject to the legislature, as
I have so often said, and to organize a referendum
there must be a law. It was the law of 15 November
I974 which authorized the organization
of the referendum. That law authorizing the referendum made
it clear that Parliament would define the voting‘pro:
cedure and that in accordance with the Constitution,
Parliament
would have to take a decision on what
should follow that consultation.
We never concealed
that. It was stated at the twenty-ninth session of the
General Assembly5 by the representative *of France
to the Fourth Committee.

.14
_’

French):

%ommitments”;
so I will not go into that field again,
in’order to reduce the number of rights of reply.- ,

120.

124. But it,would seem that when the French Govl
ernment made that statement, which we consider a
commitment,
because,, as I said yesterday, the French
Government
as- an administering
Power has certain
responsibilities’
before the Organization,
when it
made the undertaking
or indicated that intention to
the United ‘Nations
solemnly as an administering
Power, it already had the blessing of the National
Assembly, at least to the extent that there was going
to be a referendum.

119.

Mr.

PAQUI
(Benin) :(interpretatiun
from
If I correctly understand the representative
of France, this is a pirate law which the National
Assembly of France adopted. How can you‘adopt a
law to organize’a referendum in a’State which is considered a unit and say that you reserve the right to
-interpret the results of .that referendum, when it has
been stated that the results of the referendum would
be considered globally? I really do not see why they
are planning other ways out and complicating
the
matter even further for the international public.
Mr.

de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretaThe representative of Benin was
surely not in the Fourth Committee
when this was
stated at the twenty-ninth
session, that is, in 1974,
and no doubt he was not familiar in detail with the
law adopted by the French Parliament.
But. I am
surprised that he can talk of a pirate law when this
law applied to French territory. The French Parliament had the right to legislate for a French territory
without any need for “piracy”
to be mentioned. This
is really the first time that I have heard such an expression used with regard to legislation concerning the
territory of a State.

tion from

French):

121. I repeat that the law defined the voting procedure, .that is, the way in which the voting would take
place,. and stipulated that Parliament would have to
take a decision about what to do after the consultal
tion. Parliament made no commitment
about the unity
of the territory of the Comoros at that time. It reserved its right to judge on the follow-up to the consultation. Therefore, there .is no contradiction
between
the position adopted by Parliament in November 1974
and the decision taken by Parliament in June 1975.
122. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic- of Tanzania):
This is just a point of interest. I was in the Fourth
Committee when the French representative made his
statement in connexion with the- French Govemment’s position with respect to the future of the Territory. And yesterday [1886th fneeting] in my statement
I alluded to that. I ,-said at that time to the French
Government that it was inconceivable to have a multiplicity of statuses for the Territory of the Comoros
and that the Comoros should retain the frontiers it
‘had as a colony.
12j: Now, I am even more concerned when I hear
the French representative
saying what he is saying
now, because it would appear that this statement was
made by our colleague from France in the Fourth
Committee in 1974; yet by that time the French National Assembly had already planned the type of
referendum that would be held in the Comoros. That
being the case, of course the French Government
was undertaking certain intentions. We were ouarreland
ling yesterday ‘about the words “intentions’.’

125. Frankly, if at that time they had reason to doubt
that that would not be the case, why let the people of
the Comoros indulge in such a mockery? For I am
sure that if the people of the Comoros had known
from the very beginning that the motives of this referendum were still dubious, certainly they would not
have expended their energy and their resources in
the expectation of something whose outcome ,was
still a subjecl of a different interpretation.
‘I must say
in all humility, the more the representative of France
explains his position, the more my conviction of the
inconsistency of the French position on this question
is reinforced.
126:

Mr.

de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretaI do not want to prolong the debate. I regret that I was not able to convince my colleague, Mr. Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania,
better. I have often told him, and I have said here,
that the intentions of the French Government,
of the
French executive, were quite clear. The law as voted
by Parliament was not at all against the idea of the
Comoros .becoming independent as a unit. But. Parliament, after the consultation,
decided to interpret
the results of the consultation
according to the vote
of the people island by island. Because of that, we
find ourselves in our present situation. I do not think
there is any need to go into further detail on that.
tion from

Frenbh):

127. The PRESIDENT:
Before adjourning
the
meeting, I should like the members of the Council to
know that I have just been informed that certain
members ‘of the Council have joined in sponsoring a
draft resolution on the subject now before us. I understand that the text has been given to the Secretariat
and that it will shortly be available to members.
The meeting

rose at 6.45 p.m.
Notes

’ See A/l0217

:

and Corr.1.

2 See Official Records uf the General Assembly, Tweny-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 23, chap. Xl, annex, appendix II.,
‘.
’ Ibid., ‘Thirtieth Session, Plenary b4eetings, 2634th meeting.,
’ See A/10297,

.annex

I.

s See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thiriieth
.
sion, Fourth %ammittee, 2123th meeting, para. 40.
..’

.’

,kek
.,_

HOW

TO OBTAJN

UNITED

NATJONS

PJJJILJCATJONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LJ?S PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNJES

Jxs publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans Jes librairies et les agences dcpositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Get&e.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PJJBLJCACJONES

DE LAS NACJONES

UNJDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas es&r en venta en librerias y casas distribuidotas
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consuite a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Venras,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00400

83-60801~-May

1984-2,200
