S/PV.9221

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9221st meeting

Thursday, 15 December 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jaishankar. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Cleland
Mr. Coveney
Mr. Sing’Oei
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Al Kaabi
Lord Ahmad
Ms. Nuland

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Global counter-terrorism approach – principles and the way forward
Letter dated 5 December 2022 from the Permanent Representative of India to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/906)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-75329 (E)
*2275329*

S/PV.9221

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of sympathy in honour of all the victims
of terrorism and of the peacekeepers who have laid
down their lives over the years in the course of
their duties
The President: Before we proceed with today’s
meeting, I invite all members to join me in observing
a minute of silence in honour of all the victims
of terrorism.
We have also received reports of the tragic killing
of an Irish peacekeeper and of injuries to four others in
Lebanon yesterday. We pray for their speedy recovery.
I also invite all members to honour the peacekeepers
who have laid down their lives over the years in the
course of their duties.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Global counter-terrorism
approach — principles and the way forward
Letter dated 5 December 2022 from
the Permanent Representative of India
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2022/906)
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
the distinguished ministers and other high-level
representatives. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General, Office of CounterTerrorism; Mr. Weixiong Chen, Acting Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate; and Ms. Anjali Vijay Kulthe, nursing
officer at the Cama and Albless Hospital in Mumbai
and a survivor of the 26/11 Mumbai terror attacks.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.
2/25

begin

its

15/12/2022

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/906, which contains the text of
a letter dated 5 December 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
Mr. Voronkov: I thank the Republic of India for
organizing this briefing during its presidency of the
Security Council.
The persistent global threat posed by terrorism not
only requires the Council’s continued attention, but it
also calls for a renewed collective approach, as laid out
in the Secretary-General’s report Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982). His New Agenda for Peace will outline a
way forward to address converging risks and threats
that include not only terrorism, but also armed conflict,
a worsening climate emergency, poverty and inequality,
an unregulated cyberspace and a not easy recovery
from the coronavirus disease pandemic. The magnitude
and the complexity of today’s threats to international
peace and security require no less. In that regard, I
reiterate the Secretary-General’s call for strengthening
multilateralism as a matter of necessity, not of choice.
Despite continuing leadership losses by Al-Qaida
and Da’esh, terrorism in general has become more
prevalent and more geographically widespread,
affecting the lives of millions worldwide. In recent
years, terrorist groups such as Da’esh, Al-Qaida and
their affiliates have continued to exploit instability,
fragility and conflict to advance their agendas. That
has been the case particularly in West Africa and the
Sahel, where the situation remains urgent as terrorist
groups strive to expand their area of operations. The
activities of such groups have also contributed to the
deteriorating security situation in other parts of the
continent, particularly in Central and Southern Africa.
In Afghanistan, the sustained presence of terrorist
groups continues to pose serious threats to the region
and beyond, as some groups maintain ambitions to
conduct external operations. Moreover, it is concerning
that the de facto authorities have failed to sever longstanding ties with terrorist groups sheltering in the
country, despite the Council’s demands that they do so.
Terrorist groups in those and in other contexts often
pursue diverse agendas through different strategies,
often adapting opportunistically. They do so in part by
22-75329

15/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

resorting to illicit financing methods and other criminal
activities, posing difficult challenges for coordinated
responses by Member States. Others have morphed into,
or grafted themselves onto, insurgencies that occupy
territory and purport to assume State responsibilities.
The manner in which those groups misuse and abuse
developments in technological innovation to advance
their agendas is also concerning. That includes the use
of online videogames and adjacent platforms to groom
and recruit members, propagandize, communicate and
even train for terrorist acts. In that regard, I welcome
the adoption by consensus of the Delhi declaration
at the special meeting of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee held by India in October. The Office of
Counter-Terrorism will continue to work closely with
other United Nations entities, including the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, to ensure
that the misuse of new and emerging technologies by
terrorists is addressed as a cross-cutting priority.
I am also concerned about an increase in terrorist
attacks based on xenophobia, racism and other forms of
intolerance, or in the name of religion or belief. While
not a new phenomenon, a few Member States consider
that as the fastest growing, or even the most prominent,
domestic security threat that they face. I underline
the Secretary-General’s view that this phenomenon
requires further understanding, and I reiterate his call
for the development and implementation of national
plans to address the threat.

S/PV.9221

community-based and conflict- and gender-sensitive.
Engaging a multitude of stakeholders is indispensable
for devising such strategies. That includes not only
civil society organizations, religious leaders, youth and
women’s groups and the private sector, but also victims
and survivors of terrorist acts.
Thirdly, in keeping with the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, human rights must be at
the centre of effective counter-terrorism responses.
Upholding the rule of law and respecting international
law, including human rights law, is both a legal and
moral obligation and an operational requirement. Wellestablished principles, norms and standards should
feature front and centre in our efforts to counter the
threat posed by terrorist acts.
Finally, regional arrangements should be leveraged.
As the threat posed by terrorism is transnational, so too
should be the responses. Regional-based approaches
offer an opportunity for tailoring responses to specific
contexts. It is for that reason that the Office of CounterTerrorism is co-organizing with Nigeria a summit on
counter-terrorism in Africa. The summit presents an
important opportunity to reconsider how the United
Nations can further support counter-terrorism efforts
in Africa.
I look forward to working closely with the Security
Council as we strive to revitalize our multilateral action
to counter and prevent terrorist acts.

Allow me to outline some suggested principles for
guiding our collective action in countering terrorism
going forward.

The President: I thank Mr. Voronkov for
his briefing.

First, with regard to preventive action, there is no
better and more efficient remedy to the threat posed by
terrorism than prevention. The international counterterrorism experience over the past 20 years demonstrates
the limits of focusing on the necessity of security forces
responding to imminent or actual terrorist acts without
also addressing the conditions that lead to terrorist
acts. Counter-terrorism measures should be employed
in tandem with initiatives to address the drivers of
marginalization, exclusion, inequality, injustice and
lack of opportunity — the same sorts of issues needed
to reinforce the social contract between citizens and
their Governments.

Mr. Weixiong Chen (spoke in Chinese): The
terrorist landscape continues to evolve. Terrorist groups
such as Da’esh, Al-Qaida and their affiliates continue
to recalibrate their strategic and operational methods.
With such groups and cells becoming more locally
based and decentralized, the threat has become diffuse
and diverse in nature. Away from the traditional
theatres, battlefields have emerged in the Sahel, in
West, East, Southern and Central Africa and parts of
Asia. Meanwhile, Da’esh persists in its attempts to
regroup in its traditional geographic centre. We are also
seeing an increase in threats from terrorism on the basis
of xenophobia, racism and other forms of intolerance.
These groups have become more transnational in
nature. They have forged strong links across borders
and built robust networks, exploiting virtual platforms

Secondly, addressing the complex conditions
driving terrorism requires multifaceted and integrated
responses. Whole-of-society approaches should be

I now give the floor to Mr. Weixiong Chen.

22-753293/25

S/PV.9221

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

15/12/2022

through which they exchange views, radicalize others
into terrorism, find recruits and support one another
financially and operationally. Against that backdrop,
criminal justice actors have a critical role to play in
addressing these threats in a meaningful manner.

society, the private sector and other stakeholders in our
endeavours.

Terrorists continue to exploit online platforms,
including gaming platforms, to recruit and radicalize,
raise funds, plan and coordinate operations and
disseminate propaganda. Against that backdrop, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee held a special meeting
in India on 28 and 29 October on countering the
use of new and emerging technologies for terrorist
purposes. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) was able to provide its full support
in organizing the special meeting, which involved the
participation of key stakeholders, including Member
States, United Nations agencies, international and
regional organizations, civil-society organizations, the
private sector and members of CTED’s Global Research
Network.

Ms. Kulthe (spoke in Hindi; English interpretation
provided by the delegation): I am Anjali Vijay Kulthe,
from Mumbai. I am a staff nurse at the Cama and Albless
Hospital in Mumbai, one of India’s oldest hospitals,
established in 1886 exclusively for women and children
with support from private donors. I have worked at the
hospital for the past 22 years.

The special meeting focused on three key areas — the
Internet, including social media platforms and related
online spaces; countering terrorism financing and new
payment technologies; and the misuse of unmanned
aerial systems. The special meeting brought to the
forefront overarching considerations of the One United
Nations approach, upholding human rights, the role of
civil society and honouring the victims of terrorism.
The Committee adopted the Delhi declaration to
reaffirm its commitment to working with Member
States in achieving the full implementation of all
relevant Security Council resolutions to address the
threats posed by terrorism. CTED will support the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in developing a set of
non-binding guiding principles that are consistent with
international human rights law and humanitarian law,
with a view to assisting Member States in countering
the threat posed by the use of new and emerging
technologies for terrorist purposes.
In order to achieve our goals, we must work
in an inclusive fashion, involving a broad range of
stakeholders and partners. The United Nations counterterrorism architecture has also provided a useful
platform for CTED to collaborate with the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and other entities of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact to work
together towards our common objectives. We also
look forward to further collaborating with Member
States, international and regional organizations, civil
4/25

The President: I thank Mr. Chen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Kulthe.

I am one of the fortunate ones who survived
the terrorist attack on the hospital on the night of
26 November 2008. As a victim and survivor of
terrorism, I bring to the Security Council the voice of
the trauma and sorrow endured by the families of the
victims and survivors of terrorist attacks all over the
world. On 26 November 2008, I had a night shift in the
antenatal care unit that began at 8 p.m. Twenty pregnant
women were in my charge that night. I had two helpers,
Hira and Madhu, assisting me. An hour later, we were
informed that the city’s main railway station, about a
mile from the hospital, had been stormed by terrorists.
Our senior officials called and asked us to prepare for
an emergency.
At around 10:30 p.m., as we were preparing, we
heard gunshots being fired from behind the hospital.
I and my helpers quickly moved to the window of my
ward’s bathroom. We saw two people with guns enter
the hospital after jumping over the wall. One of them
fired at our window. We narrowly escaped the bullet,
which hit one of my helper’s thumbs, as well as the
lights in the ward. Hira’s thumb was bleeding profusely,
and the room was dark. I escorted her to the accident
ward on the ground floor for treatment.
I also informed the hospital’s Chief Medical Officer
that terrorists had entered the building and were firing.
As I rushed to the ward, on the first floor, I saw the
same two terrorists shooting the hospital’s two security
guards. Both the security guards fell on the floor,
bleeding heavily. I was extremely scared. I gathered my
courage and rushed to the first floor. I closed the main
iron door and shifted all the patients to the pantry with
the help of another staff member. I locked the door and
switched off the lights so that the shooters could not see
the patients. I wanted to protect my patients from the
terrorists’ shots at all costs. As I was locking the door,
22-75329

15/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.9221

I saw two terrorists rushing towards the second floor,
chased by some policemen. We heard continuous firing.
We experienced heavy shocks from the explosion of
grenades.

even today. Whenever I see news reports on television
about terrorist attacks anywhere in the world, my heart
goes out to the victims and survivors of such attacks,
who go on to live rest of their lives in trauma.

While we were hiding in the ward, I thought to
myself, “Death is inevitable in this life — why not die
valiantly?” I consoled my terrified patients, who were
in advanced stages of pregnancy. I feared that some of
them might go into labour because of fear-induced high
blood pressure, a condition that could be extremely
serious for both the mother’s and the baby’s life. And
my fear came alive: suddenly a patient shrieked that she
was going into labour. My medical officer could not
come down from the second floor. I felt helpless. I did
not know what to do next.

We, the victims of the 26/11 Mumbai attacks,
continue to wait for justice, as the sponsors of those
dastardly attacks remain free, even after 14 years. Too
many lives have been lost, too many children have been
orphaned and too many people have been traumatized. I
urge the international community, through the Council,
to bring to justice the sponsors of the 26/11 Mumbai
attacks and to give closure to the families of the victims.

Suddenly, I felt my uniform give me courage and
my passion for nursing give me clarity of thought. I
escorted my patient to the pregnancy ward, but she was
scared and reluctant to come there with me. I reassured
her and requested that she follow me. While we were
climbing the staircase, we heard heavy gunfire and
hand-grenade explosions. With faith, I managed to get
my patient to the labour room, and a while later we
were able to deliver a healthy baby. Then I returned to
my ward to check on my other 19 patients.
We spent the whole night in complete darkness,
with the patients locked up in rooms. The next morning,
we opened the doors as the police arrived. It was hard to
believe that we were alive. I could not sleep peacefully
for many nights, waking up several times in middle of
the night with vivid memories of the terrorist attack.
I shiver even today as I recall the night of the
terrorist attacks. While the terrorists were killing
human beings like insects, I am happy that I was able to
save the lives of 20 pregnant women and their unborn
babies. Although the terror and horror of that night
are still alive with me, I soothe myself by thinking
of the several lives that I and my colleagues in the
hospital saved.
One month after the terrorist attack, I was
summoned by the authorities to identify the lone
terrorist who survived the attacks, Ajmal Kasab.
Although my family feared reprisals for my decision to
testify in court, I chose to be a witness. In the jail, when
I recognized him, he smiled sarcastically and said,
“Madam, you recognized me correctly. I am Ajmal
Kasab.” Kasab did not have one iota of remorse, and he
had no shame or guilt. His sense of victory haunts me

The President : I thank Ms. Kulthe for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for External Affairs of India.
At the outset, I acknowledge the presence here
today of the honourable Ministers of Ireland, the
United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, the United
States, Kenya and Ghana, as well as all of the other
high-level representatives, whom I thank for accepting
my invitation to participate in today’s meeting.
I would also like to thank Ambassador
Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT),
and Mr. Weixiong Chen, Acting Executive Director of
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate, for their
briefings to the Security Council today. We value the
work of the UNOCT in leading the United Nations
efforts to assist Member States by providing them
necessary capacity-building though its various
global programmes.
I also thank nurse Anjali Kulthe, a valiant victim
of the 26/11 terror attacks who has just vividly shared
with us her recollection of the human cost of terrorism.
Her testimony is a stark reminder to the Council and
the international community that justice is yet to be
delivered for the victims of several terrorist incidents,
including the 26/11 Mumbai attacks.
The Council is well aware that terrorism is an
existential threat to international peace and security.
It knows no borders, nationality or race, and it is a
challenge that the international community must combat
collectively. India faced the horrors of cross-border
terrorism long before the world took serious note of it.
Over the decades, we lost thousands of innocent civilian
lives. But we fought terrorism resolutely, bravely and
with a zero-tolerance approach. As Prime Minister of

22-753295/25

S/PV.9221

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

India Narendra Modi has declared, we consider that
even a single attack is one too many, and even a single
life lost is one too many. We will therefore not rest until
terrorism is uprooted.
Today’s briefing is a part of India’s ongoing
efforts in the Security Council to reinvigorate the
counter-terrorism agenda – efforts that are overdue
because the threat of terrorism has actually become
even more serious. We have seen the expansion of
Al‑Qaida, Da’esh, Boko Haram and Al‑Shabaab and
their affiliates. At the other end of the spectrum are
lone-wolf attacks inspired by online radicalization and
biases. But somewhere in all of that, we cannot forget
that old habits and established networks are still alive,
especially in South Asia. The contemporary epicentre
of terrorism remains very much active, regardless of
any gloss that may be applied to minimize unpleasant
realities. On this occasion, let me highlight four
specific challenges with which the counter-terrorism
architecture is currently grappling.

15/12/2022

motivation are often done in the open. The days when
it could be said that we are unaware are now behind
us. Consequently, assigning responsibility is that much
easier. The response of the sponsors of terrorism is not
to give up but to conduct and execute their agendas at
arm’s length. In order to do that, they create narratives
of limitations and difficulties. We buy into such
explanations at our own peril. The suggestion that
States are apparently capable in everything else but
only helpless when it comes to terrorism is ludicrous.
Accountability must therefore be the bedrock of
counter-terrorism.
The working methods of the relevant mechanisms
is also a subject of legitimate concern and debate. On
one level, we have seen levels of protection that come
close to justification. At the same time, there are also
evidence-backed proposals that are put on hold without
adequate reason. Moreover, there has even been
recourse to anonymity so as to avoid taking ownership
of untenable cases.

The first challenge is the issue of terror financing
and State culpability, whether by commission or
omission. The world may no longer be willing to buy
into the justifications and cover-ups as it did in the past.
Through bitter experience, we know that terror is terror,
whatever the explanation. The question now arises as to
the responsibilities of the States from whose soil such
actions are planned, supported and perpetrated.

Regarding the third challenge, on how we should
deal with double standards, both inside and outside the
Council, for too long, some have continued to believe
that terrorism is just another instrument or stratagem.
Those invested in terrorism have used such cynicism to
carry on. That is not just plain wrong, but could also be
downright dangerous, even for the very people whose
toleration extends that far.

The second challenge is to ensure the integrity and
accountability of the counter-terrorism multilateral
mechanisms and their working methods. They are on
occasion opaque, sometimes driven by agendas and at
times even pushed without evidence.

Regarding the fourth challenge, on the growing
potential for the misuse of new and emerging
technologies by extremists, radicals and terrorists, over
the years, they have diversified their funding portfolio
and expanded their recruitment toolkit. They exploit the
anonymity afforded by new and emerging technologies,
such as virtual currencies for fundraising and finances.
Terrorist groups are taking advantage of the openness
of democratic societies by spreading false narratives,
inciting hatred and radicalizing ideologies.

The third challenge is to address double standards
in countering terrorism that lead to concerns of
politicization. Uniform criteria are not applied to
sanctioning and prosecuting terrorists. It would
seem sometimes that the ownership of terrorism
is more important than its actual perpetration or
its consequences.
The fourth challenge is to counter threats from the
misuse of new and emerging technologies by terrorists,
which is likely to be the next frontier of our battle.
Let me expand on each of those aspects briefly.
By now, it is well established where and how terrorist
organizations operate and under what kind of
protection. Activities like recruitment, financing and
6/25

Taking all of that into account, we need to adopt
a comprehensive, contemporary and results-oriented
approach to that set of challenges. No individual State
should endeavour to seek political gain from terrorism,
and none of us, collectively, should ever put up with such
calculations. When it comes to tackling terrorism, we
must overcome our political differences and manifest a
zero-tolerance approach.
When we began our current term on the Council in
January 2021, I had proposed an eight-point action plan
22-75329

15/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

on counter-terrorism to its members (see S/2021/48).
I am glad that some of the action points have been
reflected in presidential statement to be adopted by
the Council at the end of today’s meeting. As the Chair
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee of the Security
Council this year, India has striven to bring those
principles into the counter-terrorism architecture at the
United Nations and into the debate on terrorism at the
Council. We were privileged to host the members of the
Council in Mumbai and New Delhi during the special
meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee at the
end of October. The Delhi declaration that was adopted
there is a landmark document, and with it, we hope that
the Council will build on this further.
Let me conclude by emphasizing that we cannot
let another 9/11 of New York or 26/11 of Mumbai
happen again. In the past two decades, terrorism has
been significantly countered, and its justification
delegitimized. But it remains a work in progress.
Combating terrorism is a battle in which there is no
respite. The world cannot afford attention deficits or
tactical compromises. It is most of all for the Security
Council to lead the global response in that regard.
Today’s briefing is another step in that direction.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Minister for Defence of Ireland.
Mr. Coveney (Ireland): I would like to thank
our three guests today, who have just given us very
thought-provoking and emotive briefings. I also want
to commend India for its focus on the important issue of
counter-terrorism throughout its tenure on the Security
Council and congratulate it on its successes.
I would like to start my statement by expressing my
deep sadness at the death of an Irish peacekeeper and
the injuries to three others in an incident in Lebanon
yesterday. I want to thank the Indian presidency for the
respect it has shown by inviting the Council to observe
a minute of silence at the start of today’s meeting.
Those soldiers were serving proudly as part of the 121st
Infantry Battalion of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon.
The incident and the loss of life is a stark reminder
that our peacekeepers serve in dangerous circumstances.

S/PV.9221

They put themselves in harm’s way, always for the
cause of peace. They operate under mandates that we
decide here in this Chamber to ensure that they can do
the work they need to do and that they operate as safely
as possible, in terms of our obligation to manage risk.
I want to offer my deepest condolences to the family
and loved ones of the young soldier who died, and to
the loved ones of all peacekeepers who have died in the
course of their duty — too many this year.
When I first addressed the Council after Ireland
joined it almost two years ago (see S/2021/48), I stated
clearly that terrorism remains one of the gravest threats
to international peace and security. Over the past
two years, we have witnessed that threat evolve and,
unfortunately, spread in the Sahel, in Afghanistan, with
the sheltering of Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups
under Taliban rule, and in Iraq and Syria, with the
continuing threat there. As Ireland prepares to leave
the Council, I welcome the opportunity to reflect on
how our counter-terrorism efforts can have more of
an impact.
The most effective way to counter terrorism is to
prevent it from happening in the first place. Tackling
the global terrorist threat means addressing its complex
and varied drivers. We know that communities affected
by conflict, poverty, inequality, poor governance
and human rights violations are more vulnerable to
radicalization and recruitment. Unless we address the
root causes, we resign ourselves to addressing the same
security challenges over and over again. Respect for
human rights and the rule of law are vital in preventing
the growth of radicalization and extremism, and they are
both critical components of effective counter-terrorism
responses. Too often, measures adopted by States to
counter terrorism have been misused to repress human
rights and freedoms.
In October, together with the Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,
Fionnuala Ní Aoláin, Ireland hosted an event
highlighting the ways in which counter-terrorist
financing measures are sometimes misused to
target civil society, humanitarian actors and human
rights defenders. Those actions serve only to drive
radicalization and reinforce terrorist narratives.
We must also heed the calls of our African
partners, who have consistently advised us on the ways
that climate change can aggravate the root causes of

22-753297/25

S/PV.9221

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

terrorism itself. Most United Nations Member States,
including the large majority of those on the Council,
recognize the clear link between climate change and
instability. It is staring us in the face. And it is high
time that the Council act on the facts.
We know that there is a wealth of experience and
analysis that civil society partners can provide on the
issues of counter-terrorism. Yet the avenues for civil
society to engage with the Council’s counter-terrorism
architecture are too limited. Dealing effectively with
those issues, particularly the use of new and emerging
technologies for terrorist purposes, requires a much
more serious partnership with civil society. In addition,
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in counter-terrorism processes is critical. Empowering
women and ensuring that they are at the counterterrorism table fundamentally disrupts the status quo
for the better.
United Nations sanctions are one of the critical
instruments employed by the Council to hold terrorists
to account and to target them. But in order to have the
desired effect, sanctions must be targeted and effective
in the areas where we need them to be. During our
term on the Council, one of the recurring messages we
heard from civil society and humanitarian partners was
about the inadvertently negative impact of sanctions
measures on the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
We listened carefully to that message, and we responded
collectively as a Council. Alongside the United States,
we were proud to secure agreement, on Friday (see
S/PV.9214), on resolution 2664 (2022). That landmark
initiative providing humanitarian exemptions across all
United Nations sanctions regimes will help to ensure
that aid reaches all populations at risk, particularly
in areas where terrorists are active. At a time of
unprecedented global challenges, I am heartened that
the Security Council took decisive action and provided
a humanitarian lifeline to those experiencing conflict
and terrorism.
In conclusion, I would like to offer some short
reflections on our two-year term on the Security Council.
Just last week, we marked the hundredth
anniversary of the Irish Free State. One of its first
actions was to seek membership of the then League
of Nations. A hundred years on, Ireland is steadfast in
its commitment to multilateralism. To sit at this table,
elected by the Members of the General Assembly, is
a great privilege. Those of us lucky enough to do so
8/25

15/12/2022

should be frank enough to admit that multilateralism
is struggling today. We need reform. We need creative,
responsive solutions to global challenges that could
not even have been imagined by the drafters of the
Charter of the United Nations. But most of all, we need
political will.
As our Prime Minister said in his speech during the
high-level week (see A/77/PV.9), in the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the other organs, institutions
and agencies that make up the United Nations, we have
the spaces to discuss, negotiate, share experiences
and craft solutions. We have an interlocking web of
charters, treaties, norms, resolutions, international
jurisprudence, political declarations and agreed
statements and conclusions. Our global structures are
not perfect. We know that. No structures ever are in
reality. But it is not our systems or our structures, or our
treaties or our charters, that are fundamentally failing
us today. It is the lack of political will to implement and
uphold them that is the root cause of our failures in the
Security Council.
Reform is essential, particularly reform of the veto,
the use of which is self-defeating, the use of which,
in my view, has no place in a twenty-first century
Security Council. But reform alone will not make
multilateralism work. That responsibility rests with
us, the Member States, together. Member States will
continue to have differing perspectives on many of the
issues on the Council’s agenda, but they must, we must,
find a way to work in genuine partnership and good
faith, so that the Council can act with the ambition and
determination that is so urgently required.
Too often we see narrow self-interest taking
precedence. We see Council members block crucial
decisions to protect themselves and/or their allies.
Council members, whether permanent or elected,
have reached this table in different ways. But once
we are in this Chamber, surely we have a shared
responsibility to defend international peace and security
and the hundreds of millions of vulnerable people who
rely on us to do that. We must do better to live up to
that responsibility.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
of Culture and Youth of the United Arab Emirates.
Ms. Al Kaabi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to join my
colleagues in expressing our sincere condolences to
22-75329

15/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

His Excellency Mr. Simon Coveney and the family of
the Irish peacekeeper who was killed today in a brutal
attack while on duty in southern Lebanon. We also wish
a speedy recovery to all those injured.
I thank the Republic of India for organizing this
important discussion on the international community’s
approach to combating terrorism. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, and the
Acting Executive Director, Mr. Chen, for their valuable
briefings. I also attentively listened to the moving
briefing by Ms. Anjali Vijay Kulthe.
Over the past two decades, and through this
Organization, we have adopted many measures and
polices to address the terrorist threat to international
peace and security, including most notably the historic
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), which responds
to one of the greatest challenges of this era which
undermine stability and prosperity.
Despite the effective efforts by the international
community, we see that global terrorist threat continues
to adapt through advanced and complex tactics that
have allowed it to branch out and become widespread.
Terrorist groups continue to exploit natural resources
to finance their operations and use modern technology
to launch cross-border terrorist attacks. Terrorists have
also taken advantage of the absence of State authority
and the distraction of attention due to numerous
crises and difference of priorities, which have led to
exacerbating their threats.
We have made great strides towards strengthening
international cooperation, building capacities and
developing strategies as a means to combat terrorism.
We realize, however, that there is still a long way to
go to eradicate terrorism. Therefore, we must promote
international momentum and stay vigilant in identifying
and addressing shortcomings and preventing the
exploitation of gaps. We must also be more flexible to
keep pace with the methods of terrorist groups and be
proactive in our prevention of extremism and terrorism.
Those concerns point to the importance of our
discussion today. I would like to highlight three main
aspects that we should focus on.
First, the geographic scope of terrorist activities is
expanding. Recent reports by the United Nations note
that the African continent, like others, has not been
spared from the repercussions of that scourge. Nearly
half of the victims of terrorism in the world last year

S/PV.9221

were in Africa, where terrorist groups seek refuge in
search of shelter and breeding grounds. Therefore, it
is no longer enough for the Security Council to focus
on certain terrorist groups to the exclusion of others,
especially considering the transnational nature of
terrorist threats. It is imperative that the Council harness
all its tools, including sanctions committees, to curb
terrorist activities. Moreover, local and regional efforts
must be supported while intensifying coordination with
various actors, including women and young people.
Secondly, terrorists use sophisticated means and
methods. Terrorist groups have proven their ability to
exploit technological advances, including drones and
digital currencies to achieve their goals. Accordingly,
the Delhi declaration on countering the use of new
and emerging technologies for terrorist purposes
represents an important step through which we look
forward to building upon it in order to close the gaps
and develop solid regulatory frameworks in which the
public and private sectors participate at the local and
international levels.
Thirdly, terrorism in all its forms must be addressed
through comprehensive and multilateral strategies that
focus on prevention and eradicating extremism. We
will not be able to eradicate terrorism without exposing
extremist ideologies that fuel violence and hatred, as
well as incite killing and destruction. Therefore, we
must immune our societies against extremism and
address its root causes.
The United Arab Emirates has been keen to
work through a comprehensive framework to counter
extremism that includes rejecting all attempts to
distort and exploit Islam by terrorist groups. It is
imperative to raise awareness and promote tolerance,
co-existence and diversity, which are inherent values
in our Islamic culture. In that regard, public and private
institutions in the United Arab Emirates have launched
several initiatives in cooperation with regional and
international partners to eliminate extremism in
a sustainable manner. One of the most prominent
examples of such initiatives is the Global Conference of
Human Fraternity hosted by the United Arab Emirates.
The conference resulted in the signing of the document
entitled “Human fraternity for world peace and living
together” by His Holiness Pope Francis and the Grand
Imam of Al-Azhar Al Sharif, Sheikh Ahmed al-Tayeb
Ahmed Al-Tayeb, to catalyse dialogue on coexistence
and brotherhood among peoples and to promote those
values globally. The designation of 4 February of every

22-753299/25

S/PV.9221

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

year as the International Day of Human Fraternity has
become an opportunity to enhance multilateralism and
diversity of cultures.
The Forum of Religions of the Group of 20, which
the United Arab Emirates is hosting during the current
week, demonstrates our country’s vision of creating a
global system of tolerance, coexistence and diversity
by presenting the recommendations of approximately
100 leaders of various religious communities to the
leaders of the New Delhi summit in 2023 with a view to
establishing a world of more solidarity and peace.
In conclusion, the presidential statement that we
are adopting today confirms that terrorism remains at
the top of the Security Council priorities. As Chair of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee next year, the United
Arab Emirates will build on the achievements made
during the Indian presidency this year. We will also
continue to cooperate with our colleagues to enhance
the Committee’s capacity to implement its mandate
amid changing terrorist threats globally and to achieve
security, stability and prosperity across all our societies.
Ms. Nuland (United States of America): First, our
hearts are with Minister Coveney, the Irish people, the
family of their fallen peacekeeper and with those who
are recovering from the vicious attack in Lebanon. It is
further evidence of the risks that all our peacekeepers
take in support of the missions of this body.
I also want to thank Mr. Jaishankar, Permanent
Representative Kamboj and India for this vital meeting,
for their presidency of the Council this month and for
their active engagement and leadership as Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee this year.
The United States Coordinator for Counterterrorism
was just in New Delhi this week, working on ways to
deepen our own partnership further, including against
new and emerging threats.
I also want to also thank our United Nations briefers,
especially Ms. Anjali Vijay Kulthe, for reminding us
that the numbers on terrorism do not show the true
story of the pain and the human toll. Ms. Anjali’s
story is painful not because it is unique, but because
it is not. Last year, the world faced more than 8,000
terrorist incidents across 65 countries, which killed
more than 23,000 people. Stories like Ms. Anjali’s tell
of families and communities left shattered. They are
stories of unbelievable horror and desperation, but also
of heroism like hers.
10/25

15/12/2022

Other recent attacks around the world — the
bombing of a police station in Indonesia, the coup
attempt in Germany and hateful incidents in our own
country — remind us that no country is safe from that
threat, and it cannot be defeated by any of us alone or
by any regional bloc. We must all work together. It is
incumbent upon us to tackle those issues jointly, from
the undergoverned and ungoverned spaces susceptible
to terrorist control and the desperate conditions that
are conducive to recruitment, to the sources of illicit
finance and the perverse ideologies spreading online
and across borders.
The United Nations now estimates that racially
or ethnically motivated violent extremism, what we
call “REMVE”, has increased over 320 per cent in
recent years, with worrisome new transatlantic links
among groups. That ideology, rooted in hate like
xenophobia, racism, anti-Semitism and all forms of
bigotry, has found common cause online, with new
members being recruited through various social media
platforms and fake and manipulated photos quickly
spreading misinformation and hate. It is therefore
critical that we build on our shared capabilities in
order to better detect, degrade and respond to those
new threats. That is why we are working with partners
now to strengthen domestic law enforcement, judicial
capabilities and border security, improve intelligence
and information-sharing on those threats and sever key
sources of terrorist financing.
In May, we launched the Counterterrorism Law
Enforcement Forum in Berlin, bringing together law
enforcement officials from some 40 countries to build
capacity and share best practices.
In Indonesia, for example, the United States supports
continuous mentorship programmes to vetted law
enforcement agencies investigating terrorist activity.
In Kenya, we work with security and law
enforcement to enhance detection and prevention and
improve investigations and prosecutions and ensure we
get convictions.
Here in September, during the General Assembly,
at the Global Counterterrorism Forum, I announced a
new toolkit to counter racially and ethnically motivated
violent extremism, developed jointly by the United States
and Norway, to provide practical recommendations for
countries and communities to recognize and respond to
that threat.
22-75329

15/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.9221

But while we work on racially and ethnically
motivated violent extremism, we also have to not distract
from the parallel fight against Al-Qaida and the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) wherever it is found.
Despite the success of our Global Coalition to Defeat
ISIS and the decisive strike against Al-Qaida leader
Ayman al-Zawahiri in July, the threat is significant.

fundamental freedoms themselves. And it is concerning
that some Member States seek to undermine the
advances on gender, civil society and human rights made
in Security Council resolutions and the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We have seen
time and again that counter-terrorism cannot succeed
through sheer force and hard security measures alone.

One way the Security Council can help is by doing
more on the current sanctions list to ensure it accurately
reflects the realities on the ground. United Nations
sanctions are an essential tool in our counter-terrorism
tool kit. The Council should support listing all ISIS and
Al-Qaida affiliates, as well as their leaders and key
supporters, so that they face global asset freezes, travel
bans and arms embargoes.

As I was reminded during my recent travels to
Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger, to be
truly effective, as many have said, counter-terrorism
needs to be nested in a whole-of-Government and
whole-of-society effort. We have to nurture good
governance, respect for human rights, access to
education, health care and economic opportunity. We
have to support Governments and their ability to deliver
for their citizens. That is key to breaking the cycle of
violent extremism.

Unfortunately, the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751
(1992), concerning Al-Shabaab, have only agreed to
designate one entity and one individual this year. An
array of holds, due to unrelated political fights, stand in
the way of new listings. That political obstructionism
fundamentally undermines the Committees’ mandates
to prevent and deter threats to international peace and
security and weakens the impact of the United Nations
sanctions regime.
We have been pleased to co-nominate several
listings with India on ISIS and Al-Qaida, and we hope
that the 1267 Committee will move forward with those
and other new nominations.
The Council took strong steps last week to adopt
resolution 2664 (2022) to help ensure that reputable,
impartial humanitarian actors are able to do their
life-saving work, even in areas where terrorists operate
or control territory. That will ensure that those in need
get the help they need and are not left simply at the
mercy of terrorists. We simply cannot afford to leave
those civilians exposed to the predations of malign
actors who fail to meet their basic needs and often steal
from them, destroy their property and take their lives.
We are very grateful for the efforts of humanitarian
organizations to advocate for that resolution and ensure
that they can help vulnerable populations.
It is also critical that counter-terrorism campaigns
not be used as a pretext for Member States to violate

As I saw in the Niger, we, the United States, can
support security forces — that is important, and it is
paramount for slowing terrorist activities — but it is
not enough in a country in which half of the students
are not in school. As President Bazoum of the Niger
himself says, that kind of lack of education is a driver
of the next generation of insecurity and terrorism. We
must ensure that women and girls have safe access
to education, health care and economic opportunity
and that their communities and their countries are
more stable and more prosperous. That is why we are
focused on implementing the current, robust global
counter-terrorism framework focused on a whole-ofsociety approach.
I also have to register the United States deep
concern over the untenable situation in north-east Syria
in the detention centres where the single-largest group
of terrorists anywhere in the world currently resides,
and also over the Al-Hol displaced persons camp, with
over 50,000 associated women and children. With
approximately 10,000 foreign fighters in detention
in north-east Syria, ISIS will seek to exploit regional
instability to continue to pursue its “Breaking the Walls”
campaign, freeing prisoners and replenishing its ranks.
That is why we are working with all Council members
to spearhead an urgent effort to improve security
coordination and encourage countries to repatriate,
rehabilitate, reintegrate and, where appropriate,
prosecute their nationals who participate in violent
extremism. As part of that approach, our Department
of Defense is working to construct a new all-purpose
detention facility in neighbouring Rumaylan that

22-7532911/25

S/PV.9221

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

will be managed by the Syrian Democratic Forces to
securely and more humanely accommodate detainees.
Finally, I would just note that I came from
Washington, D.C., yesterday evening, where we are
hosting 49 African Heads of State gathered for the
United States-Africa Leaders Summit. Over the past few
days, we have engaged in meaningful efforts to advance
shared peace and security, spur economic growth,
revitalize democracy, improve health infrastructure,
overcome global food and energy insecurity, and tackle
the climate crisis — priorities that everyone around this
table shares. But all of those shared goals are put at risk
by the pervasive threat of terrorism. And the inverse
is also true: if we can make progress against those
goals, we will drain the swamp where terrorism lives
and thrives.
As we look collectively to overcome the cumulative
destabilizing impact of the coronavirus disease, climate
shocks and armed conflict, including Russia’s brutal
war on Ukraine, we cannot afford to fail.
Next year, the General Assembly will review the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We urge the international community to unite to
address the scourge of terrorism, because as Ms. Anjali
Vijay Kulthe has reminded us in painful detail, the
consequences of failure must not be acceptable to any
of us.
Lord Ahmad (United Kingdom): Before I proceed,
I would like to join others and express the deepest
condolences to my dear friend Mr. Simon Coveney and
all the people of Ireland with regard to the tragic loss of
a peacekeeper in Lebanon, someone who was doing his
job. Indeed, in extending our prayers and best wishes
for the recovery of those injured, I join with him once
again in our strong solidarity with those who represent
this Organization on the world stage and in some of the
most difficult places in the world and, ultimately, as
we have seen, tragically, pay with their lives. We pay
tribute to their bravery and courage, and our prayers
and best wishes go out for the quick recovery of those
injured.
I would first like to thank you, Mr. President. It is
a great pleasure to join this Security Council meeting
under your stewardship. I pay tribute to India for its
stewardship and contributions to the Security Council,
in particular on the issue of counter-terrorism, during
its Council tenure. The Government of India deserves
immense credit for the focus it has brought to the issue
12/25

15/12/2022

of counter-terrorism and what lies beneath and drives
terrorism, which is a perverse ideology of extremism.
We need to work together to counter that.
I would also like to join in thanking our three
briefers: Mr. Voronkov, who I know well — I am sorry
to not see him in person today, Mr. Chen and Ms. Anjali
Vijay Kulthe, whose inspiring testimony of bravery and
courage we heard.
I was delighted that my dear friend the Foreign
Secretary was able to join the meetings that India
has led, in particular the excellent Counter-Terrorism
Committee meetings in Mumbai and New Delhi, and
set out our strong position of working together with
India, and indeed all international partners, to counter
the global threat of international terrorism. It is a
threat that is ever-evolving and is becoming ever-more
complex. It requires collective and comprehensive
solutions and responses.
Terrorist groups, including Al-Qaida, which operate
today in Afghanistan and beyond, and the Da’esh
affiliates — Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab, to name but
two — are continuing to work across different parts of
the world and inflict human suffering on innocent lives
and innocent people and destroy communities around
the world.
But we also need to recognize and be cognizant to the
fact that those terrorist organizations are increasingly
employing new methods of radicalization, the driver
of terrorism and evolving tactics. They use technology
in innovative ways. Even in the United Kingdom,
we continue to face that challenge. Young minds are
being corrupted. The front door is circumvented as
technology is used as a tool to radicalize young men
and women. Those evolving tactics require a response
from us as well to ensure that we counter that abhorrent
ideology. We must also make effective use of our
sanctions regimes to prevent terrorists from acquiring
weapons and financing. We must adapt and evolve
our own counter-terrorism efforts, prevent terrorist
exploitation of emerging technologies, and indeed of
vulnerable communities. Radicalization takes place
through innovative technology means. We need to
ensure we counter it through similar measures.
As we tackle terrorism, we must be vigilant and
uphold three important principles.
First, we urge all colleagues, friends and Member
States to address the real drivers of terrorism and violent
22-75329

15/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

extremism, using a whole-of-society approach. We must
work with communities and faith leaders to address and
eradicate the perverse ideologies that are used to drive
the abhorrent crimes of terrorism. The United Kingdom
is working with its partners to understand how the
United Nations can better incorporate civil society
perspectives into its work.
Secondly, our policy and programming should
understand and address the gender dynamics of
terrorism. We know that terrorists and violent
extremists are perpetrators of sexual violence. Two
weeks ago, I had the honour to host, on behalf of
the United Kingdom, an international conference
on preventing sexual violence in conflict aimed at
strengthening the global response. I was honoured to
host, among others, Nobel Peace Prize laureate Nadia
Murad and many other survivors of sexual violence,
who spoke about the need for Governments to do more
to end those atrocities.
And there is also an important solution. In hearing
Ms. Anjali Vijay Kulthe today and her bravery and
courage, we need to ensure that we work with those who
survive, those who experience the scourge of terrorism,
hand in glove to ensure they inform our policies and
what we can also do in working together to eradicate
extremist ideology.
We also — and I join with the Foreign Minister of
Ireland in this — ask why in 2022 we are having this
conversation on involving more women. It seems almost
illogical that women today have to be subject to debates
and conversations on getting them seats at the main
table, and not in some side room, in pursuit of solutions.
We need to address this issue and address it now. We
need to ensure that Member States everywhere involve
women, and we must take the lead in ensuring that
women are pivotal to developing strategies to prevent
and counter violent extremism and terrorism. Those
strategies must also address activities that specifically
target women, not only as victims and influencers in
communities, but also as potential perpetrators.
Thirdly, I wanted to touch upon the importance
of human rights in our responses. As the Security
Council, we have the obligation under international
law to protect and promote human rights. States must
therefore act within the bounds of such law when
countering terrorism. Otherwise, we undermine the
very rights and freedoms that the United Nations was
established to promote.

S/PV.9221

In conclusion, the Security Council has a vitally
important role to play in tackling the scourge of
terrorism, which tragically continues to destroy
innocent lives around the world today. To those lives
lost, whom we remembered at the start of today’s
meeting, we owe it to act together and to act now.
Mr. Sing’oei (Kenya): At the outset, I should like
to convey Kenya’s condolences to His Excellency
Mr. Simon Coveney and to the Republic of Ireland
on the unfortunate killing of their peacekeeper in the
mission in Lebanon. This underscores the need to act
together to ensure the protection of all peacekeepers as
they carry out their critical mandates.
I wish to congratulate the President of the Security
Council for convening this important event. I also
commend India’s stewardship of the Security Council
Counter-Terrorism Committee over the last 12 months.
The Committee’s historic adoption of the Delhi
Declaration of the Counter-Terrorism Committee on
countering the use of new and emerging technologies for
terrorist purposes this October reflects this leadership.
I also thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov and
Mr. Weixiong Chen for their briefings. Ms. Anjali
Vijay Kulthe’s story as a survivor of terrorism is one
of courage and resilience. She is an inspiration to
many around the world who have suffered from these
heinous acts.
Terrorism and violent extremism constitute grave
threats to international peace and security. The bulk
of the Security Council’s counter-terrorism measures
are responses to the prominent targeting of Member
States by Al-Qaida and its affiliates, the 11 September
2001 attacks here in New York being a prime example.
Unfortunately, despite the many counter-measures that
have been instituted since then, this threat is persisting
and even spreading dangerously.
In several parts of Africa, terrorist groups, with
the support of foreign terrorist fighters and inspired
by Al-Qaida and Da’esh ideologies, are destabilizing
and even holding Governments to ransom. They are
exploiting intercommunal tensions to expand their
recruitment and radicalization and intensify attacks
across the continent.
Kenya’s counter-terrorism effort is multi-agency
and multisectoral. The lessons we have learned in
building it may serve as a useful example to others.
In the last five years, we have developed some of

22-7532913/25

S/PV.9221

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the most advanced disengagement and reintegration
capabilities in the world. Operational decision-making
is undertaken from the national to the local level and
includes multiple security and non-security institutions.
The Government’s intelligence, criminal justice and
administrative structures work hand in hand with each
other. Every one of Kenya’s 47 subnational counties has
developed prevention strategies, which are at different
stages of implementation.
Civil society is equally involved, reflecting the
Kenyan peoples’ commitment to the national priority
of preventing and defeating terrorists. Over time, this
has contributed to a marked reduction in the number
of attacks, and, critically, it has blocked off any
public legitimacy, in any section of our citizenry, for
terrorist groups. In the light of this, and bearing in
mind the need for a unified front to ensure effective
and sustained counter-terrorism, I wish to make
five recommendations.
First, counter-terrorism against groups affiliated
with Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) should never cede ground to these
groups’ extreme political demands and should offer no
path to legitimacy. Too often, counter-terrorism is too
kinetic and narrowly technical. It misses the essentially
political, social and even cultural dimensions of the
threat. Accordingly, counter-terrorism measures that
serve to minimize the worst excesses of the terrorists
without being adequate enough to realize sustained
victory are often deployed. The United Nations and
its States Members must add political, economic and
social tools to their counter-terrorism efforts.
They must also make it clear that terrorism will
not offer terrorist groups or militants who employ
this form of violence a path to political legitimacy or
power. Campaigns to negotiate with militant groups
affiliated with Al-Qaida and ISIL should differentiate
between factions that are willing and able to renounce
transnational terrorism and aims opposed to the
United Nations Charter and its articulation in national
constitutional and legal regimes.
Secondly, counter-terrorism must be linked to
broader State and civil efforts to deal with its root
causes. Political exclusion and marginalization, lack of
economic opportunities, weak governance, persistent
armed conflicts and serious historical grievances
create conditions for militancy that escalates into
terrorism. In addition, the illegal exploitation of natural
14/25

15/12/2022

resources, returning foreign fighters and natural
resource conflicts, particularly in populations dealing
with the effects of climate change, are compounding
agents. In short, fundamental changes in development
and improved governance, reflected in inclusive
and competent government, are requirements for
overcoming the spread and entrenchment of groups
affiliated with Al-Qaida and ISIL.
Thirdly: The full weight of the Security Council’s
counter-terrorism measures must be brought to bear in
equal measure and without discrimination. Kenya has
consistently called for the application of the sanctions
regime established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
on all affiliates of Al-Qaida, particularly Al-Shabaab,
but a few members of this Council have resisted this
call, even as they unilaterally sanction the group for the
same reasons for which we seek its inclusion in United
Nations sanctions.
Last December, we negotiated for a humanitarian
carve-out for resolution 1267 (1999). We are glad to
see that our aim has been realized in a humanitarian
carve-out resolution (resolution 2664 (2022)). We hope
that this will clear the way for the listing of all groups
that are formally and operationally linked to Al-Qaida
and ISIL. We agree with India that the de facto practice
in the Security Council of classifying terrorists in
inconsistent and opaque ways must be brought to an
end if our counter-terrorism efforts are to succeed.
Fourthly, at the technical level, cooperation in
information-sharing and capacity-building is critical.
We encourage enhanced collaboration at regional and
global levels, including on capacity-building initiatives
by States that have advanced the prevention and
countering of terrorism and violent extremism. We
commend continued efforts of United Nations counterterrorism entities in coordinating technical assistance
and capacity-building to support Member States in
this respect.
Fifthly, in view of the current technological trends,
we need to build partnerships on digital space and new
technologies. Partnerships with Internet providers
and social-media organizations can buttress the
ability and efforts of national authorities to detect and
disrupt online terrorism activities, including modes
of terrorism, resource mobilization and financing.
We must also support States to develop measures
and capabilities to regulate new technologies, such as
22-75329

15/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.9221

drones and virtual currencies, and to counter the use of
improvised explosive devices by terrorists.

challenges facing the communities worst affected
by terrorism.

In conclusion, I reaffirm Kenya’s unreserved
commitment to the fight against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.

In order to respond to the daunting challenges posed
by terrorism and violent extremism, our collective
response must match the gravity of the threat to all
our countries. The transnational character of terrorism
warrants our global approach and coordinated action.
In that context, Ghana reaffirms its commitment
to the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the
implementation of all four pillars of the Strategy in the
ongoing war against international terrorism. We will
continue to work with all Member States in that regard.

Mr. Cleland (Ghana): Ghana conveys its deep
condolences to Ireland on the unfortunate loss of
lives of peacekeepers while serving a worthy cause
for humankind. We are also grateful to the two
briefers — Mr. Voronkov and Mr. Weixiong Chen — for
providing excellent contexts for our discussions. Finally,
we commend Ms. Kulthe on her bravery and courage to
share her story with the international community.
Ghana commends India’s choice of the theme
for this Security Council debate. I believe that this
discussion will engender a renewed sense of urgency
among States and give added impetus to existing efforts
to address the menacing activities of terrorists.
We once again thank Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov and Acting Executive Director
Weixiong Chen for setting the stage for what promises
to be an open and frank discussion on a matter that must
be at the top of the Council’s agenda. We acknowledge
the efforts of the Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT)
in assisting Member States in implementing the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
encourage further collaboration between the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and Member States
in the face of the rising threat of terrorism.
Terrorism represents the most significant evolution
of the threats to international peace and security, which
the Council is mandated to address. It represents a
huge burden on our fragile security architecture, as
it converges with existing security threats to expose
weaknesses in national, regional and global mechanisms
to protect our people. And it affects nations, regions
and our international community in profound ways,
setting back our progress as a civilization.
The urgency to act becomes more pressing by the
day, as emboldened terrorists now seek to gain access to
maritime resources, more endowed territory and highly
urbanized and more developed terrain. The nature and
gravity of the threat to international peace and security
and to international commerce and investments needs
no further elaboration. And it strikes at the heart of
our efforts to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development as the attacks compound the development

Against that backdrop, I wish make several
key points.
Despite the continuing absence of a definition of
terrorism, the international community cannot afford a
lack of unity in its actions to counter the threat posed by
terrorist groups. We believe that, to successfully detect,
disrupt and deter terrorist acts, we need a shared vision,
a common understanding and equal commitment to
implement counter-terrorism frameworks, particularly
through proactive national initiatives and improved
international collaboration. Such a goal requires the
Council and the wider international community to
adopt a zero-excuse and zero-tolerance policy when
it comes to the treatment of terrorist groups. There
should be no differentiation between terrorist groups,
as differential treatment would only undermine efforts
to combat terrorism in a balanced manner.
Terrorist groups engage in illicit trade in natural
resources, raise revenue from illegal taxes imposed in
territories they control and use the dark web to raise
and move funding. Our aim must be to dry up those
sources of funding for their nefarious activities. To do
so, countries affected by terrorists and their networks
must be adequately supported with the funding needed
to undertake operations to monitor the movement of
money in and out of their borders and to regain control
of the territories controlled by terrorists.
Member States on the front lines of terrorism
therefore require greater international solidarity,
especially in these difficult times, when three years
of multiple crises have diminished the capacity to
counter terrorism. We equally encourage enhanced
budgetary support for UNOCT and call for sustained
funding for the implementation of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.

22-7532915/25

S/PV.9221

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Before concluding, let me briefly share some
elements of Ghana’s implementation of the Strategy,
with a strong focus on prevention as the primary
objective that needs to be pursued in addressing
terrorism. Ghana has adopted a whole-of-society
approach by involving the private sector and civil
society organizations in addressing the underlying
motivations for terrorism, while also taking a gendersensitive approach to combating terrorism. That is
helping to reduce the vulnerability of youth groups to
radicalization and recruitment through the opening
up of further opportunities for them to fulfil their
legitimate aspirations. We have also undertaken a wide
array of measures for institutional development and to
safeguard vulnerable communities, critical national
infrastructure, mobility corridors and public places
and cyberspace, corresponding to the second pillar of
the Strategy.
Within the context of the third pillar of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, we continue cooperation
with the Economic Community of West African
States, the African Union and the United Nations and
believe in strong partnerships for regional-led counterinsurgency operations, as well as cross-regional
intelligence-sharing in order to halt cross-border
collaboration among terrorist groups. In that regard,
we urge sustained international support for regional
mechanisms such as the Accra Initiative, which
facilitates intelligence- and information-sharing on
questions of terrorism, transnational organized crime
and violent extremism, in relation to the expansionist
agenda of terrorist groups from the Sahel region.
Finally, we believe in the complementary and
mutually reinforcing nature of counter-terrorism
measures and the protection of human rights, as
envisaged by the fourth pillar. In our national strategy
for the prevention and suppression of terrorism, special
attention has been placed on the protection of human
rights, and all measures taken to combat terrorism
fully comply with our national Constitution, which
has some of the highest standards of human rights,
as well as with our obligations under international
law, in particular human rights law, refugee law and
international humanitarian law.
Let me conclude by reiterating Ghana’s commitment
to working with all States Members of the United
Nations in efforts to prevent and eliminate terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations. Although much work
remains, our determination to overcome our differences
16/25

15/12/2022

is what would ultimately yield the desired outcomes.
We therefore look forward to next year’s discussions on
the implementation of the Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank the President and
the Foreign Minister for convening today’s important
meeting. Let me also first extend my condolences to
Ireland for the peacekeeper killed and those injured
in yesterday’s tragic attack in Lebanon. I would also
like to thank today’s briefers for their insightful and
thought-provoking remarks and testimony.
Two decades ago, during Norway’s previous term
on the Council, the 11 September attacks shocked the
world and triggered a profound shift in global security
policy — one that recognized international terrorism
as a global threat. Since then, the multilateral counterterrorism architecture has grown at a rapid pace and
now forms a key part of the broader peace and security
agenda. This therefore is an opportune moment to take
stock of these efforts and consider both their strengths
and deficiencies as we reflect on the way forward.
There is no doubt that notable success has been
achieved. Al-Qaida is severely degraded and no longer
capable of conducting complex attacks on the scale of
11 September 2001. The Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) has been territorially defeated in its core
area. And, according to the latest Global Terrorism
Index, global deaths from terrorism are nearly 60 per
cent below their peak in 2014.
Yet we have also witnessed more troubling
trends emerging. Africa is now the continent most
affected by terrorism. ISIL and Al-Qaida affiliates
have strategically exploited armed conflict, weak
governance and local grievances in order to radicalize
and recruit. In many other parts of the world, rightwing extremism is on the rise. And new and emerging
technologies are increasingly susceptible to misuse for
terrorist purposes.
Moreover, in some contexts, counter-terrorism
measures have had grave implications for human
rights. Over the past two decades, in the absence of
an internationally agreed definition of terrorism,
some Governments have deployed counter-terrorism
measures that violate a broad range of rights. And
sometimes they are used to target political opposition,
thereby shrinking civic space. Some counterterrorism measures have also had unintended negative
consequences for humanitarian action, such as
adversely affecting vulnerable people’s access to much22-75329

15/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

needed humanitarian assistance and protection. The
newly adopted resolution 2664 (2022), however, can be
an important tool to address that issue.
In sum, we must acknowledge that the international
community is up against a threat it cannot define,
with no clear success criteria, and which, in some
contexts, is exploited to justify repressive measures.
That is counterproductive to national and international
efforts to combat terrorism. Those challenges must
be addressed.
Allow me to underscore three points that Norway
considers crucial in guiding our collective efforts
moving forward.
First, our counter-terrorism approach must be
holistic and form part of a broader political strategy — one
that is preventive, conflict-sensitive, gender-responsive
and regionally integrated. Addressing root causes
through the promotion of the rule of law, sustainable
development and human rights is essential.
Secondly, those efforts should be rooted in a
whole-of-Government and whole-of-society approach
that marshals cross-sectoral public resources,
recognizes the importance of women’s participation
and institutionalizes strategic engagement with civil
society in the development and implementation of
counter-terrorism measures.
Thirdly, human rights must be respected at all
times, including in the context of counter-terrorism.
On the multilateral level, all United Nations counterterrorism entities should continue to mainstream
human rights considerations across their work. For
instance, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate should further integrate human rights in
its assessment activities and use the resulting data to
inform its analytical products.
In conclusion, Norway believes these principles are
key to strengthening future counter-terrorism efforts. It
is our hope that they be adhered to and that, in another
20 years, the issue will no longer be on our agenda.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I express the condolences of France to
Ireland following the death of one of its peacekeepers
in Lebanon.
I thank India for organizing this debate. I also thank
the Under-Secretary-General and the representative
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive

S/PV.9221

Directorate for their briefings, and I thank Ms. Kulthe
for her testimony.
The terrorist threat is not diminishing; it is spreading
and diversifying. Jihadism remains the most acute and
deadly terrorist threat worldwide. Far from having
disappeared, the threat from Al-Qaida and Da’esh
continues to evolve. Present in the Sahel, these groups
are expanding towards the Gulf of Guinea, Central
and Southern Africa and the Horn of Africa. In the
Levant, the territorial defeat of Da’esh should not lead
us to lower our guard. The Taliban takeover and recent
developments confirm our fears that these terrorist
groups may again find a safe haven in Afghanistan.
The pandemic has also highlighted the vulnerability
of our societies to new and emerging manifestations
of terrorism, such as politically and ideologically
motivated terrorism. That is taking place in a general
context of deteriorating security, as illustrated by the
return of war to the European continent. The means to
combat this scourge must therefore evolve.
That is why the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
with the support of its Executive Directorate, has
rightly highlighted key aspects this year, in particular
at an important meeting held in October in India. They
include continued efforts to counter the diversion
of financial innovation for terrorist financing.
Resolution 2462 (2019) enabled progress in that
regard. France is now calling for the strengthening of
international cooperation and the implementation of the
recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force.
These efforts also include the fight against
the misuse of the Internet for terrorist purposes.
President Macron and the Prime Minister of New
Zealand launched the Christchurch Call to Action on
15 May 2019 in Paris. An essential dialogue with digital
platforms has been initiated. The third Call to Action
summit, held during the General Assembly’s high-level
week, confirmed the commitment of States and private
actors to curb the circulation of terrorist propaganda on
the Internet.
To be fully effective, our fight against terrorism
must be part of a comprehensive response, including
development assistance, strengthening governance
and the rule of law and fighting corruption. We must
also respond to the fundamental challenges of climate
change and the links between terrorism and resource
trafficking and, more generally, with crimes affecting
the environment. France will continue to advocate for

22-7532917/25

S/PV.9221

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the implementation of this comprehensive approach,
which addresses the root causes of terrorism, while
respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me join others in
expressing our condolences and heartfelt sympathy
to Ireland for the loss of a peacekeeper in Lebanon.
He was working to implement a mandate adopted by
the Security Council, and we owe him and everyone
working on behalf of the United Nations infinite
gratitude and respect.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Acting Director Weixiong Chen for their valuable
inputs, as well as Ms. Kulthe for her sobering and
painful account.
We share the same assessment: terrorism remains
a serious threat to global peace and security, and we
must respond effectively and decisively. Yesterday,
we shared views about multilateralism and joint
efforts to face and deal with common challenges
(see S/PV.9220). Countering and fighting terrorism is
an area par excellence where, for all of us to succeed,
we need to plan and act jointly, continuously and in a
coordinated manner.
Albania has continuously and unequivocally
condemned, in the strongest possible terms, any act of
terrorism, committed wherever and by whomsoever.
There is no justification whatsoever for terrorism or
terrorist ideologies and activities. Terror represents an
affront to all humankind and its values.
Terrorist organizations such as Da’esh and Al-Qaida
have been defeated, but they have not disappeared.
They continue to gather financial resources to
enhance their activities, including through the use of
new technologies.
Terrorism continues to thrive in armed conflict
zones where rule-of-law institutions and human rights
have broken down. It flourishes where poverty and
hopelessness rule, especially among young people.
Inequality, intercommunal conflicts, xenophobia and
injustice often serve as fertile ground for terrorist
groups to grow.
The increased activity of Da’esh, Al-Shabaab, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province
and Boko Haram and their ability to attack, move,
fundraise and communicate transnationally, exploit
new technologies to spread their hateful propaganda,
brainwash new recruits and stay ahead of counter18/25

15/12/2022

terrorist measures point to the troubling reality that our
existing policies are not working as effectively as they
should. It shows that repressive policies and forceful
means alone are not enough.
We are all aware of the ever-growing impact of new
technologies in every aspect of development and life.
That makes cyberdefence a priority matter of national
security for everyone. Cyber is a tool used not only
by criminals but also by terrorists, be they State or
non-State actors. We experienced it ourselves in July.
It is therefore imperative that we keep cyberdefence
on top of the multilateral counter-terrorism agenda by
working together to ensure appropriate responses fit for
our times and the digital age.
Prevention is critical in our common fight against
terrorism. We need to win the hearts and minds of the
people, of young people in particular, before the terrorist
do. We need to put bespoke programmes in place that
address, in a comprehensive and sustainable manner,
the manifold drivers of terrorism. Prevention requires
good and transparent governance, development, the
rule of law, human rights, accountable institutions and
health care, including new forms of outreach through
educational programmes. To that end, we believe that the
role of civil society, including religious communities, is
crucial. All preventive measures require time, energy
and a lot of resources, but in the long run they are far
more useful than taxing. Above all, they put people and
victims of terrorism at the centre of efforts.
We must always be aware that repressive policies
can also be used, unfortunately, to deny basic rights and
exacerbate grievances and potential for added violence.
We must always remember that successful counterterrorism and prevention of violent extremism efforts
must be rooted in respect for human rights, including
the freedom of expression and the rule of law. Efforts
to counter terrorism become counterproductive when
used as a pretext to restrain the freedom of religion
or belief and other human rights and fundamental
freedoms, when they target members of minorities and
when they are used for repressive surveillance or for
coercive population control. Such measures have little,
if anything, to do with counter-terrorism. They are
human rights violations and abuses.
We believe close cooperation is critical to finding
solutions. That is why Albania has 16 regional and
international agreements on border management,
exchange of data and mutual support. Through
22-75329

15/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

prevention, close cooperation and coordination, we will
be better equipped to deal with this and other collective
challenges. We highly value the support of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism to Member States in developing
comprehensive assistance plans to better support
victims of terrorism.
The unity of the Council on the nature of the threat
and the means to deal with it is vital for our collective
success, as demonstrated with the landmark unanimous
adoption of resolution 1267 (1999). That spirit should
continue and prevail, not become a victim of narrow
interests that prevent the Council from discharging
its responsibilities.
We must never forget that war begins in the minds
of men, and it is precisely there we need to work when
developing a comprehensive strategy to defeat terrorism
and enable people to lead normal lives in peace and
dignity. We must spare no effort to prevent the direct or
indirect incitement to terror acts, any glorification of
violence or of criminals, to stand strongly against hate
speech and discrimination, while staying true to our
tenet that terrorism cannot and should not be associated
with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic
group. For us there is no doubt — it is through continued
collective action that we will be able to successfully
fight terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations and
wherever it occurs.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
join my colleagues in expressing our condolences
over the death of an Irish peacekeeper and injuries
to three others in Lebanon yesterday. We also convey
our condolences to the bereaved families and to the
Government of Ireland.
I welcome His Excellency Foreign Minister
Jaishankar, who is presiding over today’s meeting.
I listened attentively to the briefings delivered by
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Acting Executive
Director Chen Weixiong and civil society representative
Ms. Kulthe. I wish to take this opportunity to thank
the Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
for their important contributions to the global counterterrorism endeavour.
Combating terrorism is the shared responsibility of
the international community and a major duty of the
Security Council. Thanks to years of efforts, progress
has been made in international counter-terrorism
cooperation. Yet the situation is still grave, and much

S/PV.9221

remains to be done. Hence the need for continued
efforts by the international community.
As we speak, global terrorist activities are
multiplying even faster, with terrorist groups such as
Da’esh, Al-Qaida and the Eastern Turkistan Islamic
Movement running amok. Recently, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province attacked a hotel
in Kabul, Afghanistan, resulting in casualties. China
strongly condemns that attack and supports Afghanistan
in combating all forms of terrorism and violence.
That terrorist attack is yet another stark reminder that
terrorism is the public enemy of humankind and that
the international community must step up coordination
and cooperation in order to effectively combat terrorism
and to do everything possible to prevent the spread of
terrorist forces.
I wish to underscore the following three points.
First, we should further consolidate political will on
counter-terrorism cooperation and maximize synergy.
Terrorism is a global challenge. The prevalence of
that phenomenon, the complexity of organizational
networks, the frequent movements of terrorists and
terrorism’s extremely deleterious effects are beyond
the capacity of any one country to tackle on its own.
All countries should be aware that we are a community
of shared security. It is our common interests to
comprehensively, accurately and steadfastly implement
all counter-terrorism resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council and crack down
on all terrorist organizations and individuals listed by
the Council.
In recent years, certain countries backpedalled on
terrorism issues. China finds that deeply regrettable.
Those politicizing and instrumentalizing counterterrorism issues and pursuing double standards or a
selective approach that will ultimately harm themselves
and others and undermine global counter-terrorism
cooperation as a whole. In the face of the common threat
of terrorism, all parties should abandon geopolitical
calculations and ideological biases, earnestly step up
practical counter-terrorism cooperation in the judicial
and other fields, support the Organization’s central
coordinating role and expedite negotiations on a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
Secondly, we should further optimize resource
allocation, with a greater focus on the regions of the
highest priority and the most pressing issues in counterterrorism cooperation. In recent years, the direct

22-7532919/25

S/PV.9221

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

terrorist threats faced by developed countries have
decreased, leading to a relative decline in investment
in counter-terrorism cooperation and, consequently, a
global shortfall in counter-terrorism resources. Regions
such as Africa, the Middle East and Central Asia are
at the forefront of global counter-terrorism efforts.
Those regions face most the direct terrorist threats
and suffer the most serious terrorist attacks. Their
need for upgraded counter-terrorism capabilities are
therefore the most urgent. In the light of that need, the
United Nations and the international community should
appropriately increase resource allocation in order to
help developing countries strengthen their counterterrorism capacities at the legislative, judicial and lawenforcement levels. The counter-terrorism situation
varies from one region to another. We therefore need
contextualized and targeted measures if we are to
prevent terrorists from abusing the Internet and new
and emerging technologies in order to incite, plan
and carry out terrorist acts or to recruit and finance.
We should take the threats posed by the backflow of
foreign terrorist fighters seriously and make proper
repatriation and resettlement plans for those terrorist
fighters stranded in foreign countries. Efforts must
be made to effectively block the diverse channels
of terrorist financing, and a multipronged approach
should be taken to sever the ties between terrorism and
organized crime.
Thirdly, we must continue to address both the
symptoms and root causes of terrorism and strive to
eradicate the terrorist scourge at its source. Military
means alone can hardly achieve this. We must give
equal emphasis to tackling both the symptoms and root
causes and to harnessing political, economic, judicial
and other means to respond holistically. It is essential
to pursue political solutions to hot-spot issues, help
countries concerned and improve their humanitarian
situation, as well as prevent terrorist forces from
feeding on instability.
Underdevelopment is one root driver of terrorist
forces’ inception and growth. While resolutely fighting
all terrorists, countries should give due regard to
economic recovery, poverty eradication, education
and employment. They should also pursue sustainable
development pathways tailored to their own national
conditions, so as to minimize the living space for
extremist ideologies and gradually eliminate the
breeding ground for terrorism. At present, the global
development cause has been suffering setbacks.
20/25

15/12/2022

Developing countries urgently need more international
support. The international community should place
the development agenda front and centre, increase
development assistance and help countries concerned
root out terrorism through development.
China has always attached great importance to
and been actively engaged in international counterterrorism cooperation. In recent years, through the
China-United Nations Peace and Development Fund,
we have supported the projects of UNOCT and other
agencies, and by conducting trainings, providing
equipment and holding cross-border counter-terrorism
seminars, we have helped countries in Africa and
Central Asia prevent and combat terrorism.
Chinese President Xi Jinping put forward the
Global Security Initiative and the Global Development
Initiative, advocating a common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security concept in service
of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. This is of major practical significance for
deepening international counter-terrorism cooperation,
eliminating the root causes of terrorism and maintaining
common security and development. China stands ready
to work with all parties to implement these two major
initiatives and make new contributions to international
counter-terrorism endeavours.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Allow me, first of all, to express our
condolences to the delegation of Ireland following the
death of the Irish peacekeeper in Lebanon.
We thank the Indian delegation for convening the
meeting today on such a relevant topic, and we express
our support for all victims of terrorism, represented
here today by Ms. Kulthe. We thank Mr. Voronkov and
Mr. Weixiong Chen for their detailed analyses of the
threats that we are facing and overviews of the situation
in countering terrorism as a whole. We are grateful for
the efforts of the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
in countering terrorism. The work of these bodies in
striving to react to current trends gives us hope that the
existing international counter-terrorism architecture
will continue to be capable of tackling the new and
emerging threats and challenges.
The coordinating role of the United Nations,
the principle of affected States having primary
responsibility, and respect for States’ sovereignty,
national characteristics and priorities are the fundamental
22-75329

15/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

conditions on which international cooperation should be
built. Let me recall in this regard that the United Nations
counter-terrorism mechanism — first and foremost
in the Security Council — is already developed. It is
up to Member States to implement the commitments
they undertook. It is only in this way that we will come
closer to the desired outcome, namely, reducing the
threat of terrorism. In order to be successful in this
context, some, of course, will have to display strong
political will, and some will have to reject their policies
of double standards.
Eradicating the phenomenon of terrorism is
impossible until such time and for as long as terrorists
are being used for geopolitical purposes and are being
separated into categories of good, bad and not-too-bad
terrorists. Unfortunately, we have more than enough
examples of this being done, and we were subjected
to this approach ourselves when we were conducting
counter-terrorism operations in our own territory in the
1990s, as well as during the period in which the fight
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
in Syria was ongoing.
International terrorists found sponsors for
themselves. They were being trained in third countries,
which supplied them with money and weapons.
Subsequently, they were provided with shelter, and
they were even granted political refugee status. Even
more outrageously, there were even attempts to present
hardened terrorist organizations as opposition parties
or humanitarians, but the outcome of this was the same:
then as now, criminals remain criminals, and when
they are endorsed by sponsors and have the freedom
of manoeuvre, they continue to advance their terrorist
ideology. They continue to organize and perpetrate
terrorist attacks, and they often even turn their weapons
against their forebears, as was the case with Al-Qaida
and ISIL. Evil always returns like a boomerang, and
when it happens, an international coalition needs to be
formed to combat it.
In November, we received the report of the-Secretary
General entitled “Terrorist attacks on the basis of
xenophobia, racism and other forms of intolerance, or
in the name of religion or belief” (A/77/266). In this
regard, we would like to draw attention to an important
detail. The report shows that there is a regional aspect
to such attacks, as they are localized in the countries of
Western and Eastern Europe, North America, Australia
and Oceania. Because of this, there is reason to believe
that these regions are characterized by certain trends.

S/PV.9221

It remains for us to determine what the root cause
in Western society for this phenomenon is. Why has
it come into being there? And why is it progressing
so rapidly?
We also have questions with regard to the conceptual
approaches to countering terrorism, in particular the
creation of a separate category for some kind of “violent
extremist”. The seemingly harmless use of language
could lead to serious consequences, keeping us from
combating terrorism, breaking our focus and devaluing
our joint efforts in this regard, while the terrorists
themselves end up being sheltered from the international
prosecution mechanism. We are witnessing attempts to
pack Security Council documents on counter-terrorism
with human rights dimensions, including the gender
dimension. We are left with the impression that catchy
statements are being made for the sake of making such
statements, or to shift the focus away from one’s own
unsavoury record.
Many of those who are vocal advocates for human
rights in the counter-terrorism context have to date
done nothing to investigate the horrific instances of
torture, abuse and extrajudicial killings of people
accused of terrorism or under investigation in the
prisons of Afghanistan, Iraq or other countries where
special secret jails were located. Do we know anything
about those who have been found guilty in these cases?
Have there been any proceedings at all? Who has been
brought to account under these proceedings?
Could our colleagues tell us anything at all about the
functioning of the prison in Guantanamo? That is indeed
a very striking example of human rights violations in
the context of countering terrorism. Incidentally, for 10
years now, promises to close Guantanamo have been
made. Unfortunately, these promises remain empty,
which shows that every time new human rights wording
is proposed, these countries think that this language is
addressed to everyone but themselves.
In conclusion, I would like to thank India,
which has focused so much attention during its
Council presidency on the issue of coordinating the
international community’s efforts to counter terrorism.
Unfortunately, the threat of terrorism is changing
very quickly. It takes on new forms and adapts the
most advanced technologies to its needs. We are
convinced that countering terrorism can only be
done by acting together, with strict adherence to the
norms and principles of international law, including

22-7532921/25

S/PV.9221

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the United Nations Charter, with the United Nations
playing a central and coordinating role, and by paying
due regard to the primary responsibility of States in
countering terrorism.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to express my country’s condolences
to the delegation of Ireland on the death in the line of
duty of their compatriot.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov
and CTED Acting Executive Director Chen for their
briefings, and we particularly appreciate the courageous
testimony of nurse Anjali Kulthe. We welcome the fact
that India has convened us for this meeting to address
one of the most urgent and sensitive issues facing us
all, because terrorism is undoubtedly a threat to us all.
Mexico believes that it is important to take
a preventive approach that is more effective than
that used so far in addressing the threat posed
by international terrorism, with an emphasis on
sustainable development and the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. As we have
reiterated on numerous occasions, the real fight against
terrorism must be carried out through development
and creating opportunities for employment, education
and improved living conditions, and the guarantee
of the full enjoyment of human rights and gender
equality. Accordingly, Mexico considers it necessary
to incorporate the impact of concepts of masculinity
into our strategy to prevent terrorism, as has been
recognized in the report of the Secretary General of
26 July (S/2022/576).
Combating terrorism also requires full adherence to
the rule of law and unrestricted respect for international
law, in particular international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. We are concerned about
the ongoing invocation of legitimate self-defence when
using force against non-State actors in a third State,
under the so-called unwilling and unable doctrine.
We reiterate that these interpretations go beyond the
provisions of Article 51 of the Charter.
We also continue to be concerned about the
expressions of discrimination and violence that emanate
from intolerance and xenophobia, and we take this
opportunity to stress once again the urgency of curbing
the proliferation of hate speech. In the same vein, it is
necessary to comply with the restrictions on access to
small arms and light weapons, as well as the need to
strengthen efforts to prevent, combat and eliminate
22/25

15/12/2022

illicit trafficking in these weapons. We are well aware
that they are very often used in acts of terrorism.
All of the foregoing must go hand in hand with
activities coordinated to strengthen national justice
systems and law-enforcement agencies in order to
effectively punish the perpetrators of criminal acts in
accordance with the law, in full compliance with the
norms of due process. Under this logic, it is incumbent
upon the General Assembly to channel efforts to
prevent and combat terrorism. If the root causes are
not addressed, mere sanctions and the use of force
encourage cycles of violence and are clearly limited in
their beneficial effects.
A serious problem is the absence of an
internationally agreed definition of terrorism, which
contributes to blurring the lines within which actions
to combat terrorism are framed to the detriment of
respect for international law. The negotiation of a
general convention on international terrorism, which
gives legal certainty around this phenomenon and puts
an end to unilateral designations, is necessary as a
priority matter.
Finally, we naturally welcome the adoption last
week of resolution 2664 (2022), which establishes a
humanitarian exception to all sanctions regimes for the
first time. Given the great impact that counter-terrorism
operations authorized by the Security Council have had
on humanitarian organizations, especially in the light
of the sanctions regime established under resolution
1267 (1999), Mexico has on numerous occasions raised
the issue of the importance of having such safeguards
in place. We are confident that this resolution will
contribute to guaranteeing the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the places where it is most needed and
that it will protect humanitarian personnel, especially
health-care personnel, from being criminalized for
carrying out their mandate.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to join other
speakers in conveying to the people and the Government
of Ireland our very deep condolences on the loss of the
peacekeeper in Lebanon yesterday. As a United Nations
peacekeeper, he was one of our own, and it is fitting
that we all mourn his passing.
Madam President, I am honoured to participate
in this briefing under your presidency. I would like to
congratulate India for its successful tenure in the Security
Council and for its efforts in building consensus on the
presidential statement that we are going to adopt today.
22-75329

15/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

I would also like to thank Mr. Voronkov, Mr. Chen and
Ms. Kulthe for their informative briefings.
Brazil welcomes the topic chosen for today’s debate
and would like to share some of the principles that guide
my country’s approach to counter-terrorism.
The repudiation of terrorism is a principle enshrined
in Brazil’s Constitution. We strongly condemn terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations and reiterate that
there is no justification for terrorist acts.
The lack of an internationally agreed upon
definition of terrorism weakens our ability to cope
with the phenomenon. It affects the cohesion of global
efforts to address terrorism and could lead to the
application of double standards. It is imperative that
we overcome the stalemate in the Sixth Committee
and work towards the adoption of a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism.
The importance of upholding legality must guide any
response to this phenomenon. Counter-terrorism has to
be fully compliant with international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations and its rules pertaining
to the prohibition of the use of force, international
human rights law, international humanitarian law and
international refugee law. This entails guaranteeing
respect for the freedom of association and expression
and the right to privacy, attending to victims, enforcing
standards for due process in the designation of terrorist
individuals and entities, and designing sanctions
regimes that do not affect vulnerable populations,
worsen food crises or hinder neutral, impartial and
independent humanitarian assistance. In this respect,
I would like to express our recognition for the efforts
of Ireland and the United States in coordinating
efforts to ensure a horizontal humanitarian carve-out
through resolution 2664 (2022), which is an undeniable
step forward.
As the Security Council has already recognized, the
nature and scope of possible linkages between terrorism
and transnational organized crime vary considerably
depending on the geographic, social and political
context. There are no automatic linkages between these
two phenomena. They demand different remedies and
must be addressed in their respective forums.
Prevention should be central to any counterterrorism strategy. This includes tackling its root causes,
which are often linked to social, economic and political
exclusion, food insecurity, inequality, xenophobia and

S/PV.9221

other human rights violations. Therefore, promoting
sustainable development on an equitable basis as well
as the rule of law and access to justice is important to
addressing the conditions that lead to terrorism and
the violent extremism that is conducive to terrorism.
It is also essential to work towards the elimination of
discrimination and stigmatization based on nationality,
religion, gender or ethnicity. In the end, we must not
forget that the persistence of protracted conflicts and
regional tensions contributes to creating fertile ground
for terrorist action.
National law enforcement and strong judicial
institutions are also key to an effective counter-terrorism
strategy. We must enhance international cooperation
and technical assistance with a view to strengthening
national capabilities to face terrorist threats. The United
Nations is pivotal in facilitating this cooperation, and
we commend the important role played by the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact entity. We also acknowledge the decisive
contribution of regional and subregional organizations
in building local capacity to fight terrorism.
As reflected in the recently approved Delhi
Declaration, although new and emerging technologies
may be misused to increase the reach of terrorism, they
can also strengthen our ability to prevent and combat
it. Their potential to foster economic opportunities and
job creation can also contribute to addressing some of
the root causes of terrorism.
Finally, the development of counter-terrorism
strategies has to be inclusive. We must encourage the
participation of women, civil society organizations,
academia and the private sector. We must also pay
special attention to the needs of children and vulnerable
populations if we want to step up our capacity to
address terrorism in the full diversity of its causes,
manifestations and effects.
Let me conclude by mentioning that in the next six
months the United Nations will have an opportunity to
improve the most important framework it has in terms
of the fight against terrorism. The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy emanates from
its most representative body, the General Assembly,
and therefore encompasses a wide range of views and
needs. Brazil is ready for constructive engagement
with Member States with a view to achieving ambitious
results during the upcoming discussions.

22-7532923/25

S/PV.9221

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I wish to
convey my condolences to Ireland on the death of the
Irish peacekeeper who fell on the field of operations
in Lebanon.
I would like to congratulate India for its outstanding
presidency and for initiating today’s debate on the threat
that terrorist acts continue to pose to international
peace and security. I thank Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov and Executive Director Weixiong
Chen for their inspiring briefings. I also thank
Ms. Anjali Kulthe for her moving testimony.
Terrorist networks are constantly evolving and are
clearly resilient, despite the international community’s
mobilization against them. Terrorist threats are
increasing in magnitude and geographic reach,
spreading to all the regions of the world. Governments
are increasingly under pressure from populations fed up
with growing insecurity, especially since political and
economic measures seem to fall short of the urgency
and firmness required to fight this scourge. It is a war
that puts the limited capacities of countries to the test
and destabilizes entire regions.
Between January and September of this year,
1,093 terrorist attacks were perpetrated in Africa,
killing 7,816 people and injuring 1,772. According to
these figures from the African Centre for Studies and
Research on Terrorism, each of the five regions of the
continent has had its share of victims among civilians,
security forces and officials. This transnational threat
is formidable, and no Government or organization can
fight it alone. Concerted action at national, regional
and global levels is crucial. Our action must be equally
determined, multidimensional and based on the
principles of multilateralism.
African leaders understand this. On 28 May 2022,
the Heads of State and Government of the African Union,
meeting in Malabo, adopted an important declaration in
which they reaffirmed their commitment to combating
all forms and manifestations of terrorism and extremist
violence on the continent. This declaration strengthens
the many regional initiatives to combat terrorism.
Gabon welcomes the measures taken in the binding
normative framework to fight international terrorism
and the measures to make international cooperation
closer. But we must do more. Above all, we must ensure
that the current polarization in the world does not lead
to a weakening of multilateralism from which terrorist
groups and their affiliates could dangerously benefit.
24/25

15/12/2022

Above all, we must emphasize the need for a holistic
approach that takes into full account the precarious
socioeconomic conditions that make many disillusioned
youth easy targets for radicalization and recruitment
into terrorist organizations.
In the face of this scourge, we must agree on a number
of cardinal principles, including, first, zero tolerance for
all forms and manifestations of terrorism and extremist
violence; secondly, the anchoring of our actions in
strict adherence to international law and respect for the
rule of law and relevant international instruments and
protocols; thirdly, protection of our actions from any
form of politicization through impeccable impartiality;
and fourthly, the delegitimization of any justification
for terrorism.
Terrorism is not caused by deficits in governance,
but it continues to unravel and destabilize governance
plans and efforts in developing countries and feeds
at the needy table of societal fragilities. We need
to pursue and consolidate our cooperation through
information-sharing, the training of security and
intelligence personnel, and, where appropriate, support
for counter-terrorism operations that weaken terrorist
groups, particularly along common borders, where
very often State capacity and authority are limited.
On the African continent, the Accra Initiative, which
seeks to provide a coherent response that combines
a military approach with long-term interventions to
address governance deficits, is a benchmark approach
in this regard.
We must tailor our response with coherence, because
fragmented responses fuel the interests of terrorist
groups, which exploit systemic flaws in order to ferment
the soil for violence. Among these gaps are health
crises, such as the coronavirus disease pandemic, and
humanitarian crises, which are becoming increasingly
complex owing to the effects of climate change,
coupled with the rise in poverty and inequality inherent
in recurring political and socioeconomic crises. Our
collective action against terrorism therefore requires a
comprehensive approach and appropriate measures to
address the socioeconomic challenges facing affected
countries, including education and training of youth;
strengthening the authority of the State, particularly in
fragile States; and improving the living conditions of
disadvantaged populations.
Similarly, we must dry up the sources of
financing for terrorist networks through consolidated
22-75329

15/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

partnerships in the areas of intelligence on online
monetary transactions; the illicit exploitation of
natural resources; the fight against the circulation of
small arms and light weapons; and combating human
trafficking and kidnapping for ransom perpetrated by
armed groups.
The United Nations must redouble its efforts,
increase its avenues for action and firmly support
peace initiatives and operations, in particular African
initiatives. We must present a united front on counterterrorism, and everyone must be fully committed. We
must also continue our efforts to adopt an international
convention on international terrorism, which would
provide the most tangible illustration of the fact that
our States and the peoples of the world unanimously
condemn the threat of international terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.
It is therefore important that we conduct an ongoing
review of current sanctions regimes to ensure that they
are tailored to the changing terrorist threat, in particular
by better targeting the perpetrators of terrorist acts and
their support structure. Respect for the rule of law is
crucial in that exercise, as we minimize the adverse
effects and potential collateral damage of sanctions on
communities that are likely to be unfairly affected.
Gabon believes that the efforts of the international
community must be guided by regional and subregional
organizations that better understand the situation

S/PV.9221

on the ground. However, they can be effective only
if they have real capacity. It is up to us therefore to
provide those organizations with the necessary tools for
building resilience. In that regard, I must underscore
the linkage between peace, security and development
and the need for a holistic approach in the fight against
the root causes of terrorism.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore the crucial
nature of our fight against terrorism as an absolute
necessity for the peace, security and development
of our States. The international community should
be more determined to take urgent measures that are
commensurate with the threat, within the context of
broader governance involving all segments of society.
That would deprive terrorists of the ideological
propaganda they use to radicalize and manipulate
vulnerable communities.
The President: The Council has before it the text of
a statement by the President on behalf of the Council on
the subject of today’s meeting. I thank Council members
for their valuable contributions to the statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2022/7.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

22-7532925/25
