S/PV.8203

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8203

rd meeting
Wednesday, 14 March 2018, 3.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Van Oosterom. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Letter dated 13 March 2018 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2018/218)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-07096 (E)
*1807096*

S/PV.8203

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 March 2018 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2018/218)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/218, which contains a letter dated
13 March 2018 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir, for
arranging this urgent meeting of the Security Council
today to give the United Kingdom the opportunity to
update Council colleagues on our investigation into a
nerve agent attack in Salisbury.
On Sunday, 4 March, Sergei Skripal and his
daughter Yulia Skripal were found in the town
centre, slipping out of consciousness on a public
bench, and were taken to hospital by our emergency
services, where they remain in very serious condition.
Investigations by world-leading experts of the Defence
Science and Technology Laboratory at Porton Down,
accredited by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), discovered that they had
been exposed to a nerve agent. British police officer
Nick Bailey was also exposed and remains in hospital
in serious condition.
Hundreds of British citizens have been potentially
exposed to this nerve agent in what was an indiscriminate
and reckless act against the United Kingdom. We have
deployed our military to secure and decontaminate
numerous sites. The police continue an exhaustive,
wide-scale investigation. Through those investigations,
we have concluded that Mr. Skripal and his daughter
were poisoned with a Novichok — a military-grade
nerve agent of a type developed by Russia. It is not a
weapon that can be manufactured by non-State actors.
2/12

14/03/2018

It is so dangerous that it requires the highest-grade
State laboratories and expertise.
Based on the knowledge that Russia has previously
produced this agent, and combined with Russia’s record
of conducting State-sponsored assassinations, including
against former intelligence officers whom it regards as
legitimate targets, the United Kingdom Government
concluded that it was highly likely that Russia was
responsible for this reckless act. We saw only two
plausible explanations. Either this was a direct attack
by Russia on my country, or Russia had lost control of a
military-grade nerve agent that it had developed.
We requested the Russian Government to provide
an explanation by the end of Tuesday, 13 March, on
how this Russian-produced nerve agent could have
been deployed in Salisbury. It has provided no credible
explanation, which could suggest that it had lost control
of its nerve agent. We therefore have no alternative but
to conclude that the Russian State was responsible
for the attempted murder of Mr. Skripal, his daughter
and police officer Nick Bailey, and for threatening the
lives of other British citizens in Salisbury. This was
no common crime. It was an unlawful use of force and
a violation of Article 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations — the basis of the international legal order.
The United Kingdom is proud to have been one of
the States that played an integral role in drafting the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), a landmark
piece of international law. We are therefore dismayed
that Russia has suggested that our response fails to
meet the requirements of the Convention. Article VII
of the Convention calls on States parties to implement
the Convention under their own legislation. The United
Kingdom has enacted the Chemical Weapons Act
in order to fully comply with this obligation. That
legislation, together with relevant criminal law, is now
guiding our investigation into this incident, as the
Convention was designed to ensure.
This was an attack on United Kingdom soil. Under
the Convention, we have the right to lead our response,
engaging the OPCW and others, as appropriate. On
8 March, the United Kingdom formally notified the
Technical Secretariat of the OPCW that a chemical
attack had taken place on United Kingdom soil.
The Russian Federation has complained that we
are not acting under article IX of the Convention. On
the contrary, on 12 March, once it became clear to
us that the United Kingdom had been attacked, the
18-07096

14/03/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

Foreign Secretary summoned the Russian Ambassador
and sought an explanation from his Government, as
article IX clearly sets out we have the right to do. We
have received no meaningful response. It is therefore
Russia that is failing to comply with the provisions
of the Convention. The Council should not fall for
their attempt to muddy the waters. In addition, the
United Kingdom has welcomed the offer of technical
assistance from the Director-General of the OPCW. We
have invited the Technical Secretariat to independently
verify our analysis. We are making every effort to
expedite that process.
Let us now turn to the part of the Chemical
Weapons Convention that Russia is not talking about,
which requires States parties to declare chemical
weapons stockpiles and facilities that have been used
at any time since 1946 to produce chemical weapons.
Chemical weapons were to be verifiably destroyed and
production facilities destroyed or converted, subject
to approval, within 10 years of the entry into force of
the Convention. Russia completed the destruction of
its declared stockpile in September 2017, 10 years later
than required by the Convention and five years beyond
the single five-year extension period. Russia did not
declare Novichok agents or the production facilities
associated with them, as it was required to do under the
Convention. No development facilities were declared.
Yet we know from the testimony of the Russian scientist
Vil Mirzayanov that Novichok agents were developed
as part of the Soviet Union’s offensive chemical
warfare programme and that they were inherited by the
Russian Federation. Such facilities associated with that
programme should have been declared under the CWC.
Even today, a Russian politician said that Russia had
destroyed the Novichok nerve gas.
From all I have said, we can conclude that Russia is
in serious breach of the Chemical Weapons Convention
through its failure to declare the Novichok programme.
That fact alone means that the Security Council should
discount any arguments it hears about the possibility
of other countries having inherited that technology.
Had Russia declared and destroyed its own programme,
there might have been some truth to that.
On 4 March, a weapon so horrific that it is banned
from use in war was used in a peaceful city in my
country. That was a reckless act, carried out by people
who disregard the sanctity of human life and who are
indifferent to whether innocent people are caught up in
their attacks. They either did not care that the weapon

S/PV. 8203

used would be traced back to them or mistakenly
believed that they could cover their tracks.
Russian officials and media channels have
repeatedly threatened those whom they consider traitors
even after the attack on 4 March. Russia has a history
of State-sponsored assassinations, including that of
Alexander Litvinenko, who was poisoned by radioactive
materials in my country a decade ago. Russia has a
history of interfering in other countries — whether
the failed coup in Montenegro, repeated cyberattacks
on other States or seeking to influence the democratic
processes of other countries. Russia has a history
of flouting international law, most egregiously in
Crimea, eastern Ukraine, and Georgia. Russia shows
disregard for civilian life. We all remember Flight
MH-17, shot down by Russian proxies supplied with
Russian weapons. In its repeated protection of the use
of chemical weapons by Al-Assad, Russia has shown
that it has different standards when it comes to the use
of those terrible substances.
We have not jumped to conclusions. We have
carried out a thorough and careful investigation, which
continues. We are asking the OPCW to independently
verify the nerve agent used. We have offered Russia
the chance to explain but Russia has refused. We have
therefore concluded that the Russian State was involved
and we have taken certain measures in response. In
taking such measures, we have been clear that we
have no disagreement with the people of Russia, who
have been responsible for so many great achievements
throughout history. It is the reckless acts of their
Government that we oppose.
We are grateful for the support of so many countries
around the world. We will come back to the Council as
the investigations make more progress and will continue
to keep it informed. We have already heard the attacks
and threats that Russia has made over the past few days.
We know that there will be more to come. That is how
Russia has acted in every other case where it has been
caught flouting international law — denial, distraction
and threats. That is what Russia does. However, we
will not allow such threats to deter us. We will not
weaken our resolve. We will stand firm, confident in
our democracy, our rule of law and the freedom of our
people. We will stand by the values that are shared by
the overwhelming majority of those on the Council at
the United Nations. We ask them today to stand by us.

18-070963/12

S/PV.8203

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank my
British colleagues for calling this important meeting.
We are here today to discuss the use of a chemical
weapon by one Council member on the territory of
another Council member. Let me make one thing clear
from the very beginning — the United States stands in
absolute solidarity with Great Britain. The United States
believes that Russia is responsible for the attack on two
people in the United Kingdom, using a military-grade
nerve agent. Dozens of civilians and first responders
were also exposed. Police officer Nick Bailey was the
first to arrive on the scene and remains hospitalized in
serious condition. Our thoughts and prayers go out to
the victims of that atrocious crime.
No two nations enjoy a stronger bond than that
between the United States and the United Kingdom.
Ours is truly a special relationship. When our friends
in Great Britain face a challenge, the United States
will always be there for them. Alone, Russia’s crime
is worthy of the Council’s action. However, this is
not an isolated incident. The assassination attempt in
Salisbury is part of an alarming increase in the use of
chemical weapons. Last year, the North Korean regime
used the nerve agent VX to publicly assassinate Kim
Jong Un’s brother in a Malaysian airport. In Syria,
the Al-Assad regime continues to kill its own people
with chemical weapons years after the Council adopted
resolution 2118 (2013) to remove the threat from Syria’s
chemical weapons programme. When the Security
Council created a mechanism to investigate chemical
weapons attacks, the mechanism was targeted when it
began to shine a spotlight on Al-Assad’s role in killing
his own people.
A growing concern in all that dangerous and
destabilizing activity is Russia. Russia failed to
ensure that Syria destroyed its chemical weapons
programme. Russia put an end to the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism when it found that
Al-Assad was liable for chemical attacks. Russia used
its veto to shield Al-Assad five times last year. It has
also provided cover for Syria at the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in The Hague.
The Russians complained recently that we criticize
them too much. If the Russian Government stopped
using chemical weapons to assassinate its enemies
and helping its Syrian allies to use chemical weapons
to kill Syrian children, and if it cooperated with the
4/12

14/03/2018

Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
by turning over all information related to this nerve
agent, we would stop talking about it. We take no
pleasure in having to constantly criticize Russia but we
need Russia to stop giving us so many reasons to do so.
Russia must fully cooperate with the United
Kingdom’s investigation and come clean about its own
chemical weapons programme. Russia is a permanent
member of the Security Council. Under the Charter
of the United Nations, it is entrusted with upholding
international peace and security. It must account for its
actions.
If we do not take immediate, concrete measures
to address this now, Salisbury will not be the last
place we see chemical weapons used. They could be
used here in New York or in cities of any country that
sits on the Council. This is a defining moment. Time
and time again, Member States say that they oppose
the use of chemical weapons under any circumstance.
Now, one member stands accused of using chemical
weapons on the sovereign soil of another member. The
credibility of the Council will not survive if we fail to
hold Russia accountable.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the United Kingdom for having taken the
initiative to convene this important meeting and for the
information it has provided on the situation following
the attempted assassination of two Russian citizens on
its soil on 4 March in Salisbury.
At the outset, allow me to reiterate to our British
friend and ally all the support that was expressed
yesterday and today by our highest authorities following
an unacceptable attack, which President Macron
condemned without reservation. In the name of the
cardinal values we share — first and foremost the rule
of law and the commitment to the principles of peace
and security of which the Council is the guardian and
guarantor — I would like to offer the United Kingdom
the full support and solidarity of France. There can be
no ambiguity with regard to our position on this.
Let us be clear. This assassination attempt in a
public place using a military-grade toxic nerve agent,
as reported to us, and which has affected other civilians
in British territory, is totally unacceptable. Theresa
May spoke today in the House of Commons and stated
that Russia is responsible in this attack. We have full
confidence in the British investigation to shed light
on the precise circumstances of this use of a chemical
18-07096

14/03/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

weapon. It is essential that those who are at the origin
of the use of this chemical weapon be clearly identified
and prosecuted, and that all appropriate responses be
made as soon as possible to the issues raised by the
United Kingdom in this investigation.
Let us make no mistake. The facts and the
issues at stake are extremely serious. The ban on
the use of chemical weapons lies at the heart of the
non-proliferation regime that underpins our system
of collective security, as created and enshrined by the
Council and all its members.
The haphazard re-emergence of these barbaric
weapons with deadly consequences, which can be seen
not only in their recurrent use in Syria and the Middle
East, but also in Asia and now in Europe, cannot be
tolerated. It flouts the principles that form the basis of
peace and security; it undermines the non-proliferation
architecture, built stone by stone over the course of
decades; and it calls into question strategic stability.
We have repeatedly warned the Council of the risk of
the re-emergence of these weapons, their proliferation
to all types of actors, and the threat this situation poses
to the collective security system that we have gradually
built together.
Let us be very aware that we have reached a
new phase — that of the use of a substance that was
never declared to the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the use of which is
prohibited by the Convention, in a public place on
the territory of a European country. France will never
accept impunity for those who use or develop toxic
agents. In that regard, we recall our full support for
existing institutions, in particular the OPCW. That is
also the reason why France launched an international
partnership in January, aimed at supporting existing
instruments in the fight against impunity in the use of
these weapons.
We must remain more mobilized than ever in the
fight against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and the impunity of those who intend to use
them. It is a priority and a major responsibility for all of
us, as well as a responsibility of the Security Council,
and we will be judged on it. In that respect, France
affirms its resolute commitment to that end, alongside
its partners and allies, within the Council and in all
circumstances that require it.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting to discuss the use of

S/PV. 8203

chemical weapons. Regardless of the wording of the
agenda item that we are discussing today, be it “Letter
from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of the United Kingdom” or “Proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction”, we believe that this is an issue of
concern. Attempted assassination is a dangerous crime
that has an impact on the security and safety of civilians
and could undermine relations among Member States.
The State of Kuwait holds a principled and firm
position condemning the use, production, acquisition,
stockpiling or retention of chemical weapons, as well as
their direct or indirect transfer. This position is based
on article I of the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We call on all Member States that have ratified the
Convention to adhere to its provisions and eliminate all
their stockpiles of toxic chemical material.
The United Kingdom called for the convening
of this meeting because of a hostile act committed
on its territory that violates international norms and
conventions related to chemical weapons. We underscore
the right of the United Kingdom or any other country
subjected to similar acts to undertake all the necessary
investigations and carry out the appropriate measures
in order to protect its national security and punish the
perpetrators of such criminal act.
Lastly, we call on all States that bear a special
responsibility in maintaining international peace and
security, as well as all other States that express their
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations, to
undertake clear and sincere steps towards achieving the
objective of creating a world free of nuclear weapons
and weapons of mass destruction. In that regard, we
recall resolution 2325 (2016), which reaffirms that
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery poses a danger to
international peace and security.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has
learned of the attack involving the use a chemical nerve
agent in Salisbury, United Kingdom, and we hope that
events such as those will be duly investigated, that the
results of those investigations will be made public, and
that those responsible will face justice.
With regard to the accusations concerning the
involvement of the Russian Federation in the incident
reported by the Government of the United Kingdom,
Equatorial Guinea hopes that both parties, the
United Kingdom and the Russian Federation, will be

18-070965/12

S/PV.8203

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

able to address and resolve the situation in the most
appropriate way possible through direct contact and by
fully clarifying the facts. That is why we recommend
that while the investigations are being carried out,
both parties — the Russian Federation and the United
Kingdom — demonstrate moderation. We invite both
parties to work closely on the investigations being
conducted to shed light on the situation. We thank the
United Kingdom for its initiative to invite independent
and volunteer investigators to carry out the analyses
necessary to resolve this complex situation.
In conclusion, I would like to make it clear that the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea is completely opposed
to the production, stockpiling, distribution and use of
chemical, biological, bacteriological and other similar
products on human beings, which are at variance
with the relevant international treaties. We therefore
condemn such use regardless of its perpetrators. We
wish Mr. Sergei Skripal, his daughter and others who
were affected by the incident a speedy recovery.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank the
representative of the United Kingdom for his initiative
to convene today’s meeting.
Poland is gravely concerned about the use of a
nerve agent in an attempt to murder Mr. Sergei Skripal
and Ms. Yulia Skripal, which endangered the lives of
innocent civilians. Poland has always been a committed
supporter of curbing chemical weapons. In that regard,
we condemn the unprecedented attack on the territory
of the United Kingdom — the first of its kind in Europe
since the Second World War. After the continued use
of chemicals as weapons in Syria, this is another clear
example of the violation of international law and the
provisions of the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction.
We express our full solidarity with the British
people and Government and our readiness to support
our close ally and European partner in the conduct
of the investigation. At the same time, we call on
Russia to address the United Kingdom’s questions and
appropriately cooperate with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in that regard. Poland
strongly believes that there is no place for impunity.
Those responsible for the use of chemical weapons
must be held accountable.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting. I also
6/12

14/03/2018

thank the representative of the United Kingdom for
his statement.
In line with Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations, we believe that it is important to update the
Security Council on situations that could give rise to
an international dispute. Peru believes that the use of
chemical weapons is a threat to international peace
and security, violates the non-proliferation regime and
endangers the lives of civilians. Therefore, we express
our deep concern about the use of a nerve agent in a
public area, which put the lives of at least three people
in the United Kingdom in serious danger. We deplore
the fact that the incident occurred and express our
solidarity with the victims. The incident should be
investigated within the framework of the rule of law
and due process, through the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and other competent
entities. The parties concerned must fully cooperate
to ensure a credible investigation that determines
and punishes those responsible in line with relevant
international law.
In conclusion, we stress that communication
channels must remain open in order to resolve
the situation.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for updating the Security Council on
the use of nerve agents in Salisbury on 4 March.
Sweden condemns in the strongest terms the use
of a nerve agent in an attempted murder on British
soil. We stress the seriousness of that incident, which
is unprecedented in Europe in recent years. Those
responsible for the attack must be identified and held
to account for their heinous actions. Given that a nerve
agent developed as a chemical weapon has been used
and the possibility that the attempted murder has links
to State actors, Sweden supports the decision of the
United Kingdom to bring the issue to the attention of
the Security Council and other relevant bodies, such
as the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. We stand by the United Kingdom and, like
other European Union partners, express our strong
solidarity with the Government of the United Kingdom
and support its efforts in dealing with this grave
security issue.
We note that, in her letter to the Secretary-General
(S/2018/218, annex), the Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom states that the class of chemical warfare agents
used was originally developed by the Soviet Union and
18-07096

14/03/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

inherited by the Russian Federation. Given that fact and
taking into account the principal victim’s background,
we support the request of the United Kingdom that
Russia provide an account of how the agent could have
come to be used in Salisbury.
Let me also take this opportunity to stress the
importance that Sweden attaches to the ban on
chemical weapons. Such barbaric and illegal weapons
kill indiscriminately and have no place in the world. We
must ensure that the integrity of the Chemical Weapons
Convention is fully respected.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Côte d’Ivoire was saddened to learn about
the use of a chemical nerve agent on British soil on
4 March in Salisbury. It expresses its sincere solidarity
with the British Government and wishes those affected
a speedy recovery. Côte d’Ivoire has always condemned
the use of chemical weapons, regardless of the method
employed. It also demands that light be shed on the
incident in Salisbury.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan is known
for its clear and consistent position as an uncompromising
opponent of all types of weapons of mass destruction,
including chemical weapons. We condemn the use of
weapons of mass destruction as immoral, inhuman and
contrary to the principles of humanity. We express our
deep concern about the tragic incident involving the
possible use of chemical warfare agents on the territory
of the United Kingdom. The use of chemical agents,
regardless of location or target, is unacceptable.
At the same time, since this is a very politically
sensitive issue, we must be extremely careful in
drawing hasty conclusions without credible or
convincing facts on the ground. The incident should
be carefully investigated and all conclusions must
be substantiated. We believe that an international
response to the incident should be considered only after
an exhaustive, transparent, objective and impartial
investigation, undertaken in accordance with existing
norms of international law, primarily on the basis of the
provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We hope that both parties can resolve the
contradictions and disputes between them by diplomatic
means and normalize relations for the benefit of global
stability and security.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We have taken note of the

S/PV. 8203

information we received today about the events that
took place on 4 March. Bolivia would once again like to
express its firm and absolute condemnation of the use
of chemicals as weapons, which is an unjustifiable and
criminal act, regardless of where, when or by whom it is
committed. This is a serious violation of international
law and international peace and security, and we hope
that it will be investigated by the appropriate bodies
methodically, technically, thoroughly, conclusively and
without politicization.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We have been following
the news about the nerve-agent attack in Salisbury,
in the United Kingdom. We would like to express our
sympathy for and solidarity with the families of the
victims, as well as the Government and the people of
the United Kingdom. We have taken note of the letter
that was circulated yesterday (S/2018/218, annex) from
the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom addressed to
the Secretary-General on the incident, and we thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for its briefing today.
Our position on the use of chemical weapons is
well known. We firmly condemn any use of chemical
weapons by any State or non-State actor. The use of
chemicals as weapons is unacceptable and constitutes
a serious violation of international law. That said, we
hope that the necessary independent investigation
into the incident in Salisbury will be conducted and
also vetted, including through consultation and the
exchange of information on the basis of the relevant
provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention, with
a view to bringing those responsible to justice. We
believe that cooperation in good faith between Russia
and the United Kingdom will be critical to ensuring
that this issue does not get out of hand and undermine
relations between the two countries even further. In that
regard, we hope and trust that given the very justifiable
concern of the United Kingdom, all those concerned
will cooperate fully so that the matter can be addressed
fairly and in a way that will help to allay the concerns
of the United Kingdom.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has noted the recent poisoning incident in the United
Kingdom.
We take note of the statements made by
relevant countries on this incident. We hope that a
comprehensive, objective and impartial investigation
can be conducted, based on the facts and in accordance
with the relevant international rules, and that it can reach

18-070967/12

S/PV.8203

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

an evidence-based conclusion that can stand the test of
facts and history. We hope that the relevant parties can
handle the issue through the appropriate channels.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Yesterday, after the letter from the British
Prime Minister (S/2018/218, annex) was circulated to
the Security Council, the United Kingdom asked that
closed consultations be held. It was we who asked the
President of the Security Council to change the meeting
format from closed consultations to an open briefing.
We did that for a reason, because we wanted everyone to
see what is going on here. In the letter, which contains
totally irresponsible assertions and which I actually
find it difficult to comment on in diplomatic terms,
there are threats to a sovereign State and permanent
member of the Security Council that are contrary to
international law and Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter of the United Nations. I would like to try to
understand whether our British colleagues understand
that, at least.
The first question we want to ask is why the
representatives of the United Kingdom have dragged
this issue into the Security Council, thereby ignoring
the established procedure that London is obliged
to follow, in accordance with its international
commitments — that is, going through the specialized
bodies, assuming we are talking about the use of
toxic chemicals on United Kingdom territory. The
response to that question is obvious to us. Our partners
have dragged the issue into the forum of the Security
Council because they know that the their arguments
will not pass muster with the real experts on chemical
weapons in The Hague. In reality, in other words, they
are afraid of a genuine professional discussion of the
subject, and this shows that the initiators of the meeting
have entirely different motives for it.
The Russian Federation considers the unfounded
accusations in British Prime Minister Theresa May’s
appeal of 13 March to the Secretary-General — to the
effect that our country was allegedly involved in the
use of poisonous substances in Salisbury — totally
unacceptable. In what amounts to an ultimatum, it asks
us to respond within 24 hours essentially to admit to
committing a crime and to confess our guilt. We do
not speak in the language of ultimatums with anyone.
Nor do we let ourselves be spoken to in that kind of
tone. But we are polite, and on 13 March we sent a note
to the British Foreign Office affirming that Russia
was not party to the incident and requesting samples
8/12

14/03/2018

of the substance involved and a joint investigation,
particularly considering that one of the victims is a
citizen of the Russian Federation. That was refused.
In other words, while drumming up hysteria, London
is acting in a wholly untransparent way. Today we
heard reports of Russian diplomats being expelled and
bilateral relations being frozen. Incidentally, I would
like to ask my British colleague if that applies to the
United Nations as well. There were also reports of
a forthcoming cyberattack on Russia. Let this be a
warning that this will not go unanswered.
We have been compelled to conclude that
establishing the truth is the last thing the British
authorities are interested in and that they have quite
other motives. Their methods are those of the war by
propaganda that have been refined in recent years,
designed to produce a powerful information impact on
an unenlightened and impressionable public. But there
are no facts backing them up except their unfounded
assertions about Russian tracks. Incidentally, this is far
from being the first case of an attempt in the United
Kingdom on the lives of Russian citizens or immigrants
from Russia in extremely fishy circumstances, attempts
that either still have not been investigated or about
which we were refused any information. London should
start by dealing with what is going on at home. Before
blaming others, civilized people usually put their own
house in order.
We suggested that the United Kingdom immediately
launch the procedures provided for in paragraph 2
of article IX of the Chemical Weapons Convention,
whereby a State party that receives a request from
another State party for clarification shall provide the
requesting State party with information as soon as
possible, but in any case not later than 10 days after
the request. Our British colleagues are aware of that,
but have been in no hurry to invoke the Convention
to which they are a party. We demand material proof
of the alleged Russian tracks discovered in this highprofile affair. Without that, the allegedly irrefutable
data carry no weight. So far we have seen nothing,
except claims that this is “highly likely”. In the
circumstances, the right thing to do would be to ask
the technical secretariat of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to carry out
an independent laboratory analysis of the samples in
the possession of the British authorities. I would now
like to say a few words about chemistry.
18-07096

14/03/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

There has been no scientific research and
development conducted in the Russian Federation
on what has been dubbed Novichok. Starting in the
early 1970s, a large number of countries established
programmes for creating new types of nerve and
paralytic agents, known as VX, in particular in the
United States and the Soviet Union. Russia terminated
Soviet development efforts in the area of chemical
weapons, in accordance with a decree issued by the
President of the Russian Federation in 1992. In 2017,
the Russian Federation completed the destruction
of all of its existing stocks of chemical weapons, as
verified by the OPCW, the relevant international entity.
Incidentally, the United States has still not destroyed its
chemical-weapon capacities.
In the mid-1990s, Western secret services brought
a number of our specialists to the West, whose names
are well known, as well as a certain amount of
documentation. Research in this area has continued in
both the United Kingdom and the United States. The
positive achieved by these two countries in creating
new toxic substances that for some reason are classified
in the West under the general name Novichok are
confirmed and reflected in more than 200 NATOcountry open sources. We have the references for them
and are ready to provide them to the Council. The actual
identification of the toxic substance alleged to have
been used in the incident was done at Porton Down, the
British Ministry of Defence’s research facility where
the development and production of chemical weapons,
including of this kind, is conducted. The most likely
sources of this particular chemical are the countries that
have been doing intensive research on such substances
since the end of the 1990s, which include Great Britain.
We are not chemists here, so let me cite the opinion
of a professional one. For the British specialists to state
with complete confidence that this gas is Novichok and
not something else, it would be essential for them to
have a so-called control standard. In order to prove that
it is the exact same compound, it has to be compared
to that standard. Of necessity, if they state that this
is a Novichok gas, they must have a standard for that
substance. That means they have both a sample and a
formula, and that is the most important piece of this
whole story. In other words, if Great Britain is so dead
certain that this is a Novichok gas, it has the formula
and samples, and is itself capable of manufacturing it.
We are living in unusual times, and shocking things
are happening before our very eyes. The presumption

S/PV. 8203

of innocence is in the process of being replaced by the
presumption of guilt, and that principle of criminal
law is now being transferred to international relations.
Today Ambassador Haley, as if she were an experienced
chemist and expert in that area, opined about Russia’s
crimes. We have long been familiar with the fact that
she needs no investigations to identify the guilty parties.
In her letter the British Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom says that her scenario is “highly likely”, but
Mrs. Haley surpasses her trusty ally even in this.
If for the Soviet prosecutor Andrey Vyshinsky,
confession was the queen of evidence, then today, in
our Foreign Minister Lavrov’s apposite words, it is
suspicion that now plays that role. There is no longer
any need even to show the Council test tubes containing
an unknown white substance; it is sufficient to write a
letter making egregious accusations about a sovereign
State. We have already seen that with respect to Syria,
and now they are trying to add Russia to the list of
violators of the Convention. I would like to remind the
Council about the United Kingdom’s record of service
in participating in illegal attacks on independent States,
including on a basis of fake evidence. That led to
immeasurable suffering among civilians in Yugoslavia,
Iraq and Libya. Has the Council forgotten that Great
Britain is notorious for being a State that has embraced
the practice of targeted drone assassinations? In the
context, hearing it heap invective on us is strange, and
particularly so when it is based on no evidence.
There
is
a
well-known
principle
in
jurisprudence — and in life in general — “cui bono, or
cui prodest”, meaning, who benefits? What do members
think? Does this incident benefit Russia on the eve of
its presidential elections and the World Cup football
championship? I can think of several countries right
away — although, in accordance with the principle
of the presumption of innocence, I will not name
them — for which this incident, and blaming Russia
for it, would be extraordinarily beneficial and timely.
What motive could the British Prime Minister possibly
ascribe to Russia for liquidating Sergei Skripal, who,
after his prosecution, sentencing, prison term, pardon
and handover to the British authorities, no longer posed
any kind of threat to my country? But he is perfect
for the role of victim, who can be used to justify all
sorts of unthinkable lies, smears and derogatory public
relations aimed at blackening Russia’s reputation.
We have been repeatedly warning that some kind of
provocation along these lines could happen on the eve

18-070969/12

S/PV.8203

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

of major events. Today we are witnesses to the fact that
the Government of the United Kingdom will stop at
nothing to deliberately tarnish Russia.
In his stories about Sherlock Holmes, the classic
British writer Arthur Conan Doyle, famed in his
own country and very popular in Russia, features a
somewhat incompetent and comic character, Inspector
Lestrade of Scotland Yard. He is not terribly intelligent
and deduction is not his forte. His role is to serve as
a foil for Sherlock Holmes’s extraordinary detective
powers. He instantly seizes on the superficial clues
to a crime and rushes to draw obvious conclusions so
that he can then be refuted by Holmes, who always
discovers the real motive and clues behind the crime.
God forbid I should suspect the current incumbents
of Scotland Yard of unprofessionalism, although I do
think that it would not hurt to have a Sherlock Holmes
around today. Today, however, the people playing the
role of the collective Inspector Lestrade are highlevel members of the British Government, spouting
irresponsible, unfounded, superficial, monstrous
accusations that have far-reaching consequences.
Russia calls on Britain’s Government officials to
renounce these practices of their nineteenth-century
imperial past — the language of ultimatums, unproven
accusations and threats — give up their neocolonialist
ways and to return to life under the law. In situations
such as those described in Theresa May’s claims, the
standard thing to do is to turn to instruments of legal
assistance. To sum up, we would once again like to state
the following.
Russia had nothing to do with this incident. We
consider London’s ultimatums null and void. We expect
the United Kingdom to act in strict compliance with
the Chemical Weapons Convention and other relevant
international instruments, including the European
Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters,
as well as to provide samples of the substance that the
British investigation refers to for joint investigation,
since it says that it is of Russian origin. That is a
mandatory requirement under the Convention, not an
optional one. We are ready for an investigation. We
have nothing to fear and nothing to hide. We have
already spoken about the procedure in paragraph 2
of article IX of the Chemical Weapons Convention. If
the clarifications provided are considered inadequate,
we can turn to the OPCW’s governing bodies. That
is the only civilized way to settle the issue. As long
as we are being accused of violating the Convention
10/12

14/03/2018

with absolutely no proof, there is no other way to
proceed. Until we can have a productive dialogue with
specialists in this area we will not get anywhere. We are
ready to cooperate openly and constructively within the
framework of the OPCW.
In conclusion, we would like to circulate a draft
press statement that sums up my statement and
emphasizes the importance of activating the procedure
in article IX of the Chemical Weapons Convention. We
hope that all Council members will support it.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands supports the
remarks made by the representative of the United
Kingdom, who brought to our attention the urgent
matter before us today. I would like to underline
three points. They are about, first, our solidarity with
the United Kingdom; secondly, the use of a chemical
weapon; and thirdly, the importance of accountability.
Until the beginning of this month, it would have
been hard to imagine a more peaceful place in the
world than Salisbury, a quiet, historic town among the
rolling hills of southern England. But its peace has
been brutally disturbed. A man and his daughter were
poisoned with a nerve agent. The United Kingdom was
shocked. The world was shocked. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands was shocked. On behalf of my Government,
Stef Blok, our Minister for Foreign Affairs, has strongly
condemned the attack and expressed our solidarity with
the United Kingdom. People in the Netherlands feel for
Yulia and Sergei Skripal and hope for the recovery of
all the victims. We fully understand the outrage of the
United Kingdom authorities. We also understand why
this new incident is particularly painful for the people
of the United Kingdom, who still have vivid memories
of the brutal murder, using radioactive polonium, of
Alexander Litvinenko in the heart of London. Now the
United Kingdom finds itself dealing with a new and
different case, of which the full details are yet to be
determined. But one thing is already beyond doubt. No
State can or should accept attacks that take place on its
sovereign territory. The United Kingdom can count on
the full solidarity of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
in this.
My second point is about the use of a chemical
weapon. We are gravely concerned about the type of
weapon that was used in this attack, a military-grade
18-07096

14/03/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

nerve agent and a substance that no regular criminals
could easily get their hands on. This is the first time
since the end of the Second World War that a nerve
agent has been used in Europe. The recklessness of the
act is beyond words. This nerve agent was used in a
public space with many unsuspecting civilians around.
It could have had even more horrible effects. I would
also like to reiterate that any use of chemical weapons
is abhorrent. The Kingdom of the Netherlands regards
this a threat to international peace and security. It
should therefore be a matter of concern for the Council,
and we commend the United Kingdom for bringing it to
our attention. After the recent chemical-weapon attacks
in Syria, the attack in the United Kingdom is another
warning to the world that we must step up our vigilance
if we are to prevent the use of such weapons of mass
destruction. We underline the important role of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
in The Hague in that regard.
That brings me to my third and final point, which
is accountability. There must be no impunity for this
crime. My Government has stated that the Kingdom of
the Netherlands fully supports the United Kingdom in
its quest for the truth, and we call on all other countries
to do so as well. The United Kingdom authorities had
urged the Russian Federation to provide answers to
their questions by yesterday. After Russia’s failure to
do so, we can understand why Prime Minister May
announced bilateral measures earlier today. We see
no reason for Russia to continue to refuse the United
Kingdom’s request. Nor do we see any legitimate reason
why anyone should try to delay, sidetrack, second-guess
or discredit the investigation carried out by the United
Kingdom authorities. The international community
cannot shrug its shoulders over this crime as if nothing
had happened. The United Nations, the Council and
all Member States should cooperate with the United
Kingdom as it continues to investigate this gruesome
act. The perpetrators should be brought to justice.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): My Russian
colleague has asked some questions that I thought I
should answer.
He asked why we came to the Security Council.
Is the Security Council not where a country comes

S/PV. 8203

when there has been a threat to international peace and
security or an unlawful attack on it?
He asked if we will work with Russia here. Of
course we will. We believe in the United Nations and its
Security Council. We believe in the international rulesbased system. We want the Council to work together to
uphold international peace and security and to resolve
conflict together. Of course we will work with Russia
to achieve those aims here in the Council.
I set out in detail how the Chemical Weapons
Convention works and its article IX in particular.
The Council members have heard from me and from
our Russian colleague, so I will not go into it in great
detail again. I will simply say that under article IX,
we have asked Russia for an explanation. Russia’s
response was to say that it considered our request to
be null and void. We have also asked the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to support
us with an independent verification of our analysis.
Our Russian colleague talked about samples, but once
again, that is a misunderstanding of the Convention.
There are no provisions in the Convention that require
the United Kingdom to share samples collected as part
of a criminal investigation. The Chemical Weapons
Convention does provide inspected State parties with
a right to have duplicate copies of samples taken for
the purposes of an inspection, but Russia is not an
inspected State party in this case.
We are asked why we were so keen to request a
quick answer. That comes from our past experience. One
of the key tactics in the Russian playbook is to delay,
delay, delay — distract and mire in procedural delay.
We know that, of course, from the tragic Litvinenko
case in 2006. We waited for months in the hope that
Russia would cooperate with our requests to extradite
and investigate the known suspects. We waited in vain,
and we will not make the same mistake again.
Finally, my Russian colleague quotes fiction. Let
me quote the Russian President when we think about
who benefits. In 2010, he said,
“Traitors will kick the bucket, believe me.
Those other folks betrayed their friends, their
brothers-in-arms. Whatever they got in exchange
for it, those 30 pieces of silver they were given,
they will choke on them.”

18-0709611/12

S/PV.8203

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am not planning to engage in a detailed
discussion with my British colleague. I have already
said everything I wanted to say in my statement.
I just want to emphasize one thing, which is that
we have not received a formal request, in line with the

12/12

14/03/2018

Chemical Weapons Convention, to which we were and
remain ready to respond. We were given a 24-hour
ultimatum. Once again, let me stress that we have no
intention of responding in a tone or form like those of
the unsubstantiated accusations made against us before
we had the opportunity to respond. But we are ready to
cooperate with the British Government in investigating
this sad incident. In my opinion, nothing that I said
earlier contradicts that.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

18-07096
