UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/12
19 March 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3643rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 March 1996, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Sierra Leone", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the Parliamentary and Presidential
elections held in Sierra Leone on 26 and 27 February 1996 and the second
round of Presidential elections held on 15 March. It congratulates the
people of Sierra Leone on the courage and determination they have shown in
proceeding with the elections despite difficulties and disruptions, and
pays tribute to all those involved in the success of the elections, in
particular the Interim National Electoral Commission and its Chairman. The
Council stresses the importance it attaches to a peaceful transition to
civilian rule. It welcomes the commitment by the Chairman of the National
Provisional Ruling Council to hand over authority by 31 March 1996 and
calls upon all concerned to cooperate fully with the newly elected
President and Parliament.
"The Security Council notes that the Joint International Observer
Group, which monitored the first round of elections, was impressed by the
’overwhelming desire on the part of the people of Sierra Leone to exercise
their democratic right in casting a ballot for the parties and candidates
of their choice’. They have now done so, and it is incumbent on all
concerned to help them to consolidate the gains that have been made. The
Council is of the view that the circumstances created by the successful
conclusion of the elections in Sierra Leone require redoubled efforts to
end the fighting in that country. It commends the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General and others, in particular the Government of
Côte d’Ivoire, to that end. It reiterates its call to all parties to end
the violence. It calls upon the Revolutionary United Front to accept the
outcome of the election, maintain the cease-fire and enter into a full
dialogue for peace, without any conditions.

96-06688 (E)

190396

/...

S/PRST/1996/12
English
Page 2

"The Security Council calls upon the international community to
provide generous assistance to help in resolving the humanitarian problems
caused by the conflict in Sierra Leone, and to assist the Government and
people of that country in the task of reconstruction that now faces them.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to
monitor the situation in Sierra Leone and to keep the Council informed of
significant developments."

-----
