UNITED NATIONS,

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR

-2136
th

NEW

COUNCIL

MEETING:

’

MAY
10

23 MARC!i&7bfB~~

“’

1982

YORK

CONTENTS

’
Page

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1

Complaint
by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent
Representative
of Angola
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Courfcil
(S/13176).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2136)
of the agenda

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

s
WPV.2136

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the OflcialRecords of the Security Council The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2136th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 23 March 1979, at 5 p.m.
President:

Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China. Czechoslovakia,
France,,
Gabon, Jamaica, .Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Sovjet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

(l&ted Repubfic of Tanzania), Mr. Ha Van Lau (Viet Nam)
and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the places reservedfor
them at the side of the Councif table.
2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2132nd meeting, I invite Mr. Mishake
Muyongb, Vice-President of the South West Africa
People’s Organization (SWAPO), to take a place at the
Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2136)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter ‘dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13176)
The meeting was called to order at 5.35 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda )vas adopted.

Complaint bjr $ngola against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent Represelative of Angola to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13176)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken by the Cbuncil at previous meetings f213Oth. 2132nd,
2133rd and 2135th meetings], I invite the representative of
Angola to take a place at -the Council table, and the
representatives of Algeria, Benin, Botswana, Bulgaria, the
Congo, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, the German Democratic
Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, India, Liberia, Madagascar, Mozambique, Romania, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan, Togo, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Viet Nam and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table and Mr. BouayadAgha (Algeria); Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. Thou (Batswana). Mr. Yankov ~(Bulgaria), Mr. Mon&o (Congo),
Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meg&d (Egypt),
Mr. Worku (Ethiopia), Mr. Florin (German Democratic
Republic). Mr. Sekyi (Ghana), Mr. Yansant (Guitiea),
Mr. Sinclair (Guyana). Mr. faipai (India), Mr. Tubman
(Liberia), Mr. Rabetafika (Madagascar), Mr. Honwona
(Mozambique), Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Mr. Gelaga-King
(Sierra Leone), Mr. Hussen (Somalia), Mr. Rodrigo (Sri
Lanka), Mr. Sal$oul (Sudan), Mr. Koaovi (Togo), Mr. Chafe

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Muyongo (South
West Africa People’s Organization) took a place at the
Council table.
j. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Togo. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
4. Mr. KODJOVI
(Togo) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, I should like to thank you for giving me this
opportunity to participate in the important debate which is
now taking place. The delegation of Togo is happy to
congratulate you most warmly on your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and for
the competent manner in which you have been guiding the
present debate. This is also an opportunity for us to recall
with pleasure the excellent relations which exist between
Nigeria and Togo and to emphasize the particularly
constructive nature of the co-operation between our two
countries within our subiegion and within the West African
Economic Community.
5. Thus, the racists who colonized the southern tip of
the African continent and who are adamant in illegally
occupying Namibia, in their deadly rage and bloodcurdling frenzy, have yet again mobilized against the
People’s Republic of Angola a part of the substantial
military potential that they acquired with what they gained
from pillaging the natural resources of our continent and
from the shameless exploitation of the indigenous populations reduced to slavery in the context of the policy of
apartheid that th$y have set up to perpetuate their infamous
domination. Once again there have been bloodshed and
mourning. The list is long, too long, of the acts of aggression
continually and with impunity perpetrated by the Pretoria
racists and the Salisbury rebels against the countries which
surround the territories which they seek to maintain under
the yoke of their domination.
6. In this forum, the -delegation of Togo wishes to
reaffirm the indignation felt by the Togolese people at the
deadly and co-ordinated attacks that Pretoria and Salisbury
have constantly been launching against the brother frontline countries, in particular against Zambia, Mozambique

and Angola. We wish to pay homage to the memory of the
many victims of the bloody forays organized by the SmithBotha-Vorster clique. We express our sympathy to the
families in mourning and reaflirm our solidarity to the
countries thus afflicted and our unwavering support for the
freedom lighters who are waging a heroic battle in southern
Africa and are ready to make any sacrifice to free their
peoples from the yoke of oppression and slavery.
1

the muzzle of the gun, the force of liberation is there too.
Equally, it is certain that the deathdealing raids of which
they are victims will not deflect the front-line countries from
the justified support they are giving to the freedom lighters.
12. Faced with that situation, the members ofthe Council
must arrive at the appropriate conclusions and take
adequate measures, bearing in mind resolution 428 (1978)
which was adopted on 6 May 1978 and not forgetting that
threats which are brandished about but not carried out
when the circumstances demand they should be weaken
those who make them, particularly when they are levelled at
dangerous fanatics who are determined not, to understand.

7. For us Africans, as for all peoples which really love
peace and justice, the hateful acts of violence, barbarism
and aggression are signs of the decline of those who believe
that they can build their lasting power and prosperity on
racial hatred, on the practice of slavery, on the brutal force
of arms, on the horror of massacres and on wanton and
repeated acts of aggression against young nations.
Although weak, those young nations are entitled to have
their sovereignty respected; because they are weak, they
need to have their sovereignty protected.

13. For our part, we Togolese wish to reaffirm here that
we believe in the virtues of dialogue and that we remain
firmly devoted to the peaceful settlement of international
disputes; in that, we are faithful to the doctrine that the
Association of the Togolese People-our movement-has
established on the basis of the political philosophy of its
founder and guide, General GnassingbC Eyadema. But all
the parties must accept dialogue, or be prepared to accept it
and to make it useful and put it into effect:There must be a
will to resolve conflicts, and not inhuman oppression that is
deliberately prolonged. The parties must be prompted by
good faith; they must heed or be able to heed the voice of
reason; they must respect or be capable-of ‘respecting the
rules whose observance is a precondition for the survival of
the human community. As we all know, .that is not true of
the fanatics of racism, slavery and warmongering. For that
reason we shall continue to guarantee our’support for the
liberation movements and our active ,and unwavering
solidarity with our brother front-line countries until the
inevitable final victory, that is, until the cdmptete liberation
of the peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa.
.
14. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker’is‘the representative of Sierra Leone. I invite him to take, a place at the
Council table and to make his statement. 1

8. I hardly need to remind this assembly-whose
members are perfectly aware of the heavy responsibilities
incumbent upon them-that it is for the Security Council to
organize international security by prohibiting war, by
eradicating its causes and by setting in motion appropriate
measures, on the basis ,of the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, to neutralize the racist
minorities whose villainous deeds jeopardize the dignity
and territorial integrity of sovereign States and pose a
serious threat to international peace.
9. The Charter, as everybody knows, provides for specific
sanctions to be applied against States guilty of acts of
aggression, particularly when those acts of aggression are
deliberate and repeated. We fully share theconviction of the
vast majority of United Nations Members which believe
that the only means to bring to ‘heel the sinister and
warmongering regimes of Vorster-Botha and Smith is to
apply against them the enforcement measures laid down in
the Charter so as to render harmless those inveterate
sources of conflict.

15. Mr. GELAGA-KING
(Sierra Leone): As 1 am now
addressing the Council, Sir, for the first time since your
assumption of offtce as President for the month of March,
allow me to proffer to you my sincere congratulations and
to associate myself with all the worthy sentiments expressed
by previous speakers about your diplomatic skill and
panache in conducting the nerve-racking affairs of this
august body.
‘

10. Those regimes have flouted the Organization for
many years and trampled underfoot the decisions of the
Security Council and the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly. By committing acts of armed aggression against
sovereign countries time and time again and by maintaining
a state of war in southern Africa, they have given proof that
they are as impervious to the efforts undertaken so far to
make them repent as granite is to oil. Their pirouettes
prevent the process of a negotiated settlement from being
successfully conducted. By nature and doctrine, those
regimes are essentially rebellious to dialogue and, because
they are fundamentally warmongering and inhuman, it is an
illusion to expect that they will stop bombing, destroying
and killing or that they will cease stifling the legitimate
aspirations for independence and freedom of the peoples
which they keep in slavery. It is fruitless to expect a hungry
wild beast to release its prey.

16. Coming as I do from Sierra Leone,-which is on the
same side of Africa as your great country, Nigeria, and with
which your country has had not only great historical bonds
in the educational, social and economic spheres and in our
nostalgic fight for freedom and independence, but also wellcemented ties of kinship and friendship ,which have been
fostered and strengthened through the ages, my delegation
feels a particular and unique closeness to you at this time
and pledges our full support in making your arduous task a
bearable one. I have no doubt that, with your experience as
a seasoned diplomat and with your acknowledged abilities,
your month in oflice will be a successful one.

11. It is a known fact that the Salisbury and Pretoria
warmongers will continue to thwart any possibility of a
negotiated and just settlement. A failure of the efforts
undertaken to arrive at such a negotiated settlement cannot
but strengthen the liberation movements in their determination to pursue their just struggle by all means available,
with the conviction that, while the force of oppression is in

17. I wish also to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to
your predecessor, Mr. Bishara of Kuwait, for the tine way in
which he presided over the Council as it dealt with the
turbulent affairs of the month of February.
2

232 Quite clearly it is the current policy of the white
minority racist r&me of South Africa to intimidate and
subdue, by acts of exceptional brutality and the basest
cruelty, the courageous people of Angola. They hope that
by the wanton destruction of lie and property the front-line
States will be compelled to withdraw their support for the
liberation movements in southern Africa. But this is a
miscalculation, just as they miscalculated when they tried to
throttle, at ,its birth’ in 1975, the People’s Republic of
Angola.

18. About two weeks ago the Council wasconvened to
consider Rhodesia’s naked and wanton aggression against
the People’s Republic of Angola and, during the same
month, Zambia also became a victim of yet another
barbaric act committed against it by that same regime. And
here we are again today assembled to consider yet another
shameless and brutal act by the racist white minority r&me
of South Africa against the peace-loving people of Angola.
These aggressive and provocative acts committed by Fascist
South Africa against Angola and, indeed, all the front-line
States are, in our view, not only a serious and dangerous
infringement of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
these States but also a major threat to the peace and security
of their peace-loving citizens. Quite obviously, therefore,
the time has come when the Council should take firm and
resolute action against the racist r&ime.

24. On 6 May 1978 the Council adopted resolution 428
(1978), which, inter a&a, admonished South Africa and gave
notice that, in the event of further acts of violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola, the Council
would meet again in order to consider more effective
measures in accordance with the appropriate provisions of
the Charter, including Chapter VII thereof.

19. One would have expected that at this time, when new
proximity talks have been foisted on us as a result of South
Africa’s intransigence, sanity would prevail over Botha and
his racist clique. One would have expected them, if they
were reasonable human beings, to co-operate peacefully
with the international community and the Western five in
their efforts to solve the problem of Namibia, which has
plagued the United Nations for such a long time. But
unfortunately South Africa continues to show itself in its
true colours. Pretoria’s continued acts of aggression against
the States of southern Africa are an open manifestation of
that r&ime’s.desire to frustrate all genuine efforts by this
world body. to ,bring about the peaceful transition of
Namibia to independence.

25. We believe that the time has now come to proceed
from words to deeds, to move away from hortatory
resolutions and take such decisive and resolute actions as
would compel the white minority racist regime of South
Africa to comply with the resolutions of this world body,
stop its unprovoked attacks against neighbouring States
and allow United Nations-supervised elections in Namibia.
‘26. Accordingly, Sierra Leone will support any draft
resolution in terms of Chapter VII of the Charter requesting
mandatory action to bring about cessation of the following:
supplies of petroleum, petroleum products or other strategic materials to South Africa; loans to and investments in
South Africa; guarantees or other inducements for investments in South Africa; tariff and other preferences for
imports from South Africa; all trade with South Africa,

20. In his letter of 19 March addressed to you /S/13180,
apex], Mr. P&lent,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
South Africa portrayed the arrogance and impudence of his
Government by. stating in the fourth paragraph:

27. South Africa is not beyond coercion. The Fascist
minority racialists have been successful in ridiculing international public opinion because they are convinced that
they have powerful Western backers who because of their
huge investments and equally huge profits would turn a
blind eye to the atrocities committed by that racist regime.
But perhaps the time is fast approaching when the credibility of those States that would have us believe that they are
sincere and genuine in their abhorrence of apartheid and
racial discrimination will be put to the test for the world to
see and judge.

“SWAP6 cattempting to take over by force political
power in South West Africa, thus depriving the inhabitants of’South West Africa of their right of selfdetermination‘ and making impossible their quest for
independence through constitutional means.”
21. How ludicrous can the South Africans deliberately
make themselves? Here we have the racist regime, illegally
occupying Namibia and arrogantly flouting the numerous
resolutions of the United Nations requesting that regime to
terminate its illegal occupation, glibly and nonchalantly but
falsely accusing SWAPO, the sole authentic representative
of the heroic peoplebf Namibia, of*‘attempting to take over
by force political power”. Who has in fact taken over
political power by force: SWAP0 or the racists? The facts
speak for themselves.
:.
22. What SWAP0 is doing-and in this it has the wholehearted support of my Government-is using every means
at its disposal to end the illegality by trying to root out the
racist militarists of South Africa from its country, Namibia.
The South Africans, for their part, have shown and
continue to show that they have,no wish to implement the
agreement reached with the five Western Powers. They have
made known to the world by their fraudulent manceuvres
aimed at SWAPO, by their barbarous and perfidious
attacks on the newly independent Republic of Angola and
other front-line States, by their double-dealing and doubletalking, that they have no intention whatsoever of abandoning their illegal hold on mineral-rich Namibia.

28. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Madagascar. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
29. Mr. RABETAFIKA (Madagascar) (interpretationfiom
French): Mr. President, permit me to expresson behalf of my
delegation particular satisfaction at seeing a distinguished
representative of Nigeria presiding over this meeting of the
Security Council. The qualities that have always distinguished you, which are a credit to your country and to the
whole of Africa, are for us a guarantee of harmonious
conduct of the proceedings of the Council. I would also take
this opportunity on behalf of my delegation to thank you,
and through you the other members of the Council, for
permitting us to take part in this important debate.

30. The timing of the most recent acts of armed aggression
committed by South Africa against the People’s Republic of
Angola is not without its significance. It is, indeed, striking
3

that we have been called here to discuss tne violation of an
internationally recognized frontier, the use of considerablemilitary resources to commit aggression against a country
that is a sovereign Member of the United Nations, and the
attack on political refugee camps in foreign territory at the
very time when those responsible for these crimes have been
invited by others to the negotiating table to decide on
Namibia’s future; by this I mean the proximity talks going
on in New York this week. 31. One might have thought that the imminence of these
discussions would perhaps encourage the Pretoria leaders
to be more moderate and to curb, if only for a short period,
their instincts of rapine and their disregard for the life and
property of Africans, whether they be Namibians, Angolans or South Africans. One might have thought also
that, in order to justify the confidence and credence. which
some persist in according them, and in order to facilitate the
consummation of a settlement process-which, incidentally, is an extremely good deal for them-the South
Africans would be more careful in their international
conduct and would show more respect for the norms
governing inter-State relations. One might have thought
that, in order to echo the appeals of interested bodies for
respect for human rights, particularly when it is a question
of nationals of countries with which it would appear to
share the same political, economic and other concerns, the
South’African regime might, as a sign of go.odw$l, have
decided to free 51 prisoners, including Nelson Mandela of
the African National Congress, Toevo of SWAP0 and
John Pokeila of the Pan Africanist Congress. That the
champions of human rights should not have called for this
as a prerequisite for taking into account the alleged interests
of South Africa. in Namibia is to say the least surprising.

35. All we can say is that th?%Fexists a “credibility gap”
which some people seem to wish to ignore. They go about
preaching moderation in one place and in another proposing so-called peaceful settlement procedures that are
nothing but booby-traps lining the route to the true
..
liberation of the Africans.
36. The armed aggression against the People’s Republic of
Angola is further proof of South Africa’s “intention of
establishing a permanent presence in Namibie and simply
represents one further episode in its policy of creating a
buffer zone which would isolate the count$of apbrrheid
from the rest of independent Africa. And.whp is unaware
that the active support given by Pretona,,,to the illegal
Salisbury regime and the futile attempts to oppose change
in Zimbabwe all fall within the framework ofthis policy, for
whose,triumph the minority and racist regime would stop at
nothing?
‘.
37. In the light of the recent armed incursions by South
African ,armed forces into Angola, and in; the light particularly of the military means used, there are grounds for
supposing that the South African authoritieslare counting
more on, the physical elimination of the ‘members of
SWAP0 than on negotiations, concerning which the possibilities of a peaceful settlement are entertained only in order
politically to demobilize the nationalists, to divide them and
to lull their vigilance in order to strike a moresevere blow at
‘, , ,
them.
. as. I 1
38. South Africa can get along very nicely with this
process of negotiation,’ whose end is ceaseresslypostponed,
where the good faith of one of the parties, is’more than
suspect and where it seems to have beerradopted as a rule
that only the most vulnerable party, SWAPO, has to make
concessions. Indeed, some members of the Council have
invoked the continuance of these negotiation.& oppose the
adoption of effective sanctions provided for under Chapter
VII of the Charter, and this in spite of the seriousness of the
accusations against South Africa. This B all the more
intolerablebecause independent African -countries such as
Angola, Mozambique, Tanzania, Zambia .and Botswana,
which have assumed the historic responsibility of serving as
a rear base for the liberation movements, are considered by
Pretoria as being completely without rights and fair game to
,1
be attacked at will and with impunity.
~.I
39. Certainly, the Security Council, which has not manifested sufficient authority in order to ensure the successof
its sanctions policy against Rhodesia, which has been
prevented from discharging its responsibility for ensuring
the security of the front-line countries victims of aggression,
intimidation ;and acts of internal destabilizauon, and which
as yet has not been able to live up to the hopes of the
liberation movements, bears a large share of the responsibility for the strengthening of this feeling of impunity
which, without doubt, constitutes a major.; strategic factorin
South African policy;
,

32. On behalf. of my Government I repeat the proposal
made by the President of the Democratic Republic of
Madagascar on 21 March 1979, through the SecretaryGeneral, on the occasion of the International Day for the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination, namely, that:
6‘. . . in tribute to the heroism of the‘ thousands of
fighters and nationalists against apartheid and for the
triumph of their cause, .the mercenaries legitimately
detained in Madagascar, those enemies of progress,
freedom and justice should be freed-and some people
seem to be aiming at their liberation-provided
that 51
prisoners who have been condemned to death and
disgrace in South Africa are freed.”
33. Whether we like it or not, there is a link between this
debate and the proximity talks inasmuch as the acts of
which. South Africa is accused affect its good faith as a
partner in the negotiations. The acts which the Pretoria
leaders do not even take the trouble to deny sbow that, in
replying by force of arms to the aspirations of the Namibian
nationalists, the apostles of upurrheici-are against the true
liberation of those nationalists. That is precisely what we
would expect to be the result of the negotiations taking
place at present.

40. Quite obviously, the much discussed -arms embargo
which was adopted a few months ago wastoo little and too
late, a measure which eased the consciences of those who
had armed the racist regime to the teeth, but which did
nothing to alter either that country’s military capacity ‘or its
warlike aims.

34. In challenging the right to political asylum enjoyed by
nationalists and in violating the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the. People’s Republic of Angola, the South
African regime has shown us its true face and has
unmasked its blind hostility to Africans.

41. It is never too late to move forward, and ifthose here
who have dangled the possibility of a negotiated settlement
4

cannot discharge their freely assumed responsibllify, they
must support new, broader sanctions against South Africa,
for the simple reason that the political situation in the
region, instead of improving, has actually deteriorated.
Angola’s complaint is a case which provides prima @it?
justification for these sanctions.
42. The ‘Madagascar delegation associates itself with all
those who have already recalled here the terms of paragraph 8 of resolution 428 (1978). adopted in the wake of
similar acts of aggression committed by South Africa
against the People’s Republic’of Angola. The conditions
have been,met today, it seems to us, for seeing to it that the
sanctions ‘which have constantly been threatened against
South Africa, without being either real or effective, can
finally be’brought to bear against it. Otherwise, we could
only draw the inescapable conclusions about the si.ncerity of
the promises made in the Grganization, and it would no
longer be possible to reproach us forequatingopposition to
the taking of. a decision which is politically necessaryfor the
Council :with the veritable protection of the racist regime at
the expense of the liberation movements, to which we
preach patience and moderation.
43. South: Africa, in its communique

of 19 March

/S/13180], ,would have had the Council condemn SWAPO,

but nothing done by a regime which is past worrying about
one more or .one less contradiction can surprise us any
more. However, the experience we all have had with the
Council would tend to suggest that in similar casesthere has
all too often been a tendency to place the aggressor and the
victim on. an equal footing by referring to them in mealymouthed fashion
as ‘.‘interested parties**.
,<._
44. In this particular case we do not believe the Council
will go that-far, but we should like to say right now that we
categoricz#y repudiate, in the name of a morality which is
as valid as the supposedly democratic principles. which
people invoke hollowly, any attempt, from whatever source
and no matter what form it may take, which wouldtend to
call into question the legitimacy of SWAPO’s struggle until
the total liberation of Namibia and the courageous commitment of .Angola to internationalist solidarity.
,i.: :
45. We back fully the cause of our brothers and sisters in
southern Africa and the front-line countries. They may rest
assured of.our wholehearted militant solidarity.
,.‘
46. The PRBSIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Liberia, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to’ make his statement.
.
47. Mr. :TUBMAN (Liberia): Mr. President, my delegation is proud to extend congratulations to you, a brother
African, for, the able manner in which during this month
you are presiding over the affairs of the Security Council.
Africa, our great motherland, has many friends indeed,and
in our fight against racism in Southern Africa many
opportunities have been afforded and are still occurring for
those friends to show by their deeds no less than by
their words meaningful suppdrt for Africa. Support from
friends, especially in times of need ordifficulty, in Africa as
elsewhere,.is always to be.welcomed. Yet, we Africans have
always known that only Africa can save itself, and by its
own exertions. This is why, Sir, seeing you playing so
effective a role in advancing African interests, not only on
the Council but on other United Nations bodies, particu-

Iarl$Qhe Special ammittee
against Apartheid gives pride
an&satisfaction to my delegation.
48. This debate has already grown quite lengthy. The
endurance of suffering by African people, long tried in
struggles against racism, colonialism and deceit, needs no
further testing here. I could in my statement today repeat
and elaborate upon the shocking indictment of South
Africa that has been laid before the Council by the
representative of Angola, but my words could never match
in eloquence and effectiveness the anguished pleas of the
Angolan people that have been so movingly articulated here
by their able spokesman. The endorsement of the indictment by Angola already voiced in this debate by the
representatives of Zambia and other front-line States,
whose people even at this moment live under threats of
outbursts of South African aggression, cannot be enhanced
through further repetition by States less directly affected.
Such repetition could lessen the’ impact that the grave
complaint by Angola deserves to make upon the Council.
But be all this as it may, Liberia has asked to speak in order
to declare its fun and unwavering support for the brotherly
Republic of Angola in the complaint against South Africa
that it has lodged with the Council. Independent Africa’s
solidarity with Angola is all the more appropriate because
Angola’s sufferings today are the direct consequences of its
own staunch support for the Namibian people and their
courageous liberation movement, SWAPO, in their light to
rid their country of-South Africa’s illegal occupationand to
attain genuine independence. .
49. South Africa’s armed attacks against Angola are not
new, nor is this the first time that those attacks have been
brought to the attention of this body. Only last year, in its
resolution 428 (1978) the Council, having condemned
South, Africa for its savage bombing of Angolan territory,
warned that in the event of further attacks by South Africa
against Angola enforcement measures under Chapter VII
of the Charter would be con$dered for possible application
against the Pretoria regime. In’spite of that solemn warning,
South Africa’s attacks upon Angola have, in fact, been
intensified.
50. The Pretoria Government’s disregard for African lives
and world opinion, plus its contemptuous treatment of the
United Nations, continue to be demonstrated over and over
again with impunity.
51. My delegation could, as others have done before us,
consider these attacks by South Africa against Angola as
attacks against all independent African States-and indeed
they are.
52. My delegation could go on, as others before us have
done, and term these attacks by South Africa against
Angola as attacks against all countries of the non-aligned
movement-and indeed they are.
53. My delegation could go even further, as others have
already done, and condemn these attacks by South Africa
‘against Angola as attacks against the Organization and
against world peace-and in truth they are.
54. But were we to arrive at such awesome conclusions,
what would we then do? The whole world knows that
neither my country nor, unfortunately, the collectivity of
independent African countries are at the present time

the promise in its resolution 428 (1978) to consider invoking
enforcement measures under Chapter VII of the Charter if
Angola were again attacked by South Africa. Renewed and
widespread South African attacks against Angola have
taken place, and that suffering nation, trusting in resolution
428 (1978) has come back to this body seeking redress.
Angola’s hopes and the eyes of the whole world are fixed
upon the ‘outcome of this debate. That outcome must not
give comfort to racists at the expense of the lives of innocent
Angolans. At the very least, the Security Council must not
disregard its own resolution.

militarily prepared to back our condemnations of South
Africa’s racism and aggression by overwhelming force. But,
as I stated earlier, Africa is not without friends, and while
our countries may not be strong today this will not be the
rxise always.
55. In any case, the Charter of the United Nations, under
which we have lived for more than 33 years, provides for
collective security. Under the Charter, the view that might
makes right has been expunged absolutely from international relations. Countries that are the victimsof aggression are not left by the Charter to rely only on their own
strength to repel aggression. The Charter places primary
responsibility upon the Security Council to curb aggression
and to maintain worid peace. For this reason, it is not
enough that the Council should repeatedly condemn South
Africa’s continuing aggression while at.the same time doing
nothing to halt it. The aggression that has occurredand that
continues to be perpetrated by South Africa in Namibia,
against Angola and throughout southern Africa threatens
international peace. The Council is therefore duty-bound to
take urgent and effective measures to remove those threats.
The discharge by the Council of its most important
responsibility to protect peace depends crucially- upon the
positions taken by those States whose membership in this
body is permanent and in whom the power of veto has been
vested. Unfortunately, quite often the power of veto has
been used to frustrate the Council’s search for peace. We
realize that when use of the veto is threatened or when the
veto is actually used this is because there exists a clash
between the interests of the States which have this power to
veto. Such, often very selfish, uses of the veto are most
dismaying, but they are none the less understandable. But
here we are dealing with racism. Is there any member of the
Council that considers the protection of racism to be in its
interest? Racism is in nobody’s interest. In fact, racism in
the long run can only jeopardize the interests of even the
white minorities in southern Africa that practise it today.
Why then is this body not being encouraged-especially by
those noble and enlightened States, champions of fair play,
liberty and human rights-to take effective measures to
root out the cancerous aberration of apartheid which
menaces Africa’s progress and threatens the peace of the
world? Regrettably, it is becoming increasingly difficult to
escape the conclusion that the Council’s failure to act
effectively in the face of repeated acts of aggression by racist
South Africa is not because certain friends of South Africa
are unable to act but because they are unwilling.

58. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Angola has
asked to speak, and I now call on him.
59. Mr. DE FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): I have requested
permission to speak briefly merely to reiterate a few points.
I am quite sure that my colleagues do not need to be
reminded of certain facts; however, the racist reach is as
notoriously long as its memory is conveniently short.
60. The People’s Republic of Angola is the plaintiff in this
case before the Security Council. It is Angolan territory and
Angolan nationals who are the victims of the ceaseless
armed attacks being carried out by the racist, Fascist,
minority regime of South Africa, It is Angolan borders that
are daily being violated and crossed. It is sovereign Angolan
air space that is being constantly violated. It is Angolan land
that is being trodden by the racist boot. And it is Angolan
lives that are being sacrificed on the altar of racism, aparfheid and imperialism.
61. It is the racist South African junta that isin the dock,
charged with crimes against humanity, for thus has the
United Nations defined apartheid. And it is not we who have
put the South African racists on the stand. That was done
by the international community a long time ago. We are
bringing yet another set of charges, one in a long series.
However, Africa feels that the racist regime of South Africa
has not yet been brought to trial. It has never been seriously
convicted for its crimes. Or should I say that, ,though the
Fascist junta has been convicted, it has not served a single
day of its sentence-saved by its friends in high.places, by
allied imperialist interests.
62. Were it not for the countless lives lost, were it not for
the deaths of my brothers and my comrades, I might have
permitted myself some slight amusement over the letter
addressed to you, Sir, by the racist Foreign Minister of
South Africa [S/13180]. This is the essenceof racism-the
utter disregard for black lives, the transformation of their
murder into jest and cynicism, and the gall in presenting the
‘draft” of a “resolution” which seeks to castigate and
condemn SWAPO.

56. Racist South Africa has made no secret of the fact that
it would sooner engulf the whole of southern Africa in war,
even a nuclear war, rather than abandon apartheid. Why
should people with such fanatical notions be humoured?
Why should they, as a result of that humouring, be allowed
to weaken the Council, a vital organ of the Organization,
upon whose enduring credibility the future of mankind
depends?

63. Furthermore, the racist Foreign Minister of South
Africa has the. temerity to link these meetings of the Security
Council to the proximity talks. We requested the convening
of the Council to protest against the armed ground and air
attacks on our territory and our people by the white,
minority regime of Pretoria. If this debate is seen as having
any peripheral effect on the talks across the street, that effect
has to be attributed to the sabotage planned and carried out
by the racist Pretoria junta-again, classic Kassinga tactics
calculated to force the victim to appear. to be in the wrong!

57. My delegation cannot commend too highly the
Western Powers for the pains they have taken and the
patience they have demonstrated to resolve conflicts in
southern Africa peaceably, but, because of South Africa’s
continued intransigence, these Powers may wish to consider
whether the time has not come for South Africa to be told
squarely that enough is enough. The fact that proximity
talks on Namibia-not
on Angola-are taking place at this
time is really no reason why the Council should go back on
6

64. I shall not repeat the details I presented threedays ago
[213&h meet&I of the latest series of South African
attacks. But further to illustrate my point, I should like to
state that the latest round ofthese racist military raids began
on 5 March when South African Mirage aircraft began
bombing the Cunene province in Angola. The bombing,
plus strafing from helicopter gunboats and mining operations on accessroads by ground forces, continued along our
southern border. Many villages were totally burned down.
On 13 March the South African bombers hit Kahama, 100
miles inside the Angolan border, and South African ground
troops moved towards the Calueque Dam.

not follow the course of action outlined in it. Was not that
resolution adopted by the Council? Since it was,we are now
perfectly within our rights to ask for “more effective
measures*’ and that is what we are attempting to do in the
draft resolution that we hope will come before the Council.
We cannot wait and allow these wanton attacks to take
place at South Africa’s whim. Even today as I address the
Council more and more of my compatriots are dying of the
injuries sustained in South African bombardment and
napalming. The Council could go on adopting resolutions
ad infinitum; however, until the international community
can strike South Africa where it hurts, right at the roots of
its economic &tern, my people will continue to die.
Compared to the damage and destruction wrought by
South Africa in southern Africa by its apartheidsystem and
by its racist military activities, this resoiution does not meet
justice even half-way.

65. I should like to ask the racist South African Foreign
Minister whether he has ever seen the bodies of napalmed
children? I am quite sure of the answer, because lily-white
children play in safety in all-white playgrounds in South
Africa; guarded from harm by black nannies. I am truly
sorry when I think that these privileged white children may
one day perpetuate their racist, uparrheidsystem. It is tragic
when anyone, especially youth, grows up alienated from
what the world could offer to all its inhabitants. The tragedy
is compounded by the fact that the collusion of Western
imperialism keeps those playgrounds segregated, the sup
port of Western transnationals keeps the ghettos alive, and
the supplies, of Western arms merchants keep our graveyards in a state of perpetual expansion.

69. I wait to see whether some of my colleagues in the
Security Council will continue merely to pay lip-service to
the ideals of international law, justice and freedom, or
whether they are finally ready to translate some of their
words into action by voting afIirmatively on the draft
resolution which we hope will come before the Council very
soon.
70. I should also like to refer here to the news reports of
the electronic monitoring of certain borders in southern
Africa. On this matter, I wish to state that, although the
Western five and the United Nations are certainly free to
reach whatever accommodation they are able to work out
with the parties concerned, the Government of the People’s
Republic of Angola will not allow even a single strand of
barbed wire to be placed even one inch inside our borders.
Monitoring of our borders, electronic or otherwise, will
have to take place outside our borders, not inside them. We
reiterate our willingness to cooperate fully with the Secretary-General’s plan for Namibia, but we insist on the full
exercise of our sovereignty-political,
military, diplomatic
or territorial. In this matter, we will admit of no compromise and accept no betrayal of our revolution.

66. On an allied matter, I should like to state that it is
evident from South Africa’s behaviour and from its statements that it has already created the outline of a neocolonial “internal settlement” such as that imposed by its
Salisbury allies. South Africa has pushed its puppet groups
into prominence-with which the West acquiesced-all in
preparation ‘for a possible “unilateral declaration of independence”: South Africa has already announced that its
civil servants “will stay on in Namibia after independence’*.
And a miraculous “development corporation” has surfaced
to demand economic planning for labour-intensive projects
in the region to provide “better opportunities for the people
of the Territory*‘. Read that to mean “perpetuation of the
economic privileges enjoyed by South African and other
transnational corporations”: in short, the survival and
growth of economic imperialism, for whose support a
politico-military imperialism must be maintained.

71. Africa has pride, dignity and courage. It has an intense
desire for freedom, self-determination and independence. It
has solidarity for those who seek self-rule, majority rule.
And Africa has sons and daughters enough to tight long
and hard, till racism and imperialism are uprooted from
southern Africa. The “population option” is ours. And the
history of southern Africa will be written in blood, since
that is the only language imperialists and racists employ. It
may be the only language they understand.

67. I need hardly remind my colleagues here of resolution
428 (1978); adopted by this very Council on 6 May 1978,
which not ‘only strongly condemned South Africa for its
aggression against my country and demanded an end to the
illegal South African occupation of Namibia, but also
unequivocally decided

72. Every moment of our lives history is being made;and,
when it is finally recorded, it will be remembered that we
rejected colonialism, racism and imperialism. It will be
remembered that we all along sought to negotiate, for life is
precious. But freedom is dearer; for that we will fight in any
and every language and on any and every battlefield.

“to meet again in the event of further acts of violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s
Republic of Angola by the South African racist regime in
order to consider the adoption of more effective measures, in accordance with the appropriate provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, including Chapter
VII thereof’.

73. The dialectics of the situation demand that history be
written on our terms.

68. South Africa has continued to attack my country since
the adoption of the aforementioned resolution. That is why
the Council is meeting on the issue. But the aforementioned
resolution would make a mockery of the Council if we did

74. The struggle continues; victory is certain.
The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

7

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite
1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may
your

LES

PUBLICATIONS
be obtained
bookstore

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

and, distributors
Nations,
Sales

DES

UNIES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sont en vente
dans
les librairies
deposit&es
du monde
entier.
Informer-vous
aupres
de votre libraire
a : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes.
New York ou Geneve.
HAK

HOJIYVZiTb

LI3flAHSfZ-I

OPI-AHH3AUFiM

OIYbEAHHEHHhIX

et les agences
ou adresser-vous

HAWfR

HJ~~HHR
OwaxwaauHw
06Tbe~mre~ma
HaunR
~oauro
rcynn~b
a ~XH~~KHLIX
xaraJHHBX
H arenrcraax
60 Bcex paRO??a%
mapa.
HaBonn%
cnpamw
06
HsAaHHRX
a
eaule~
KHW~HOM
htarasme
ww nmimre
no aapecy:
Oprannaaqua
06’bennnerinbrx
Harm&
C~KIXHR no nponame
u~nannR.
Hwo-Flop%
HJIH Xerieaa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
partes
Unidas,
Se&on
de Ventas.

Litho in United Nations. New York

DE

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
estin
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Price: sus.

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerias
a su librero
o dirfjase

1.50

y casas distria: Naciones

79-70002-December

1981-2.250
