UNITED

NATIONS

ITY
OFFICIAL
TWENTY-EIGHTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

1728”
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/i 728) , , , , , , . , , , , , , . . a , . . , , , , . , . , , , .
Adoption

of the agenda

Page
1

. , , , . . . . . , . . . , , , , , . , . . . , , , , ,,, . , . . , , . , .

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/10940andCorr.l)
. . . , . . , , , , . . .‘. , , . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . -., . .
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under Security Council resolution
. . . * . . . . I,. . *. . . . , , I I.. . . I1 . . . *. I . . *
331(1973)(S/10929)

S/PV.1728

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in. 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secun’ty Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND TWENTY-EIGHTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, I5 June 1973, at 3.30 pm+
F’resident: Mr. Yakov MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics),
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 728)

1. Adoption

of the agenda,

2. Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/5488):
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/10940 and Corr.1).

gives rise to the question of how long this situation 1sgoing
to continue, especially if one reads paragraph 60 of the
Secretary-General’s report, which states that “during the
period under review there has again been no significant
further progress towards a return to normal conditions”,
Paragraph 93 of the report discloses that:
“AEthougb there have been few intercommunal incidents during the period under review, little progress has
been achieved in the field of military deconfrontation”.
4. In supporting the decision of the Council to extend the
mandate of the Force, my delegation wishes to place on
record its sincere hope that increased efforts will be
undertaken by all parties concerned with regard to the
search for solutions to the frustratingly complex problem
of the island, so that the operation of UNFICYP may come
to a positive end within a reasonable period of time.

5. My delegation’s hope is strengthened by the positive
aspects that have also been revealed in the report. We are
particularly satisfied that major confrontation between the
Adoption of the agenda
parties concerned has at least been avoided. My delegation
furthermore wishes to commend the parties concerned for
having demonstrated self-restraint and co-operation, thus
The agenda wasydopted.
showing their genuine desire to maintain peace and proLetter
dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent mote mutual understanding in Cyprus. The role of
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nationsaddressed UNFICYP in exercising its good offices, where necessary,in
order to prevent the situation from deteriorating should
to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations also be duly noted. My delegation has also taken note of
the involvement of the Food and Agriculture Organization
operation in Cyprus (S/10940 and Corr.1)
and the United Nations Development Programme in assisting the economic progress of Cyprus. The rapid economic
1 . The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian):In accorddevelopment benefiting both communities is heartening,
atrce with the decision taken by the Security Council at the
though efforts should be made to end the disparity in the
previous meeting, 1 intend, with the consent of the Council,
rate of progress of the two communities.
to invite the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece
tu take part, without the right to vote, in the Council’s
6. Despite these somewhat encouraging features of the
consideration of the item on our agenda.
Cyprus situation, my delegation realizes that the present
At the invitation of the President, Mr. 2, Rossides situation on the island is not prone to producing instant
( QJ~II.L(s~,Mr. 0. Olcay (Turkey) and Mr. C I? Panayotacos solutions and that more time, more co-operation and more
goodwill will be needed to achieve a lasting settlement of
(G&cecej took placesat the Council table.
the problem of Cyprus.
-.7 Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): First of all, allow me to
7. My delegation is happy to note that intercommunal
express my high appreciation to the Secretary-General for
talks,
reactivated on the basis of the Secretary-General’s
his comprehensive report, which gives my delegation a clear
aide-memoire
of 18 October 1971 /S/10401, para. 791,
picture
of the activities of the United Nations Peacehave continued during the period covered by this report I In
keeping
Force in Cyprus and the development of the
this regard, my delegation would like to take note of
problem of Cyprus during the last six months.
paragraph 81 of the Secretary-General’s report, in which he
mentions the controversy between the interested parties
3, The Security Council this morning, for the twenty-third
with regard to the concept of an independent, sovereign
time, adopted a resolution authorizing the extension of the
mandate of the Force. This practice of nearly one decade and unitary State of Cyprus.
The ,?zeeting wascalled to order at 3.50 p.‘m.

8. I should like to express our concern over the fact that it
has so far proved impossible for the two communities to
agree, through the intercommunal talks, on a constitutional
framework that will provide for the adequate participation
of the two communities in the Government of the
Republic. However, my delegation believes that continuation of the talks with the assistance of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the two
constitutional experts made available by the Governments
of Greece and Turkey wil1 lead towards a permanent
solution of this sensitive issue acceptable to both communities, a solution that can safeguard the integrity and
sovereignty of Cyprus as an independent non-aligned
country, enabling the people of Cyprus to live in peace,
unity and harmony.

12. Since the intercommunal talks are continuing, we
would not wish to say or do anything which might come in
the way of their progress and eventual success. We shall,
therefore, be content with limiting our remarks to indicate
briefly what, in our opinion, are the fundamental considera.
tions of the situation prevailing in the island.
13. First, we should like to ensure that Cyprus would
continue as a sovereign, independent and unitary State,
This seems to have been already agreed between the parties
and reflects geography, demographic distribution of the
people and the historical experience of the inhabitants, This
is also consistent with the workable political and administrative structure which we believe is necessary for Cyprus,
We would not welcome and would indeed dissociate
ourselves from any moves which may contain the seeds of
partition, even in a distant future.

9. In conclusion, my delegation would like to pay a
tribute to Mr. Osorio-Tafall, the Special Representantive of
the Secretary-General, to Major-General Prem Chand and to
all Ihe members of UNFICYP for their untiring devotion to
the difficult task assigned to them. The resolution just
adopted by the Council again extends the duration of their
duties. My delegation wishes them every success in the
discharge of their complex task.

14. Secondly, we should like to ensure that the fundamental rights of all the citizens of Cyprus, and certainly of
the Turkish community which constitutes nearly 20 per
cent of the population, are guaranteed and protected.
15. Thirdly, we should like to ensure that Cyprus continues as a non-aligned and separate entity.

10. Mr, SEN (India): This morning we voted for a
resolution extending the mandate of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus by another six months. In
doing so, we were conscious that by the middle of
December 1973 the Force would have been on that
troubled and beautiful island for nearly 10 years. There is
universal acknowledgement that the presence of the Force
has had the salutary effect of maintaining general calm and
quiet in Cyprus. On the other hand, particularly during the
last few years, the feeling has been growing and increasingly
voiced that the United Nations presence in this form and for
so many years may not have contributed to the speed with
which all of us would like the negotiations between the
parties to proceed. The best way of dispelling such a
suspicion would be for the parties to come to a rapid
settlement and make it possible for the Force to withdraw.
We are therefore glad to see our colleagues from Cyprus,
Turkey and Greece with us, We welcome the moderation
with which they have presented their views and particularly
the determination they have expressed to achieve a solution
to the Cyprus problem by peaceful means,

16. While, therefore, we would encourage every possible
effort for the parties to come to a settlement and would
indeed welcome and look forward to such a solution in the
very near future, we would, in judging the merits of any
final settlement, apply the considerations I have stated.
17. One immediate problem which we consider must
engage the urgent attention of both the parties is that of
normalization of the relations between the communities,
We think that it is essential that military confrontation
should rapidly be reduced, if not altogether eliminated,
Similarly, we believe that full freedom of movement for the
civilian population, including necessary transport and communication, should be restored. It would also be useful to
continue to promote integrated economic activity and to
bring about better economic relations between the two
communities. These measures are not only good in themselves, but will contribute significantly to the progress of
intercommunal talks and, at the same time, restore to the
island its old and excellent tradition of all the communities
living together in different cities, villages and hamlets in all
parts of the island with a degree of toleration and
understanding.

11 I The Secretary-General’s admirable report also breathes
hope and a sturdy sense of realism. Since the SecretaryGeneral reported on 1 December 1972 [S/10842/, progress
towards the restoration and maintenance of law and order
has generally been satisfactory. The latest report of 3 1 May
1973 also indicates that, during the past six months, the
intercommunal military situation has remained quiet and
that very few incidents have been reported between the
Cypriots of Greek and Turkish origin. Incidents have,
however, occurred within the Greek Cypriot community
itself, but fortunately they did not develop into intercommunal friction. The need for vigilance is clearly
established and we welcome the condemnation by the
Governments of Cyprus and Greece of the use of violence,
irrespective of its origin,

18. The Secretary-General, in paragraphs 72 and 93 of his
report, has drawn our attention to the problem of freedom
of movement and military confrontation and we should like
to support the removal of all steps which come in the way
of normalization and progress towards intercommunal
reconciliation, on the basis of living and working together
from day to day, from week to week and from one year to
another. Meanwhile, we wish both the parties all success in
their efforts and look forward to a programme for an
agreed final settlement, hopefully before 1973 comes to an
end, In this hope we are encouraged by the fact that the
sympathetic and efficient services and goodwill of the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative, Mr. Osorio2

Tafall, the Commander of UNFICYP, Major-General Prem
Chand and all their colleagues and officers with their men
and staff would continue to be available to the parties. The
reconciliation
of the various factors does indeed seem
refreshingly favourable.

been observed, the situation in the area remains essentially
unstable. It is for those reasons that my delegation voted in
favour of the resolution to extend the mandate of the
Force in Cyprus.
24. I wish to conclude this statement by again expressing
the hope that, through peaceful means, Cyprus will
ultimately emerge as a united, independent, sovereign and
non-aligned State. Owing to the very close relations which
my country enjoys with all the parties involved and because
of the strategic importance of Cyprus for international
peace in that troubled region, it is significant, in our view,
that the future of Cyprus should be decided by the free will
of its own people, without any interference or influence
from outside.

19. Mr. ABDULLA (Sudan): 1 should like to explain the
vote of my delegation on the resolution that the Council
adopted at this morning’s meeting. By adopting that
resolution, the Council has once again extended the
mandate of the United Nations Force in Cyprus, thereby
demonstrating once more the willingness of almost all its
members to see that peace obtains in Cyprus.
20. My delegation has read with keen interest the concise
report of the Secretary-General, There are several passages
in the report which give us encouragement and hope. But
there are some passageswhich remind us that the road to a
solution of the problem of Cyprus is not going to be an
easy one and therefore calls for the most unremitting
efforts in that direction.

25. Finally, my delegation wishes to express its appreciation to the Secretary-General and his collaborators,
notably Mr. Roberto Guyer, the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr, Osorio-Tafall and Major-General Prem Chand, for the
efforts they continue to exert in the maintenance of peace
in Cyprus and for assisting the Cypriot people in deciding
the future of their country.

21. On the side of hope, we note that the situation has
remained quiet during the period under review and that
there have been few incidents. We note also that the
observation of the cease-fire has been satisfactory but we
realize that, in the general context of the situation in
Cyprus, that cannot mean much. However, that there exists
an atmosphere in which efforts towards peace-making have
a better chance of succeeding, is a fact whose significance
we cannot underestimate. We hope, therefore, that this
opportunity
will be put to good use by both parties.

26. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) (interpre&tim
from French): The Security Council has suspended its
debate on the question of the Middle East. However, its
attention is still directed to the Mediterranean, to the island
of Cyprus, which is another hotbed of tension and a
potential threat to peace and security in that same part of
the world.
27. For more than nine years, the Security Council has
been meeting at regular intervals to consider the reports of
the Secretary-General’ on the operations of the United
Nations Force in Cyprus. The extension of the mandate of
the Force has become a necessity which confronts us in the
quest for an agreed solution for the maintenance of peace
and security in this part of the world where feelings run so
high. Thus the Security Council has, for the twenty-third
time, once again prolonged the mandate of the Force.

22. Last December almost all the members of the Council
were unanimous in welcoming the reactivation of the
intercommunal
talks, thanks to the initiative of the
Secretary-General. My delegation shares the belief that he
expresses in paragraph 82 of the report that
“the reactivated intercommunal talks are the best instrument for achieving a satisfactory, lasting and agreed
solution
based on the concept of an independent,
sovereign and unitary State with the adequate participation of the two communities”,

28. The Secretary-General’s report in document S/10940
and Corr.1 on the development of the situation in the
island over the past six months, give us grounds for some
hope as to the favorable outcome of the intercommunal
talks, We have noted with satisfaction, on the positive side
of the report, the relative calm over the period under
review, with few incidents between Greek Cypriots and
Turkish Cypriots, which will unquestionably help the
atmosphere of the talks.

It is reassuring, therefore, to note in paragraph 79 of the
report that the “talks have been conducted in a constructive manner” and that in the view of the Special Repro
sentative of the Secretary-General “there appears to be a
good possibility
that a substantial measure of agreement
may be reached on questions of principle”. With the
constructive approach on the part of both parties evidenced
so far, we have no doubt that they will also undertake the
patient
work that is obviously needed to bring the
negotiations to a satisfactory end.

29. Nevertheless, although real progress has been made on
questions of principle, several important problems are still
outstanding, as may be seen from the Secretary-General’s
assessment of the situation, particularly in Chapter III of
his report entitled “Activities towards a return to normal
conditions”.

23. I stated earlier that, in reading the report, one comes
across certain passages which serve as a reminder that the
search for a solution is not an easy task. I was referring to
such passages as the one in paragraph 60, which is not
untypical.
It states that: “during the period under review
there has again been no significant further progress towards
a return to normal conditions”. This underlines the fact
that, despite all the encouraging signs of progress that have

30. One is often tempted to believe that, despite the
resumption of the talks, the two communities, Turkish and
Greek, are still diverging and in fact are moving further and
further apart, rather than coming closer together. My
country, which is very devoted to the principles of freedom
3

38. Panama is a peace-loving nation and we express our
best wishes for the reconciliation of Greek and Turkish
Cypriots so that all inhabitants of the island, without any
distinctions of any kind, may enjoy all fundmental
freedoms.

and national unity of peoples, cannot but deplore the gulf
that still divides the two populations. My delegation
deplores the fact that young people in the two Cypriot
communities continue ignoring each other’s existence and
have even come to the point of hating one another
thoroughly.

39. The conciliatory words of the representatives of
Cyprus, Turkey and Greece this morning have been a source
of great satisfaction to us.

3 1. We share the view of the Secretary-General when he
writes in paragraph 82 of his report that

40, My de!egation understands this problem particularly
well because Panama, like Cyprus, was forced to accept a
trust regime imposed on us to guarantee our independence,
which was at variance with all forms of morality and
principles of international law.

‘&the reactivated intercommunal talks are the best instrument for achieving a satisfactory, lasting and agreed
solution based on the concept of an independent,
sovereign and unitary State with the adequate participation of the two communities”.

41. We congratulate the Secretary-General on his report
which describes United Nations efforts over the past six
months in support of peace in Cyprus. In particular we
point to the excellent job done by the Under-SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Roberto Guyer.

As the Secretary-General has so clearly put it, the quest for
a concerted, just and lasting solution to the problem of
Cyprus rust be based on the idea of an independent and
sovereign Cypriot State that will guarantee the equal rights
of the two nationa components. We hope that the
forthcoming talks will go forward in a spirit of conciliation
and mutual compromise and with a will on both sides to
arrive at a satisfactory solution in the direction of the
national unity of the Cypriot people.

42. I wish to conclude this explanation of our vote by
saying that we are aware of the economic and other
difficulties which the Secretariat has had to confront and,
on behalf of the delegation of Panama, we express our
thanks for the co-operation provided by all those who have
assistedin the case of Cyprus.

32, It is with this hope that my delegation supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General in paragraph 97
of his report, that the mandate of the Force in Cyprus be
extended, and has accordingly voted in favour of draft
resolution S/l 0946,

43. Mr. STUBBS (Peru) (interpretation from Spanish): I
wish to congratulate the Secretary-General on the presenta.
tion of his report, contained in document S/10940 and
Corr.1. This is a very precise and enlightening report and
has proved very useful in our deliberations.

33. Before concluding this brief statement I should like to
associate myself with the preceding speakers, the members
of the Council, in expressing my great appreciation to the
Secretary-General for the unremitting efforts made by him
and his representatives in order to safeguard peace and
harmony in Cyprus.

44. We would also express our appreciation to the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Roberto Guyer and to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, for their important,work, and to the Commander
of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus,
Major-General Prem Chand, on that Force’s efficient
services.

34. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish):
The delegation of Panama voted in favour of draft
resolution S/l 0946 for the following reasons,

45, Security Council Resolution 324 (1972), adopted on
12 December 1972, extended for six months the stationing
of the Force in Cyprus, in the hope that by that time
sufficient progress would have been made towards a finat
solution of the problem, to make it possible to remove the
Force from the area or reduce it considerably.

35. Ever since the General Assembly adopted resolution
2077 (XX) of 18 December 1965, of which we were
co-sponsors, we have advocated unity for the Cypriot
nation without any interference or intervention of any kind
and without any limitations of any kind.
36. The solution of the. problem, in our opinion, must be
sought with a view to Cyprus becoming a united, indivisible
land where the rights of minorities are recognized and
guaranteed.

46. From this report it is clear that, while there is a more
propitious atmosphere at the present time, we are still very
far from a situation which can be considered satisfactory.
The maintenance of the status quo which has been more or
less achieved over the past six months is not a sufficient
guarantee for peace and security on. the island. Suspicion
and fear continue to exist between both communities and
there are obvious economic differences aggravating tension.
Although *it might seem encouraging that the Greek
Cypriots have been overcoming the problem of unemployment, in the Turkish community unemployment continues
to be an acute problem. The same can be said about
services, The Turkish Cypriots must still deal with the
shortages which put them at a disadvantage as compared

37. Ever since the groundwork was laid in 1968 for the
talks which are being pursued today, we have always
believed that it was important to find in Cyprus a plan for a
free, independent and united State. We hope that with
every passing day the threat of a military confrontation will
diminish and that very soon freedom of transit throughout
the entire island will be guaranteed indefinitely and without
restrictiops so that Greek .and Turkish Cypriots may be
reconciled and live in peace..
4

with the other community. There is a dangerous tendency
to continue with separate development in the economic life
of the two areas. There is no doubt that, unless this
situation is corrected, any effort at political stability will be
virIually in vain.

53. As has already been pointed out more than once, there
is and can be no doubt that the settlement of Cyprus’
internal problems is a question for Cypriots themselves. The
legitimate rights of Cypriots, whether Greek or Turkish,
must be respected by all, The Cyprus question can and
should be settled without any interference from outside.

47. Furthermore,
we should like to point as an encouraglng sign to the fact that intercommunal talks have
taken a constructive turn and that there has been goodwill
on the part of the parties, showing a desire to reach
agreement, which should lead to the results which the
entire international
community is anxiously awaiting. It is
obvious that we are still very far from a concrete solution
ensuring peace and security in the island of Cyprus, but the
goodwill of the parties concerned and the presence of the
United Nations in the area indicate that the first steps
which have been taken will lead to a satisfactory conclusion I

54. The Soviet Union firmly opposes any attempt to
infringe on the sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus or to
settle the question of Cyprus without consulting its people,
to the detriment of their vital interests and to the advantage
of outside imperialist forces. In that connexion, the Soviet
delegation would like to repeat once again that the USSR
continues to insist that, in order to guarantee the independence, integrity and sovereignty of the Republic of
Cyprus, all foreign forces should be withdrawn from its
territory and all foreign military bases on its territory
removed.
55. Cyprus is located near one of the “hot spots” in
international relations, the Middle East region, where the
risk of a new armed conflict is stilf present. It is our hope
that the examination of the situation in the MiddIe East in
the Security Council, the first stage of which has only just
ended, will help to make a significant contribution to the
establishment of peace in that area and, as a result, to the
establishment of favourable conditions guaranteeing the
peaceful existence of States in the eastern Mediterranean,

48. Peru has friendly ties with Cyprus and with Turkey
and Greece, and the Cypriot problem has received our close
attention. We earnestly hope that it will be solved in such a
way as to guarantee the independence and protect the
special features of this bicommunal nation, Those are the
reasons why my delegation voted this morning in favour
of draft resolution S/l 0946.
49. The PRESIDENT
(translation from Russian): I should
Iike to take the floor as the representative of the
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS.
-

now

56. Cyprus is also situated very close to Europe. It is quite
natural that the state of affairs on that formerly troubled
continent should have a very direct influence on the
situation in Cyprus. In that connexion, we may note with
satisfaction that the favourable trend towards the relaxation of international tension on the continent of Europe is,
in the eyes of all the peoples of the world, transformed into
an irreversible process of strengthening collective security
and co-operation among all the countries of Europe. This
was once again demonstrated by the success of the
preparatory work for the convening of the Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe. We are convinced
that the Conference will also make a significant contribution to improving the situation in the Mediterranean.

50. In connexion with the Security Council’s adoption of
the resolution
on the Cyprus question, the Soviet delegation would like to state that the Soviet Union has always
based and continues to base its position on the view that
this problem
must be settled by peaceful means in the
interest of reducing tension in that vital area, and in the
interests of all the people of Cyprus.
51. The Soviet delegation has more than once stated in the
Council the position of the Government of the USSR on
the situation
in Cyprus. We have noted that a settlement of
the Cyprus problem must be based on the respect for the
freedom, independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic
of Cyprus, a State Member of the United
Natiorts which has pursued and still pursues a policy of
peace and non-alignment with military blocs.

57. The Soviet delegation views in a positive light the
information relating to intercommunal talks provided in the
Secretary-General’s report on the situation in Cyprus for
the period 2 December 1972 to 31 May 1973. One cannot
disagree with the general conclusion of the report that the
best means of achieving a peaceful, generally acceptable
settlement of the Cyprus problem is the renewal and
continuation, in a positive spirit, of the intercolnmunal
talks, The USSR delegation hopes that the talks will make
it possible to overcome present difficulties and will end
successfully, in the interests of the people of Cyprus and of
the strengthening of peace in the area,
.
58. The report contains a recommendation that the
presence of the United Nations Forces in Cyprus be
extended for a further six-month period, in order to
guarantee norma conditions which will make it possible for
the intercommunal talks to continue, The Soviet delegation‘
did not object to the adoption of a Security Council
resolution extending the presence of the United Nations

52. The Soviet delegation remains firmly convinced that
the more rapid normalization of the situation in Cyprus,
the strengthening
of its, security and the extension of
equitable co-operation with other countries will lead to a
further improvement
in the international standing of the
Republic and will permit it to play an even more significant
role as an important
factor in stabilizing the situation in the
eastern Mediterranean,
As is well known, the Government
of Cyprus and its President have many times affirmed their
adherence
to the ideas of peace, security and mutual
co-operation
with other States. It is .quite obvious, and
may be stated with conviction, that that position has found
and will continue
to find broad support and solidarity on
the part of all peace-loving forces and of international
public opinion.
5

forces in Cyprus until 15 December 1973, bearing in mind
the position of the interested parties, and fust and foremost
the Government of the Republic of Cyprus, on this matter.
Our position is based on the understanding that the
extension of the presence of the United Nations forces in
Cyprus will be conducted in full conformity with the
provisions of the Security Council resolution adopted on
4 March 1964 [186 (1964)] and subsequent Council resolutions on the Cyprus question, that is to say on the
understanding that the present functions of the forces and
the current voluntary financing procedure will be maintained.
59. Speaking again as PRESIDENT, I should like to state
that we have now come to the end of the list of speakers on
the Cyprus question, We shall now hear those who have
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
60, I call on the representative of Cyprus.

61. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I wish to thank aI1 the
members of the Security Council who have participated in
this debate and expressed their support for the independence and sovereignty of Cyprus, and also for non-intep
vention and non-interference in its internal affairs.

Cyprus, That is also the policy of the Government of
Greece, as stated this morning by its representative and I
assume it is also the policy of the Government of Turkey,
46. Is the question of sincerity raised regarding the
promotion of the solution? The sincerity is to be judged
from the conduct of the parties in the talks over the years
and in the promotion of deconfrontation, normalization,
amI conciliation, making solution of the problem possible.
Anyone who cares to look through the reports will find
that on aJI occasions the Cyprus Government has closely
cooperated with UNFICYP for the furtherance of deconfrontation, whereasthe Turkish Cypriot side has not. In the
last report, it is stated that the Government of Cyprus haa
maintained its position that it will accept deconfrontation,
total or partial, and this is to be found in all previous
reports as well. That goes also for normahzation and for
conciliation. Measures of deconfrontation, normalization
and conciliation are necessary preconditions for the solution of the problem and, if the policy of the Government of
Cyprus has all along been to assist and promote these
objectives, its sincerity regarding a peaceful and lasting
solution cannot be in doubt.
67. Reference has been made by the representative of
Turkey to equal partnership. What is required and what the
Turkish Cypriots fuUy enjoy is equal citizenship. But
equality of partnership between 82 per cent and 18 per
cent of the population is a very difficult concept to
understand. I do not say that we do not want to be
generous to the Turkish side, but to demand a complete
equality of partnership in a ratio of I8 to 82 seems to me a
little extravagant. What we want, as I have stated, is of
course equality of rights of citizenship. If there is any
discrimination in Cyprus it is discrimination, at the present
stage at least, against the Greek Cypriot majority and in
favour of the Turkish Cypriot minority. That discrimination is evident from the very fact that, as has been stated
already, the majority does not have complete freedom of
movement in the island. Many roads are closed to it because
of the Turkish enclave, whereas the Turkish minority can
move all over the island without any obstacles.

62. It is gratifying to realize that this is a situation where a
small country has the support of the United Nations and
where the role of force is diminishing in the prospects for
the development of that country. This is an achievement of
tbe United Nations which, in spite of all its difficulties, is
real and true.
63. Now I should like to say a few words to my colleague
and friend, the representative of Turkey, with regard to
some of his remarks. This is not intended to be contra.
versial but merely an elucidation of certain points,

64. First of all, with regard to the question of federation,
my statement was very clear on this. I said that, in the view
of the highest legal authorities, it could not apply to
Cyprus. Therefore it is not a question of choosing or not
choosing federation, because federation does not apply, and
if it were to be applied it would be a constitutional oddity,
incompatible with the realities and therefore bound to fail.
Consequently our position is that we want to have a
solution which is compatible with the constitutional norms
and territorial realities of the situation and therefore be
workable, Federation can neither apply nor function
because there are no separate territorial entities, That is
why it was agreed-indeed it was agreed repeatedly by the
Turkish side and I have the reports here-that it wasto be a
unitary State. I believe that untiJ now it has not been
disputed that it is to be a unitary State,

68. What is the cause of all this trouble in Cyprus? The
cause is the continued policy of separatism, As to the
motivation for this policy, that is something I shall not
enter into now. The fact remains, however, that because of
this policy, the Turkish Cypriot community is suffering.
They are the pawns in a policy of the Turkish Cypriot
leadership, and because they are pawns in that policy they
cannot look after their own interests. We see that the report
of the Secretary-General of May 197 1 says that:

65. With regard to the reference td ‘statements which
might endanger the future and the continued independence
of Cyprus, I wish to place on record that the policy of
Cyprus over the years, in the United Nations and outside, is
well known to be the pursuit of a peaceful and lasting
solution on the basis of sovereign and independent state.
hood and, in the particular instance,, the pursuit of the
intercommunal talks to their successful conclusion on the
basis of the sovereign, independent and unitary State of
6

GC
itI
de1
CY
seip
6!3,

Nal
dis
($1
Wi

Ins1
cm
The
Beu:
idel
whi
70.
PQQ
Pati
ecai
ano
MY
the
rep

71.

Turk
onb
they
eerta
IiOHF,

the
Gove
cith:f
PY
millic
them
then
72.
KBy

Jimc,
Turki
tie I

“It would , . , be difficult to utilize fully and rationally
the human and other resources of the island if the present
trend towards separate economic development is maintained”. /S/l 0199, para. 41.1

super
by th

We therefore see that the separate economic development is
maintained in the cause of separatism, which prevents the
Turkish Cypriot people from participating in the economic
Progress of the island. They are kept outside it by the force
of these circumstances. In spite of that, they are given every
opportunity by the Government to participate and both the

deve:tc
comtn

73. +
dehi

74. 1
inrpor
th roq

Government and private enterprises have offered to invest
in the Turkish Cypriot areas and to supply funds for
developing and raising the standards of the Turkish
Cypriots. But again, because of the same policy of
separatism, they are not allowed to do it.

years,, the Government of Cyprus has been offering to
proceed to eliminate confrontation but that the other side
has not accepted. The same with normalization.
75. These efforts of the Government of Cyprus are
sufficient indication of its intent to proceed seriously and
effectively with normalization, elimination of confronta.
tion and conciliation with a view to solving the problem,
The solution, of course, is a matter for the talks and we
hope that the appropriate spirit will prevail towards arriving
at a workable and lasting solution.

69. My friend referred to the fact that the share of United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) assistance is
disappointingly
low. I see from the report that the Turkish
Cypriot participation and student enrolment at the UNDPassisted Higher Technical Institute and Hotel and Catering
Institute
is still “disappointingly low” [S/10940 and
CW.1, para. 611. This is because they will not participate,
They are free to enrol, but they do not. Why do they not?
Because they are still under the shadow of the separatist
idea, and they cannot move forward towards doing that
which would be to their own benefit.

76. The PRESIDENT (translationfrom Russian):1call or1
the representative of Turkey,
77. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I shall try to be very brief. 1 am
in a rather difficult position because in some ways 1 am in
total agreement with my friend, Ambassador Rossides, and
on some points I am-as he would expect and as, 1 suppose,
members of the Council would expect-in total disagreement. I am happy to say that 1 am in agreement when he
says-solemnly I hope-that the permanent independence of
the island is the main objective of his “Government”. That,
of course, is a very good thing to hear here and is what we
are all striving for. ‘Sometimes 1 have thought that we were
the only ones who were for this permanent independence. I
have a reason for that, as I said this morning, and 1 know
that Mr, Rossides will take exception to these statements of
mine. Of course, it is hard for a simple man like me, who is
trained as a civil servant and is in the habit of attaching
great value to statements by public figures, not to believe
what he hears when the highest officials in a State proclaim
that, after all, their ultimate aim is something else than the
permanent independence of their State.

70. That is why the Secretary-General has repeatedly
painted out that it is necessary, in the interests of all and
particularIy
the Turkish Cypriots, to have an integrated
economy. But they refuse. And here, in the report again,
another aspect is pointed out with regard to public services,
My colleague said that the Turkish Cypriots are not given
the public services to which they are entitled. But the
report explains the reason why. It says that
“normalizing
public services in the area under Turkish
Cypriot control is linked to the attitude of the Turkish
Cypriot leadership concerning such matters as the maintenance of the military status quo and the freedom of
movement
of Greek Cypriot civilians”. [Ibid., para. 94.1
71. If there is no freedom of movement, how can the
Turkish Cypriots get the proper public services? It is not
only very difficult but virtually impossible. That is why, if
they were to allow freedom of movement, they would
certainly get all the public services they may be missing
now, although
the Government does everything to supply
the electricity,
for instance. Here we have it that the
Government
supplies electricity and water for all its
citizens, despite the fact that most of the taxpayers do not
pay their electricity
and water bills. And it runs into
millions of pounds that are not paid, and yet they supply
them, But when they do not allow the employees to enter,
then it is not possible to do it.

78. I believe that out of the 132 Members of this
Organization, the high officials of 131-I do not want to
name names-would shudder at the idea that some day the
independence of their State would come to an end. But I
cannot help it. 1 have documents before me here, but
members need not worry becauseI will certainty not quote
them. However, in case’they are interested, my delegation is
at their disposal to provide ample proof of what 1 mean
when 1 say I consider certain declarations as a threat. But I
am pleased and really thankful to hear my colleague saying
that that does not mean anything really, and that in fact
what the highest authorities in Cyprus mean is a permanent
independence of their island. I am pleased to hear it.

72. In a previous report, mention was made of the Kanli
K&y dam. It was interesting because it marked the first
time, since the outbreak of the disturbances, that the
Turkish Cypriots agreed to allow a Government official into
the main Turkish Cypriot enclave north of Nicosia, to
supervise work done with the building materials provided
by the Government.

79. Now I come to some points of disagreement, and I am
really going to be brief about them, I disagree when
Mr, Rossides says that the highest legal authorities are of
the opinion, for instance, that the adoption of the form of
federation is impossible. Not, I repeat, that 1 am for
federation or for any other form, because first of all my
legal background does not give me the authority to speak
here for or against any form of State. People in Cyprus are
discussing precisely this point, Whatever they agree upon
will be something for us to respect, But I just cannot accept
the idea that any form of State or any form of constitution
is to be set aside as an impossibility becausesome people
think it is impossible. I therefore beg to disagree on this
point,

73. Therefore,
from the reports one can see there’ is a
definite
effort
at separation, preventing matters from
developing in a way that would help the Turkish Cypriot
community.
74. The other aspect I should like to mention is the
importance
of elimination of confrontation. If we look
trough the reports, we find that, at least for the last eight
7

-

80. I certainly do not consider the word “unitary” in the
sense which some people want to give it. It may have some
other sense, but I say humbly that I am not a legal expert. I
do not know exactly what it means. But I certainly know
what it does not mean, and that is why I am a little
unhappy when I am told that it is the only way out of the
present Crisis.

87. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I am afraid that the policy
of separatism is not a question of fear. It is a question of
political policy, independent of fear. The fear is brought in
as an excuse for that policy and other matters that have
been introduced are also to excuse that policy, That is out
of policy; it is not out of fear. We can see the reference, in
an earlier report of the Secretary-General, to the fact that
the Turkish

81. The other point of disagreement is when we come to
the discussion of the problem of partnership. But this again
is a question for the people on the spot to decide. The only
thing I remember is that Cyprus is an atypical, historical
phenomenon. It has been created, if I am not mistaken, on
the basis of this equal partnership and the equal partnership
to our mind means that the two communities have an equal
say when it comes to the State’s policy as a whole, to its
future, to its independence, to its territorial integrity, to its
defence, to its foreign policy and so on and so forth.

“community leadership discourages the Turkish Cypriot
population from engaging in personal, commercial or
other contacts with their Greek Cypriot compatriots,
from applying to government offices in administrative
matters, or from resettling in their home villages if they
are refugees”. [S/6228 of 11 March 1965, para, 55.1
88. They are discouraged from any commercial contacts.
They are not afraid of commercial contacts. They are
discouraged from applying to the government officers in
administrative matters. Further, they are discouraged from
doing anything normal-not out of fear, but because it is a
policy, as I said before. Also, I have already stated on a
previous occasion that there is a list of punishments
inflicted upon the Turkish Cypriots for disobeying this
order not to have any contacts with the Greeks:

82, For the rest, of course, the normal application of the
rule of law in any State would prevail, I hope that the
constitution will see to it and, of course, one cannot ignore
the fact that there are two distinctly separate communities
which, as everybody knows, and as I am sure that
Mr. Rossides would also agree, have had different national
aspirations, and therefore a kind of autonomous development is to be expected. That is why there has been trouble
in the past and that is what we want to prevent in the
future through a more workable constitution.

“Those who disobey the order with a view to having
trade connexions with the Greek Cypriots shall pay
E25 Ss., or should be punished with imprisonment. , . , A
fine of $20 will be imposed on those who have any
dealings with Greek Cypriots or those who buy from
Greek Cypriots goods which they could get from the
Turkish Cypriot sector”. [1568th meeting, para. 173./

83. Now we come again to the question that we have so
long discussed across the table with my dear friend
Mr. Rossides: the question of whether the Turkish community’s diffidence in taking part in the economic life, the
social life and so on of the island as a whole is due only to
the fact that some politicians on the Turkish side-that is
what is meant-wish it that way. I do not think that it is
that easy to remove the fears of a community which has
had some reasons to feel that fear. That is why the troops
are there, They are not there just because of a whim on the
part of the United Nations or of anyone in particular in
Cyprus, Conditions have so developed that it is only thanks
to the presence of the United Nations troops that life has
become livable there.

89. So it is obvious that this is not a question of fear. It is
a question of policy. And what is the aim of that policy in
keeping the people of Cyprus divided and separated? It is
left to the imagination. There must be some particular
political aim. It has transpired in the past in very official
statements. Therefore, we cannot but note that this present
policy is carried out, in spite of everything, in order to keep
separation, keep up strife, prevent conciliation, prevent the
elimination of confrontation, and in order to do everything
to keep the people of Cyprus apart. And when we come to
the negotiating table, proposals are made again of such
extremist separatism that discussion becomes difficult. It
would not be difficult for these talks to come to a
successfulconclusion. They started in 1968 and, after some
time, came up against the impossibility of performance,
extreme separatism and excessivenessin separatism.

84. Mr. Rossides has used the words “the shadow of the
separatist idea” fpara4 69 above/. I think that this shadow
is a result of the shadow of more serious events, a shadow
which I hope-and this is why I should like again to finish
on a note of optimism-will
be removed as a result of the
very serious, very businesslike, very genuine and very
sincere efforts that no side, no interested party, spares to
obtain a workable solution of the problem.
85. Therefore, I think

90. All these things are not fear. There is something else to
it. To say that it is fear and that therefore it is impossible to
apply the constitution does not make sense. But again I
.wish to end with optimism and to express the hope that
reason will prevail in the talks, so that we may have a
solution that is workable and that separatism, whatever its
reasonsor motivations, will be abandoned.

that basically we are again in

agreement with Mr. Rossides. What we both mean to say is

that there has been a difficult situation. I am not dwelling
on the reasons for it. This situation, it is to be hoped, will

end when the two sides which have lived through lt see a
better way of doing things and find a better constitutional
framework for their future national life.

91 I I say again that the Government of Cyprus is sincere in
its conduct of the negotiations for the independence of
Cyprus, But that does not mean that the ingrained feelings
and aspirations of the people, whose Greek history extends
back 2,000 years, should be regarded as a crime, or that

86. The PRESIDENT (translation from Rtrssian): I call on
the representative of Cyprus.
8

their feelings should be deprecated. Their feelings and ideals
should be respected. Their practical policy and its sincerity
cannot be disputed.
92. I hope my learned friend-I say “learned friend”
because he also indulged in constitutional matters-will
agree with me that it is our hope that these talks will
succeed in a spirit of sincere co-operation and understanding,
93. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I call on
the representative of Turkey,
94.

Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I apologize for speaking again.

95. I wish only to say that this debate has shown that
when there is action there is reaction, without qualifying
either the actions or the reaction, The Council may rest
assured that when there is no action there will be no
reaction. And vice versa, I suppose.
96. Therefore, to end on a note of optimism, let us hope
that the people whose duty it is to put an end to this
unfortunate
situation in the island will achieve success in
the not too distant future.
Mr.
Rossides
(Cyprus),
Mr.
Fife. Parmyotacos (Greece) withdrew.

Olcay

(Turkey)

and

The situation in the Middle J&t:
la) Security Council resolution 331 (1973);
fb) Report of the Secretary-General under Security Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/10929)
97. The PRESIDENT (translatioti from Russian): I should
like to recall that yesterday, at its 1725th meeting, the
Security
Council heard me read a telegram from the
President
of Chad, His Excellency Mr. Francois Tombaland decided to accede to his request and, as an
We,
exceptional
measure, give the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Chad, Mr. Baba Hassane, the opportunity to make a
statement
on the situation in the Middle East at today’s
Council meeting, following completion of the consideration
of the Cyprus question, In taking that decision, the Council
took into account the fact it had been intended to, suspend
the examination
of the situation in the Middle East at
yesterday evening’s meeting, as was in fact done.
98. fn accordance with that decision of the Council and if
there are no objections, I intend to invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Chad, His Excellency Mr. Baba Hassane,
who is here in the Council chamber, to take a place at the
Council
table and to make a statement on the situation in
the Middle East.
At
the invitation of the l+esident, Mr. %aba Hassane
(Ghad)
took a place at the Council table.

99. Mr. MASSANE (Chad) (interpretation from French):
Mr-. president,
first of all I should like to discharge a
two-fold
duty. I wish to thank you and the members of the
security
Council for allowing me, by way of an exception,
to t&e part, without the right to vote, in the debate on the

consideration of the situation in the Middle East. 1 should
like
to assure you that the Organization of African Unity
and my head of State are grateful to you for this
exceptional decision to grant the latter’s request, I should
like to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of June, Those
who have spoken before me have very eloquently referred
to your merits and qualities as a diplomat familiar with
United Nations affairs. I shall not yield to the temptation
to return to that subject, since 1 am convinced that under
your guidance the debate on this complex issue will lead to
peace in that beleaguered area of the world.
100. Members of the Council will recall that, at its tenth
regular session, the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity adopted
an important resolution on the crisis in the Middle East,
deciding that a delegation of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of a number of States should come to set forth in the
Council the feelings and concerns of all Africa on this grave
situation and the threat it posed to peace. Like my
colleagues from Nigeria, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Algeria, the Sudan, Kenya and Guinea, it is under that
sacred mandate that I address the Council.
101. With great concern, the entire world has closely
followed events over the past few years in certain areas of
the world, The recent cessation of the most terrible and
devastating war of our time, the war in South-East Asia,
was welcomed with great relief and hailed by the entire
world.
102. Another outstanding event which continues to come
up in regional and international talks and meetings is the
development of the Israeli aggression of 5 June 1967
against neighbouring Arab States.
103. At the request of the Arab Republic of Egypt, an
African State concerned by the conflict disrupting the
Middle East, the Security Council wasinvited to review the
political and military situation over the past six years and
the efforts undertaken and pursued by both the international community and Governments to put into effect
the peace settlement decided upon by the Council in its
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. We hope that
that subject will be the essential point before us and that
Israel will not divert attention in any way that will work
against proper consideration of the subject by the Council.
104. The report of the Secretary-General /S/10929/,
submitted under Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973), is
a detailed and comprehensive account of United Nations
efforts to bring about a settlement of the Israeli-Arab
conflict. I should like to congratulate the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative on the work they have done
in difficult circumstances The document clearly reports
that, if the six years which have been marked by tireless
efforts of the United Nations to establish a just and lasting
peace have revealed anything at all, it is that Israel’s policy
of colonial expansion and the systematic refusal of the
Government of lsrael to co-operate with the Organization
have been the obstacle which any efforts towards peace
have encountered. Such a negative attitude by a Member of
the Organization deserves serious consideration on the part
of the C&nciI.

105. It should also be recalled that, in the search for a
peaceful settlement of all the aspects of the situation in the
Middle East, the United Nations, and in particular the
Security Council, established a basis for a settlement of the
contlict. I am referring, of course, to historic resolution
242 (1967) the operative part of which reads as follows:
[The speaker read paragraphs 1 to 3 of resolution
242 (196 7)./

106. As the report of the Secretary-General indicates in
paragraph 45 in particular, the parties to the conflict, with
the exception of one State, accepted that resolution, It goes
without saying that the withdrawal of Israeli armed forces
to the positions occupied before June 1967 constitutes a
fundamental and preliminary step to any peaceful settlement in the Middle East.
107. The activities of the Special Representative of the
Secretary.GeneraI, Ambassador Jarring, as well as the
meetings which were held on the question of the MiddIe
East in 1971 by the representatives of the four major
Powers permanent members of the Security Council-the
United States, France, the Soviet Union and the United
Kingdom-to agree on a joint interpretation of the reso.
lution referred to and on a joint formulation of the general
provisions for a settlement, found themselves at an impasse
and perceived that it was impossible to reach any result
at all.
108. The African States, members of the Organization of
African Unity and Members of the United Nations, concerned by the conflict in the Middle East, wished to make
their modest contribution to a settlement. To that end,
they set up a committee made up of 10 heads of State
under the chairmanship of Senegal, The committee went to
Israel and Egypt with the mandate to promote a peaceful
settlement of the confIict and to safeguard the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people. The result of that mission
appears in paragraph 96 of document S/10929, We read
there, among other things:

110. In ,view of our great concern over the alarming
situation prevailing in the Middle East, a situation which is
a serious threat to the independence, security and unity of
the African continent, and in accordance with resolution
242 (1967), we support Egypt and other Arab countries
occupied by Israel in their legitimate struggle to recover the
entirety of their territory. We set up the committee made
up of IO heads of State which I just mentioned to help find
a solution to the problem and to contribute to the
safeguarding of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people in accordance with the responsibilities arising from
the fundamental principles of the Organization of African
Unity and the United Nations. The heads of African States
met at Addis Ababa and agreed to continue to support
Egypt and other occupied Arab countries until their entire
territory, which was occupied in June 1967, wasliberated,

111. The search for an agreement among the parties was
the subject of various initiatives. Members will recall the
unsuccessful attempt by the United States to reach a
provisional agreement on the reopening of the Suez Canal,
as called for by United Nations resolutions. The year 197 1,
like the preceding years, was marked by a lack of progress
towards a settlement of the conflict in the Middle East,
However, in resolution 2799 (XXVI) on the situation in the
Middle East, the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth
sessionexpressed itself as follows:
[The speaker read paragraphs 4 to 7 of resolution
2799 (XXV’)./

112. It is deplorable that no progress of the kind
advocated by the United Nations has been made. The
Secretary-General confirmed this in his report of 15 Sep.
tember 1972 to the twenty-seventh session of the General
Assembly, when he stated:
“In spite of our continued efforts, it has not been
possible to make any substantial progress. As can be seen
from published statements of the parties, an agreed basis
for discussions under Ambassador Jarring’s auspices does
not seem to exist at the present time”. [S/10792,
para. 5.1

“Both parties Itad renewed their acceptance of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) and were ready to resume
indirect negotiations under the auspices of Ambassador
Jarring. The mission came to the conclusion that the
success of renewed negotiations could be regarded as
assured, if the practical application of the concept of
secure and recognized boundaries did not oblige Egypt to
alienate part of its national territory and that it was
necessary to obtain Israel’s agreement to the putting into
effect (without territorial annexation) of arrangements
offering sufficient guarantees to ensure its security.”

In view of that failure, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 2949 (XXVII), which it decided to transmit to
the Council for appropriate action and, furthertnore,
reaffirmed its resolution 2799 (XXVI).
113. In the light of the information that we have available
and of our study of the report of the Secretary-General
under examination, it can be safely said that all efforts to
bring about a peaceful settlement of the conflict have been
impeded, not to say thwarted, by the Israeli Government.
The Organization has not been able to act effectively. There
has not even been a beginning of a satisfactory solution to
any aspect of the problem. The cease-firehas been violated
on a number of occasions by the Israeli armed forces. One
need only refer to paragraph 10 of the report to see this. It
should be pointed out that, in the absence of an equitable
and accepted settlement, the cease-fire is bound to remain
precarious and unstable.

109. We know that Israel, using dilatory manoeuvres,
refused to take a positive and unequivocal stand. The same
is true concerning the request made to it to follow up on
the aide memoire of 8 February 1971 from the United
Nations Mediator /S/l0403
of 30November
1971,
annex 11. That aide mdmoire received the unanimous
support of the four permanent members of the Security
Council: France, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union
and the United States.

114. In this situation it is to be noted with great concern
that, in spite of many resolutions of the Organization of
10

105. It should also be recalled that, in the search for a
peaceful settlement of all the aspects of the situation in the
Middle East, the United Nations, and in particular the
Security Council, established a basis for a settlement of the
conflict. I am referring, of course, to historic resolution
242 (1967), the operative part of which reads as follows:
[The speaker read paragraphs I to 3 of resolution
242 (1967)./
106. As the report of the Secretary-General indicates in
paragraph 45 in particular, the parties to the conflict, with
the exception of one State, accepted that resolution. It goes
wjthout saying that the withdrawal of Israeli armed forces
to the positions occupied before June 1967 constitutes a
fundamental and preliminary step to any peaceful settlement in the Middle East.
107, The activities of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Jarring, as well as the
meetings which were held on the question of the Middle
East in 1971 by the representatives of the four major
Powers permanent members of the Security Council-the
United States, France, the Soviet Union and the United
Kingdom-to
agree on a joint interpretation of the resolution referred to and on a joint formulation of the general
provisions for a settlement, found themselves at an impasse
and perceived that it was impossible to reach any result
at all.
108. The African States, members of the Organization of
African Unity and Members of the United Nations, concerned by the conflict in the Middle East, wished to make
their modest contribution to a settlement. To that end,
they set up a committee made up of 10 heads of State
under the chairmanship of Senegal. The committee went to
Israel and Egypt with the mandate to promote a peaceful
settlement of the conflict and to safeguard the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people. The result of that mission
appears in paragraph 96 of document S/10929. We read
there, among other things:

110. In ,view of our great concern over the alarming
situation prevailing in the Middle East, a situation which is
a serious threat to the independence, security and unity of
the African continent, and in accordance with resolution
242 (1967), we support Egypt and other Arab countries
occupied by Israel in their legitimate struggle to recover the
entirety of their territory. We set up the committee made
up of 10 heads of State which I just mentioned to help find
a solution to the problem and to contribute to the
safeguarding of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people in accordance with the responsibilities arising from
the fundamental principles of the Organization of African
Unity and the United Nations. The heads of African States
met at Addis Ababa and agreed to continue to support
Egypt and other occupied Arab countries until their entire
territory, which was occupied in June 1967, was liberated.
111. The search for an agreement among the parties was
the subject of various initiatives. Members will recall the
unsuccessful attempt by the United States to reach a
provisional agreement on the reopening of the Suez Canal,
as called for by United Nations resolutions. The year 197 1,
like the preceding years, wasmarked by a lack of progress
towards a settlement of the conflict in the Middle East,
However, in resolution 2799 (XXVI) on the situation in the
Middle East, the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth
sessionexpresseditself as follows:
[The speaker read paragraphs 4 to 7 of resolution
2799 (XXVI).]
112. It is deplorable that no progress of the kind
advocated by the United Nations has been made. The
Secretary.General confirmed this in his report of 15 September 1972 to the twenty-seventh session of the General
Assembly, when he stated:
“In spite of our continued efforts, it has not been
possible to make any substantial progress. As can be seen
from published statements of the parties, an agreed basis
for discussions under Ambassador Jarring’s auspices does
not seem to exist at the present time”. /S/ZO792,
para. 5.1

“Both parties i ad renewed their acceptance of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) and were ready to resume
indirect negotiations under the auspices of Ambassador
Jarring. The mission came to the conclusion that the
success of renewed negotiations could be regarded as
assured, if the practical application of the concept of
secure and recognized boundaries did not oblige Egypt to
alienate part of its national territory and that it was
necessary to obtain Israel’s agreement to the putting into
effect (without territorial annexation) of arrangements
offering sufficient guarantees to ensure its security,”

In view of that failure, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 2949 (XXVII), which it decided to transmit to
the Council for appropriate action and, furthermore,
reaffirmed its resolution 2799 (XXVI).
113. In the light of the information that we have available
and of our study of the report of the Secretary-General
under examination, it can be safely said that all efforts to
bring about a peaceful settlement of the conflict have been
impeded, not to say thwarted, by the Israeli Government.
The Organization has not been able to act effectively. There
has not even been a beginning of a satisfactory solution to
any aspect of the problem. The cease-fire has been violated
on a number of occasions by the Israeli armed forces, One
need only refer to paragraph 10 of the report to see this. It
should be pointed out that, in the absence of an equitable
and accepted settlement, the cease-fire is bound to remain
precarious and unstable.

109. We know that Israel, using dilatory manoeuvres,
refused to take a positive and unequivocal stand. The same
is true concerning the request made to it to follow up on
the aide memoire of 8 February 1971 from the United
Nations Mediator /S/10403
of 30 November 1971,
annex //. That aide memoire received the unanimous
support of the four permanent members of the Security
Council: France, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union
and the United States.

114. In this situation it is to be noted with great concern
that, in spite of many resolutions of the Organization of
10

African Unity and of the United Nations, committing it to
withdraw from all African and Arab occupied territories,
lsrael not only continues to refuse to implement those
resolutions but endeavours to pursue a policy designed to
create in the territory a fait accompli to serve its expansionist designs.
115. The situation is not ideal either in the Arab territories occupied following the hostilities of- June 1967 by
the Israeli army. The Security Council is in duty bound to
call on the Government of Israel to rescind all action and to
abandon all policies and practices affecting the population
of these territories. It is also in duty bound to reaffirm that
all action taken to create settlements in these territories,
including Jerusalem, is null and void.
116. Throughout the past six years the entire world has
seen that the true objective of the Israeli Government is not
to seek the peace which we all ardently desire, but to do its
utmost, with the complicity of certain major Powers, to
pursue a policy of territorial expansion to the detriment of
th’e neighbouring countries. While mediation has been
offered in an attempt to find ways and means to bring
about a practical settlement of the explosive conflict pitting
the States in the area against one another, Israel, which was
born by General Assembly resolution 181 (II) of
29 November 1947, relative to the partition of Palestine, is
preparing plans designed to annex the occupied territories
of Egypts, Jordan and Syria. The Minister of Defence of
Israel declared his intentions unambiguously in his famous
statement of 5 July 1968 when he said:
“Our forefathers reached the frontiers which were
recognized in the 1947 Partition Plan, Our generation
reached the frontiers of 1949. But the generation of the
six-day war reached Suez, Jordan and the Golan Heights
in Syria. There will be new lines but they will extend
beyond the Jordan, perhaps even to Lebanon and perhaps
even to central Syria.”
117. That is the true face of Israel and the truly appalling
thinking
behind its so-called policy of peace and good
neighbourliness. The events which have occurred in the area
since that statement reflect to what extent the Hebrew
State is committed, in flagrant disregard of the relevant
resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security
Council,
to its plans to annex territories which are at
present occupied and to conquer new territories, The law of
military
conquest remains in force. As a member of the
OAU and Member of the United Nations, we refuse to
accept the fact that one State can occupy the territory of
another by the use of force.

of the Organization of American States, signed at’Bogotil in
1948, states in article 17 that “no territorial acquisitions or
special advantages obtained either by force or by other
means of coercion shall be recognized”. It is in that spirit
that the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the member States
of the Organization of American States met in the summer
of 1969 to deal with a dispute between two member States
of the Organization and said to the thirteenth Meeting of
Consultation that they “unanimously reject the use of force
to settle disputes between States members of the Organization” and that “as established in article 5 [e) and 17 of
the Charter of the Organization of American States, neither
recognition of conquests nor occupation of territories
acquired by use of force is admissible” /see S/9370 of
31 Juiy 1969, resolution IlIj .

120. Article II, paragraph 1 (c) of the Charter of the
Organization of African Unity, signed in 3963, rejected the
principle of any territorial conquest by the use of armed
force. The Assembly of African heads of State and
Government at its last Summit meeting adopted a resolution stating that it “reaffirms. , , its active and total
support for the Arab Republic of Egypt in its legitimate
struggle to recover entirely and by all means its territorial
integrity” /see S/10943 of 7Jurie 19731. It once again
called for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of
the Israeli armed forces from all occupied African and Arab
territories,
121. The Summit Conference of the Non-Aligned Countries which met at Georgetown in August 1972 rejected the
principle of territorial acquisition by the use of force and
called for the withdrawal of Israeli forces from all the
occupied Arab territories.
122. African, Asian and Latin American voices-those of
the third world-requested Israel to heed the voice of
reason and called on that country to liberate all the
territories occupied by force.
123. In the circumstances, how can we fail to take up the
problem of the Palestinian refugees? I am convinced that
most of the members of the Council will be of my opinion
when I say that settling the conflict in the Middle East
depends first of al1 on a settlement being found by the
world Organization for the tragedy of the Palestinian
people.

1 18, The United Nations is based on the proposition that
war must not be a profitable enterprise. The General
Assembly and the Security Council have on many occasions
condemned
the territorial conquest by one State of another
by armed force. Right after the Israel-Arab conflict, the
fifth
special emergency session of the General Assembly
highlighted
the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force and called for the immediate withdrawal of
Israeli forces from all the occupied territories.

124. The origin of this situation lies in the injustice
inflicted by the United Nations on that innocent people
whose fate has been a constant source of concern to the
international community. Many resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council have recognized the
right of that people to recover their national heritage. I
recall in that connexion the following resolutions: 2535 E
(XXIV) of 10 December 1969, 2649 (XXV) of 30 November and 2672 C (XXV) of 8 December 1970,2799 (XXVI)
of 13 December 1971 and 2949 (XXVII) of 8 December
1972, as well as the relevant resolutions of the Council all
of which call for a just settlement of the problem of the
Palestine refugees.

1 19. Furthermore, other organizations adopted a similar
position
with regard to territorial acquisitions. The Charter

125. In our opinion, all these resolutions contain certain
gaps which need to be filled. All call for a just and lasting

noble fight tb recover their national heritage. The head of
my Government and the people of Chad are determined to
give them a chance to settle in Chad to combat Zionism and
Israel, agents of the international intelligentsia.

solution to the Palestinian problems without, however,
making clear how this could be achieved, since they exclude
the Palestinian people from negotiations on the questions
which are first and foremost of concern to them. We believe
it is high time to correct that which can still be corrected.

133. We the peoples of the United Nations all have the
duty to defend the principles, authority and morality of
our Organization. However, at the present time we are in a
deadlock. Our inability to act could easily appear to be a
reflection of the weaknesses and shortcomings of the
United Nations. It is our duty to act and to act swiftly, for
the Organization bears a great responsibility in the tragedy
of the Palestinian people. We must face squarely up to
Israel’s challenge to the Organization’s authority in refusing
to implement its resolutions and to its threat which hangs
heavily over the neighbouring member States. We recall the
recommendation made by the General Assembly at its last
session to the Security Council to take appropriate action
[resolution 2949 (XXV.I)J. There can be no doubt that the
Assembly is referring to Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations when it advocates action to be taken against
the State of Israel. On 5 June 1967 the world witnessed an
act of aggression, perpetrated by the Israeli forces against
the Arab countries. Just as in the case of South Africa,
Rhodesia and Portugal, the Security Council has an
obligation to take action against Israel.

126. Permit me to mention here the echo of international
support for the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people,
which resounds throughout the world day after day and
year after year.
127. The Palestinian people have seen and recorded the
failure of the United Nations to act effectively to resolve
the profound cause of its uprooting; now that people,
which has suffered such humiliations, has taken the centre
of the stage. Proof of this can be found in the brutal
outbreak of acts of violence, terrorism in its many forms,
hijacking of aircraft and so forth.
128. Referring to the situation in the Middle East, the
head of an African State said in Washington a few years
ago:
“A new event has taken the centre of the stage since
June, and that is the entry of the Palestinian people,
Their will asserts itself day by day and the leaders of
States will have to take account of their desires.

134. Africa, for its part, has defined very clearly and
unequivocally its position on the conflict in the Middle
East. It:

“The Palestinian people now must really assume the
responsibility for their fight to recovertheir rights in their
own country and the kind of commitment which might
lead to an end. Their ability to sacrifice and their
maturity in this political and military struggle will largely
determine the success of their struggle, which other
countries have a duty to support.

(a) Unreservedly supports the Arab countries in their just
fight;
(b) Drawsthe attention of Israel to the danger threatening the security and unity of the African continent as a
result of its continued aggression and refusal to evacuate
the territories of the State victims of that aggression and
declares that the attitude of Israel might lead OAU Member
States to take, at the African level, individually or
collectively, political and economic measures against it, in
conformity with the principles contained in the OAU and
United Nations Charters;

“A solution of the problem can be, properly brought
about only with the participation and support of the
Palestinian people.”
129. Furtherm b re, the last Summit Conference of the
Organization 04 African Unity recognized that respect for
the inalienable ‘rights of the Palestinian people was an
essential element in any just and equitable solution, just as
it is an indispensable element in any lasting peace in the
area.

(c) Earnestly calls upon the big Powers supplying Israel
with all forms of arms and military equipment and granting
it moral and political support that enables it to strengthen
its military potential, to refrain from doing so.

130. We are also in favour of the idea that the General
Assembly and the Security Council should explore what
they can do to give the Palestine Liberation Organization
observer status. Why should this not be done? It might
very well be a step forward in the search for an equitable
solution if we associate the people directly concerned with
the deliberations on matters which are of vital interest to
them.

135. It is the hope of all of us that the Security Council
will reach a constructive settlement rather than abdicate its
authority and refer the matter to the General Assembly. It
knows very well that the problems of security and war fall
within its purview, whereas the Assembly has only powers
of recommendation. The Council should be prepared to do
its utmost to put an end to the present impasse.

131. 1 invite members of the Council to meditate on these
words, No one can ignore the existence of that people and
its aspirations. NO force can bend their will, We believe that
they are valid interlocutors in the quest for peace between
Israel and the Arabs.

136. From the statements made in the present debate by
the parties concerned, the Council has doubtless noted the
sincere desire for peace expressed by the victims of Israeli
aggression and in particular an African country, Egypt, a
founding member of the Organization of African Unity.
The Foreign Minister of Egypt, Mr. El-Zayyat, stated in this
body that his country accepted all the resolutions of the

132. The Government of Chad is proud to reaffirm its
support for the just cause of the Palestinians and their
i2

United Nations on the situation in the Middle East. Egypt
has welcomed and co-operated with all the peace missions
which have visited the area and has given a favourable reply
to Mr. Jarring’s aide-mimoire. However, Israel, still drunk
with victory, persists in its thinly veiled refusal to cooperate with the United Nations, The notion of secure and
recognized boundaries cannot go beyond those existing
before 5 June 1967.

Organization of African Unity relating to the Middle East
has already been issued as a Security Council document at
the request of the Commissioner for External Affairs of
Nigeria /S/10943]. I also thank the distinguished Minister
for his words addressedto me.
140. Before closing the meeting, I should like to recall
that the decision taken by the Council yesterday to suspend
consideration of the question of the Middle East contains
the provision that the suspension should be used for further
reflection on the results of the discussion of the question in
the Council, both by its members and by other representatives taking part in the consideration of the item. In the
light of the Secretary-General’s report on the efforts
undertaken by his Special Representative and also the
statements which have been made by all States participating
in the consideration of this question, the suspension could
also be used for the holding of further informal consultations among members of the Council regarding further
steps the Council might take.

137. As these deliberations conclude, the Security Council
will doubtless bear in mind many aspects of the conflict in
the Middle East, but two in particular are essential and
await acceptable solutions: the continued occupation of
African and Arab territories, a principle not recognized by
the international community or the Charter of the United
Nations, and the tragedy of the Palestinian people, a
primary cause of tension in the area. The Council should
require that Israel withdraw from those territories and,
rather than just referring to them, should associate the
people of Palestine in the negotiations with the parties to
tha conflict. It seems to us that that is the path which
would lead to a stable peace in the Middle East.

141. I should like to express the hope and wish that
members of the Council will make active use of the
suspension for these noble purposes, so that when it
resumes its consideration of the item, the Council will have
before it a draft of concrete and effective measures on
which a decision can be taken which will guarantee a
peaceful political settlement in the Middle East in accordance with United Nations decisions and taking into account
the efforts and initiatives undertaken by the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Kepresentative.

138. Before I leave the Council table, I formally request,
as my colleagues have done, that the resolution adopted at
Addis Ababa by the Assembly of heads of State of the
OAU be considered a working document of the Security
Council.
139. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad for his very
interesting statement and, in connexion with his last
remark, I should like to inform him that the resolution
adopted by the anniversary session of the Assembly of the

The meetirig rose at 5,45 p.m.

13

HOW

TO OBTAIN

unitad

Natiow

UNITED
ptlbkatiau

ttwn&out~world.~tyau-

NATIONS
Iney

PUBLICATIONS
be obtained

&ction,NewYorkorOmeva.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

fmm

lBoomom

and

diatributom

or write to: United Nationa, S&a

SW.% I .OO (or equivalent

id other

currencies)

7%822214anuary

1977-2,200
