18

General Auembly-Se,,enteenth Seaaion

Recognizing that the training of national technical
personnel should be an integral part of national econ omic and social development plans and should be
carried out having regard to current and long-term
n eeds for specialists in connexion with those plans,
R ecognizing also that the training of national technical personnel should be carried out mainly in the
developing countries themselves whenever possible,
Noting with sa.tisfaction that the United Nations and
the agencies concerned, in implementing their programmes of technical assistance, are paying increasing
attention to the p roblem of training national technical
personnel in the developing countries,
1. Considers it desirable to intensify the work of
the Committee for Industrial Development with regard
to assistance to the developing countries in training
national technical personnel, so that further concrete
measures within the framework of the United Nations
system and recommendations for the Governments
concerned may be elaborated in this field;
2. Reqiiests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Governments of Member States and in consultation with the Technical Assistance Board, the
Special F und, t he United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International
Labour Organisation and the other specialized agencies,
to prepare a report, which would include :
(a) An estimate of the requirements of the developing countries, whenever possible according to their
development plans, for technical personnel of the intermediate and higher levels and an. estimate of the
available possibilities for training such personnel in
those countries, using, inter alia, the methodology and
techniques for assessing those requirements the formulation of which is envisaged in the programme of
work in the field of industrialization of the Committee
for Industrial Development;
( b) Information concerning methods of training national technical personnel in various countries, taking
into account the experience of States with d ifferent
social and economic systems ;
(c) Information concerning the progress being made
in the training of technical personnel for the developing countries in the industrially advanced countries,
and the methods employed;
( d) Proposals for measures within the United
Nations system and recommendations to the Governments concerned with regard to intensifying the training, and improv ing the facilities for the training, of
national intermediate and higher technical personnel in
the developing countries and, where appropriate, on an
intra-regional basis;
3. Invites the Committee for Industrial Development to give special consideration at its forthcoming
sessions to the need for intensifying the training of
technical personnel in the process of industrialization,
and to assist the Secretary-General in preparing the
above-mentioned report;
4. Invites the Economic and Social Council to consider the Secretary-General's report and the results
of the discussion thereof in the Committee for Industrial Development, and to submit to the General
Assembly, at its nineteenth session, for consideration
within the framework of the problems of industrialization, a progress report on the implementation of the proposals and recommendations approved by the Council ;

5. Urges the United Nations organs which carry
out the programmes of technical assistance, the regional
economic commissions and the specialized agencies
concerned to increase their efforts in developing both
national and regional projects aimed at promoting the
training of national technical personnel for industry ;
6. Urges 1lember States to develop their educational svstems to meet the needs of industrialization,
particularly as regards the supply of personnel at the
secondary, technical and higher levels.
1197th f>lc11ary meeting.
18 December 1962.

1825 ( XVII) . World Food Programme
The General .1ssembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1496 (XV ) of 27 October
1960 and 171-+ (XV I) of 19 December 1961,
Bearing in mind its resolution 1710 (XVI) of
19 December 1961 on the United Nations Development
Decade, and in particular the reference to the need
to eliminate illiteracy, hunger :md dis<'ase.
1. E.i:presses its satisfaction that, following J0111t
action by the Economic and Social Council and the
Council of the Food and Agriculture O rg;rnization of
the United Nations, pursuant to resolutions 1496 (XV)
and 1714 (XVI ), a United Nations/FAQ 'Norld
Food Programme was established which will play a
vital role in the efforts of member countries to meet
the need for food supplies in the event of emergencies
and to assist those countries in their economic and
social development ;
2. Notes with a/>{1reciation that thirty-nine States
1v1embers of the United :'Jations and members of the
specialized agencies have pledged more than $8X.7
million in cash, services and commodities for thl! experimental three-year period of the \:Vorld Food
Programme;
3. Invites other States Members of the United
Nations and members of the specialized agencies to
give further consideration to making pledges to the
'vVorld F ood P rogramme in order to attain as soon
as possible the goal of $100 million envisaged in resolution 1714 (XVI) for the experimental three-vear
period;
,
4. Urges all member countries to giYe their support
to the World F ood Programme in order that it may
fulfi l its objectives.
1197th plenary meeting.
18 December 1962.

1826 ( XVII) . Establishment of a United Nations
capital development fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 520 A (VJ) of 12 January
1952, 622 A (VII ) of 21 December 1952. 724 B
(VIII ) of 7 December 1953, 822 (IX) of 11 December
1954, 923 (X) of 9 December 1955, 1030 (XI) of
26 February 1957, 12 19 (XII) of 14 December 1957,
1240 (XIII) of 14 October 1958, 1317 (XIII) of
12 December 1958, 1424 (XIV) of S December 1959,
1521 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and 1706 (XVI )
of 19 December 1961 , on the basis of which preparatory
steps have been undertaken during the last decade
with a view to the establishment of a special United
Nations fund for economic development,

Re1olu1 ions adopted on the reporu ol the Second Comm iu ee

Recalling especially the decision in principle to
establish a United Nations capital development fund,
contained in resolution 1521 (XV),
Having considered the second report of the Committee on a United Nations Capital Development
Fund,8
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 921 (XXXIV) of 3 August 1962,
I. Commends the Committee on a United Kations
Capital Development Fund for formulating the draft
legislntion (statute) of the Fund in accordance with
r esolutions 1521 (XV) and 1706 (XV]);
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
draft legislation (statute) to the Governments of States
Members of the United Nations and members of the
specialized agencies so as to receive their comments
and observations hy April 1963 ;
3. Endorses the appeal addressed by the Economic
and Social Council, in its resolution 92 1 (XXXIV),
to the economically advanced countries to reconsider,
in consultation with the Secretary-General, the possibilities of undertaking measures designed to ensure
the establishment, at the earliest possible date, of a
United Nations capital development fund and its employment in the field of capital development;
4. Decides to extend the mandate of the Committee
on a United Nations Capital Development Fund established under resolution 1521 (XV):
5. Instructs the Committee:
(a) To study the replies of the Governments mentioned in paragraph 2 above;
(b) T o continue to study the need for international
financing with a view to ensuring the attainment of
the objectives of the United Nations Development
Decade, taking into account the study prepared by the
United Nations Secretariat ;9
(c) T o propose practical measures designed to ensure the beginning of the operation of the U nited
Nations capital development fund, with specinl emphasis on, inter alia, the possibi'lity envisaged in section
III of resolution 1219 (Xll) and in resolution 1240 C
(XIII) ;
( d) T o co-operate with the Secretciry-General in
preparing the report provided for in Economic and
Social Council resolution 921 (XXX IV);
6. Req11ests the Committee to report to the Economic and Social Council at the thirty-sixth session
and requests the Committee to transmit the report,
together ·with its comments. to the Gcner;1J Assembly
at the eighteenth session, for action.
1197th plenary 111ecti11g,
18 December 1962.
1827 (XVH) . United Nati ons training and research
institute

T/ze General A sscmbl-y.
Rcrogni::;ing the close int errelationship between economic and social development and the achievement
of peace and security and the dependence of both of
these on international co-operation in various areas,
Noting with appreciatio,i the offer of the K etherlands
Government to provide $1 million for a re:;earch in8 Jbid., Thirt y-fo11rth S ession, ;bmc.,·cs, agenda
item 6,
document E/3654.
9 United Nations publication, Saks No.: 62.11.D.3.

19

stitute for social development to be established under
the aegis of the United Nations for the purpose of
conducting a study of the fundamental relationship
between social development and economic progress in
the developing countries,
Having consid.:red the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the measures proposed for the United
Nations Development Decade, 10 and in particular
chapter III relating to the mobilization of human
r esources,
Believing that the provision and training of per sonnel of the highest calibre, particularly from the
developing Member States, for national service artd
service with the United Nations and specialized
agencies are important in order to fulfil the objectives
of the Decade,
1. E.i·presses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the measures proposed for
the United Nations Development Decade, and to the
specialized agencies and other institutions which helped
in the preparation of that report;
2. Recogn-izes the basic needs of the developing
countries and their expressed wishes to increase substantially their highly trained personnel in various
fields;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard
to the existence of other programmes and institutions
active in this and similar fields, and taking into account the views of the specialized agencies, to study
the desirability and feasibility of establishing a United
Nations institute or a training progrnmme under the
auspices of the United Nations, to be financed by
voluntary contributions, both public and private. and
to transmit his study to the Economic and Social
Council at its thirty-sixth session and to the General
Assembly at its eighteenth session ; the frame of reference of the institute or programme might include such
fields as:
( n) T raining of personnel. particularly from the
developing Memher States. for administrative and operational assignments with the United Nntions and
the specialized agencies, both at Headquarter s a nd in
field operations, and for national service :
( b) Advanced training for persons now serving in
such posts;
( c) Research and seminars on operations of the
United Nation;; and the specialir.ed agencies.
119711, plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.

1828 ( XVII ). Land reform
Tit,! Grncral .1Is.~e111bly ,
Recalling its resolution 1426 ( XIV) of 5 December
1959,
Naog11i::i11g that the implementation of land reform
is an integral part of economic and social development,
1. Endorses the decision of the Economic and Social
Co1111cil contained in resolution 887 (XXX[V) of
24 July 1962 ;
2. Dra-;,;s the attrntion of the Governments of States
Members of the U nited Nations and members of the
specialized agencies to the importance of implementing
land reform in conjunction with ndet[u:ttc mea~urcs of
community development;
10 United

~ations publi,:ltion, Sales No.: 62.11.H: ' .
