VI.

Recognizing the importance of research, training and
information activities for the increased participation of
women in the development process at all levels,
Recognizing also the importance of research, training
and information activities for the implementation of the
Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement
ofWomen, 79
l. Requests the International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women to strengthen its
activities in research and training for the formulation of
policy analysis, planning and programming relevant to the
increased participation of women in development,
especially its activities in statistics, indicators and data relevant to women, in particular in the developing countries,
at the national and regional levels;
2. Also requests the Institute to give particular emphasis in its programme of activities to innovative methodological approaches related to women and development in
research, training and information programmes;
3. Calls upon competent institutions and organizations
within and outside the United Nations system to continue
their collaboration with the Institute by strengthening the
network of co-operative arrangements related to programmes concerning women and development;
4. Invites States, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to contribute to the United Nations
Trust Fund for the International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women, in view of the
long-term projection for the work of the Institute;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session a report on
the activities of the Institute;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session the item entitled "International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women".
96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985

40/39. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the United
Nations, as stated in Articles 1 and 55 of the Charter, is to
promote universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction of any kind,
including distinction as to sex,
Reaffirming that women and men should participate
equally in social, economic and political development,
should contribute equally to such development and should
share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling its resolution 34/180 of 18 December 1979,
by which it adopted the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Recalling also its resolutions 35/140 of 11 December
1980, 36/131 of 14 December 1981, 37/64 of3 December
1982, 38/109 of 16 December 1983 and 39/130 of 14
December 1984,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the Convention, 82
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women on the
work of its fourth session, 83
82 A/40/623.

83 Official Records of the General Assembly. Fortieth Se.1.non. Supplement

No. 4J (A/40/45).

217

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

l. Notes with appreciation the increasing number of
Member States that have ratified or acceded to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women;
2. Urges all States that have not yet ratified or acceded
to the Convention to do so as soon as possible, taking into
account the World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace, held at Nairobi from
15 to 26 July 1985;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit annually
to the General Assembly a report on the status of the Convention;
4. Takes note of the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women on the
work of its fourth session;
5.. Emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under the
Convention;
6. Urges States parties to make all possible efforts to
submit their initial implementation reports in accordance
with article 18 of the Convention and the guidelines of the
Committee, and requests the Committee, in organizing its
work, to ensure that the reports of States parties are adequately reviewed within the quadrennial cycle envisaged
in the Convention;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to make all efforts to
ensure adequate servicing for the effective functioning of
the Committee as a treaty body of the United Nations;
8. Takes note once again of the discussion in the Committee, at its third session, 84 concerning the inclusion in
the agenda of a future session of an item on ways and
means of implementing article 21 of the Convention,
which provides that the Committee may make suggestions
and general recommendations based on the examination
of reports;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
report of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women to the Commission on the Status of
Women, for information.
96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985

40/98.

Improvement of the role of the United
Nations in the field of social development

The General Assembly.
Recalling the Declaration on Social Progress and Development based on the Charter of the United Nations and
solemnly proclaimed on l l December 1969, 85
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (SVI) of 1 May 197 4, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 33/48 of 14 December
1978 on world social development and 35/56 of 5 December 1980, the annex to which contains the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade,
Bearing in mind the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies
for the Advancement of Women, adopted by the World
Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of
the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Devel84 Ibid.. Jhmy-mnth Sesswn. 'iupp/emem No. 45 (A/39/45). vol. II. para

360.
8, Ser resolution 2542 (XXIV,
