United Nations

S/PV.4913

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

4913

th meeting
Friday, 20 February 2004, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wang Guangya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (China)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Adechi
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Khalid
Mr. Baja
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Konuzin
Ms. Menéndez
Mr. Thomson
Mr. Holliday

Agenda
The situation in Timor-Leste
Special report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (S/2004/117)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-24566 (E)

*
0
4
2
4
5
6
6
*

S/PV.4913

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor-Leste
Special report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (S/2004/117)
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Fiji, Indonesia,
Ireland, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Singapore, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand and Timor-Leste, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

“I have the honour to request that the
Executive Secretary of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, Ambassador João
Augusto de Médicis, participate, without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 39 of the
Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
in the Council’s public meeting on Timor-Leste,
to be held next Friday, 20 February 2004.”
That letter has been issued as a document of the
security Council under the symbol S/2004/120.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. João
Augusto de Médicis.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. João Augusto de Médicis to take a
seat at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm welcome
to His Excellency Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/117, which contains the special
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. RamosHorta (Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council
table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to document S/2004/108,
which contains a letter dated 11 February 2004 from
Portugal, and document S/2004/114, which contains a
letter dated 12 February 2004 from Timor-Leste.

The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
I now give the floor to Mr. Guéhenno.

I invite Mr. Guéhenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

Mr. Guéhenno: I am pleased and honoured to
introduce the special report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) (S/2004/117), in the presence of His
Excellency Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Foreign Minister of
Timor-Leste.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 18 February 2004 from the
Permanent Representative of Brazil, which reads as
follows:

The report presents, as promised, proposals for
continued support to Timor-Leste after the conclusion
of the current mandate on 20 May 2004. We welcome
this opportunity to share with Council members the

There being no objection, it is so decided.

2

S/PV.4913

thinking behind our proposals, and hope that this may
support a fruitful debate.
Before discussing the report itself, I would like to
bring to the attention of the Security Council two
recent developments in Timor-Leste that are not
reflected in the text. First, I would like to note that,
some days ago, President Gusmão approved the law on
village elections. This is an important advance in terms
of reinforcing the role of electoral processes in TimorLeste and in fostering local engagement in governance.
It is expected that further steps will be taken to clarify
the roles and responsibilities of village chiefs and
village councils. These will be the first elections in
independent Timor-Leste, and will be the basis on
which broader electoral laws can be developed for
national elections.
Secondly, I wish to inform members of the
Security Council of a recent incident that suggests the
continuing fragility of the situation on the ground,
particularly in the area near the border. While this
incident took place before the issuance of the present
report, it could not be included in the text because of
the incomplete level of information at that time.
On 29 January, a group of villagers from West
Timor entered Timor-Leste and, possibly in a
continuation of a local feud, burned some structures in
a village in the area and may have stolen some
livestock. Timorese officials, supported by UNMISET,
continue to investigate the incident and discuss it with
Indonesian counterparts. This incident was also
reviewed at the inter-command meeting, held in Bali
earlier this week, which was attended not only by
Indonesian and UNMISET military commanders, but
also by the Commander of the Timor-Leste armed
forces, Brigadier General Taur Matan Ruak.
I would now like to turn to the report before the
members of the Security Council.
An appeal for additional support for Timor-Leste
after 20 May 2004 faces a paradoxical challenge
because of the remarkable progress that has already
occurred. It is, indeed, easy to forget that Timor-Leste
has taken shape in less than five years. But the reality
is that there is a limit to how much can be achieved in
so short a period of time, and Timor-Leste, the poorest
country in South-East Asia, continues to face
significant challenges, for which it will continue to
require international assistance.

When
the
Security
Council
established
UNMISET on 20 May 2002, it acknowledged that the
Mission’s assistance would be crucial even after the
country
crossed
the
symbolic
threshold
of
independence. The mission was mandated to support
the continued development of an independent TimorLeste and to build upon what had been achieved until
then. That decision testified to the Council’s
determination that, as noted by the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, there should be no exit without strategy.
Remarkable progress has occurred since then, based on
close partnership between the international community
and the Timorese leadership and people. But as the
conclusion of UNMISET’s original two-year mandate
approaches, it is clear that the line of true selfsufficiency has not yet been crossed.
As reflected in the Secretary-General’s report, the
Secretariat has concluded that the continued presence
of a small peacekeeping operation for an additional
one-year consolidation phase is essential to reinforce
and strengthen what has been achieved to date. The
Secretariat’s recommendations were based upon an
extensive analysis, including by UNMISET, of needs
on the ground, and drew upon valuable input from
Member States. They also seek to take full account of
the vision of the Timorese leadership for their
country’s progress.
The recommendations were derived through a
two-step process. The first step was to determine tasks
in the most concrete terms, reflecting crucial gaps in
Timorese capacity that could threaten the country’s
stability and security and where no viable alternative
form of support exists. Secondly, in those cases where
we concluded that United Nations assistance was
crucial, we sought to identify the best means through
which UNMISET could contribute. In most cases,
those recommendations have emphasized an advisory
rather than operational approach since that is more
compatible with Timor-Leste’s progress towards selfsufficiency. Where an operational role was under
consideration, we gave particular attention to assuming
responsibilities that we were confident we could
discharge effectively.
I would now like briefly to summarize the
recommendations that resulted from that analysis and
discuss the logic behind them. The provision of
assistance to the public administration has been one of
the most challenging tasks undertaken by the United
Nations in Timor-Leste. The speed of progress is

3

S/PV.4913

limited both by the complexity of the skills that are
being imparted and by the close linkage between a
country’s institutional development and a process of
political evolution that cannot be artificially
accelerated.
When
UNMISET
began,
Timor-Leste’s
administration included about 8,700 Timorese civil
servants out of a total of approximately 13,190. Today,
that number has increased to 11,000, and significant
headway has been made in strengthening institutions of
State. Skills have increased steadily, and civil servants
are effectively discharging many functions on a daily
basis. But as recognized in the Secretary-General’s
report, further assistance is crucial for two broad
reasons.
First, it is necessary to support the continued
development of Timorese capacities and to ensure the
country’s functioning during that process. This is
particularly urgent in those areas that are critical to
long- and short-term stability, such as the Ministries of
Finance and the Interior, the Office of the Secretary for
Defence and the justice system.
Secondly, preparation of civil service legislation
has barely begun. International assistance is crucial for
the formulation of the policy and legislative
frameworks that will provide secure foundations for the
country’s future development.
We believe that this additional year of support
would make a meaningful difference in enabling the
country to reach the threshold of self-sufficiency.
However, for the reasons that I mentioned, there are
real limits to what can be achieved, and some further
long-term assistance may be required even after this
period. For that reason, the responsibilities of civilian
advisers will include the identification of alternative
solutions by which to continue support, if that remains
necessary after this year has ended. Already, since the
report was issued, the Government has convened a
workshop with UNMISET and development partners
where it presented plans based on the clear
understanding that those advisers, if approved, would
conclude their assignment in May 2005. The
Government has launched an intensive discussion on
means to ensure a smooth transition after that
assistance ended.
The recommendations to the Security Council in
support of the conduct of serious crimes investigations
and proceedings would allow progress in an area where

4

much has already been done. As reflected in the
Secretary-General’s report, 81 indictments have now
been issued, with 369 indictees. A total of 48
convictions have resulted — two having been issued in
the past two weeks — as well as one acquittal. Thirteen
of these were related to the 10 priority cases, while
trials with regard to two further priority cases are
ongoing and are expected to conclude by May 2004.
However, as indicated in the Secretary-General’s
report, a number of trials will remain pending by 20
May 2004 and further indictments are in the process of
preparation, including those related to the killing of
two local United Nations staff. Continued international
assistance is crucial for this process, which gives
expression to the Security Council’s determination that
such crimes will not be perpetrated with impunity and
helps to reduce the risk of tensions among the
Timorese population, while strengthening confidence
in the justice system. The support we have proposed
will permit completion of serious crimes cases at the
trial level and progress at the appellate level, in
particular with relation to the 10 priority cases.
I would like also to note that, as indicated in the
Secretary-General’s report, the great majority of those
who have been indicted remain outside the country.
Close cooperation among Member States will be
essential to ensure that all those who are responsible
are brought to justice.
Turning to UNMISET’s programme in support of
internal security and
law
enforcement,
the
establishment of an effective and professional police
force has been, and remains, a core objective of the
United Nations involvement in Timor-Leste. It is also
an area where, despite inevitable frustrations at the
complexity of the task, notable progress has been
achieved. When UNMISET began, approximately
1,800 Timorese police officers had been trained and
deployed, and the contingent of 1,250 United Nations
police had responsibility for all executive policing
functions. Today — just 21 months later — the
Timorese police force, now numbering 3,024, has
assumed responsibility for all daily, routine patrolling
throughout the country. That includes the assumption
of responsibilities along the border area, where they are
playing a key role under difficult circumstances. The
United Nations has retained daily operational
responsibilities only in the area of crowd control, in
order to afford the Timorese riot unit the time it
requires to undergo additional intensive training before

S/PV.4913

20 May 2004. As reflected in the report, the
international police contingent now includes only this
125-officer formed police unit and approximately 200
officers who are advising and discharging residual
headquarters functions.
For all the progress that has been achieved, the
creation of law enforcement agencies takes time.
International assistance will remain crucial for a further
12 months after 20 May 2004 to ensure the police
service’s effective functioning and to reinforce
professional values and skills.
As reflected, this would be based upon the
continued deployment of 157 civilian police advisers
after May — down from the current figure of 200 —
with staffing requirements to be reviewed by the end of
the year. Further adjustments should also be possible to
accommodate bilateral assistance that materializes on
the ground before the end of April, when our proposals
will be finalized.
We also gave extensive consideration to the
possibility of UNMISET’s retaining an operational role
in responding to civil disturbance. We share the
analysis of some Member States that such problems
could indeed occur. However, the Timorese leadership
has indicated its strong preference for the exercise of
full executive authority in policing after May 2004, and
it would be logical that operational responsibilities in
this area, as in others, be undertaken by Timorese
forces, in order to preserve a single line of command.
We undertook an extensive review of the capacity of
the Timorese anti-riot unit and concluded that its
preparation should be adequate by 20 May 2004.
For those reasons, we concluded that the better
course would be to redouble our training efforts
through the end of the current mandate and to retain an
advisory presence after that date. At the same time, it is
urgent that the leadership of Timor-Leste develop the
necessary legislative and policy frameworks, which
will clarify the basis for cooperation between the
armed forces and the police, in particular with regard to
back-up in the case of civil disturbance.
Finally, progress in the area of external security
and border control has benefited greatly from the
statesmanlike commitment that has been shown by the
Indonesian and Timorese leadership. However,
agreement on the border and on practical arrangements
for its management has not yet been reached, and the
potential for tensions or destabilizing actions remains

within communities in the western districts. At the
same time, the creation of structures and relationships
on the ground requires further time. While the Border
Patrol Unit has assumed its responsibilities, and while
the Timorese armed forces (F-FDTL) have continued to
develop, both institutions remain thinly stretched, and
further clarification of their responsibilities is essential.
In addition, the establishment of the Rapid Deployment
Service remains considerably behind schedule.
In this context, an essential role continues to be
played by military observers, who are monitoring
developments within a potentially volatile area and are
supporting close relationships between Timorese and
Indonesian border personnel. It is therefore
recommended that a small group of 42 military liaison
officers could be retained along the border to discharge
similar functions for a further year after 20 May 2004.
The requirement for their presence could be reviewed
in December, against progress in border arrangements
and the development of necessary Timorese capacity.
This proposal brings an additional requirement —
the need to incorporate a realistic strategy for the
protection of those officers who will deploy, unarmed,
in an uncertain environment in which local response
capacity is still limited. It is our responsibility as
managers to measure very carefully the risks faced by
the men and women provided by our Member States;
the importance of appropriate precautions has been all
too clearly demonstrated over the past year.
In this context, it is proposed that a small formed
military presence, with aviation and support, be
retained after May 2004; this component would number
308 personnel in total. Its primary role would be to
provide security, protection and extraction for United
Nations personnel — in particular our military liaison
officers, but also police and civilians.
At the same time, that presence would help
respond to the priority goal of the Timorese leadership,
as conveyed in Prime Minister Alkatiri’s letter to the
Secretary-General, that a continued international
military presence be provided to promote calm at a
time of potential volatility. By maintaining a high level
of visibility through regular patrols and civil-military
cooperation, that component could help limit the
destabilizing effect of too abrupt a downsizing
exercise. In extremis, it could help Timorese security
agencies to respond to security threats by providing
support in such areas as logistics, transportation,

5

S/PV.4913

communications and information, in regard to which
they will certainly require assistance for the next 12
months.
(spoke in French)
Member States have shown their keen and shared
desire to continue to provide effective assistance to
Timor-Leste. However, there are a number of different
ideas on how best to do so. That is why we have
submitted this report well in advance of the time when
the Security Council must take its decision, on 20 May
2004. It is our hope that the proposals put forward
today will assist in achieving consensus on those tasks
which the United Nations Mission will be able
effectively to carry out after 20 May 2004, and on the
best way to do so, on the basis of the report and in a
manner that meets with the full support of the host
country.
The Security Council’s ultimate decisions on
support to Timor-Leste after 20 May 2004 will need to
take into account developments on the ground between
now — that is, mid-February — and May. There may
be changes in the security situation, progress in the
development of Timorese capability, and additional
provisions relating to bilateral assistance from which
Timor-Leste could benefit. In a number of areas, the
decisions and actions taken by the Timorese political
leadership will be crucial to the validity of these
proposals, as is noted in the report. The Secretariat
therefore intends to provide an additional report before
the end of the present mandate that will update and
fully inform the Council so that it can take its decisions
accordingly.
It is doubtful whether any nation has ever
advanced as rapidly as Timor-Leste along the path to
self-sufficiency. This has permitted a swift downsizing
in the international presence, as reflected in the charts
attached to the Secretary-General’s report. Clearly this
illustrates the dynamic which underlies the transfer of
responsibility to the authorities of Timor-Leste.
Nonetheless, there are always limits to what can
be achieved in so short a period of time. It is our hope
that the Security Council will give the fullest
consideration to the proposals outlined in the
Secretary-General’s report. Those proposals represent a
modest additional effort as compared to what has
already been done, but we believe that they could play
a decisive role in consolidating all that has been
achieved so far.

6

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Guéhenno for his briefing.
I wish to recall that there are 30 speakers
scheduled for this morning. Many of them have
indicated to me that they do not wish to speak at
another meeting. Therefore, in accordance with the
understanding reached among Council members, I wish
to remind all speakers that, other than Under-SecretaryGeneral Guéhenno and Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta
of Timor-Leste, representatives’ statements will be
limited to no more than five minutes in order to enable
the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to
deliver condensed versions when speaking in the
Chamber. I thank them for their understanding and
cooperation.
I now call on the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this public meeting on TimorLeste. I also thank Under-Secretary-General JeanMarie Guéhenno for his comprehensive briefing and
wish to echo his words this morning concerning the
need to avoid a premature and potentially destabilizing
withdrawal of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET).
My delegation welcomes the presence among us
of Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Timor-Leste, as well as of Ambassador João
Augusto de Médicis, Executive Secretary of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP).
Their contribution to our discussions will be of great
importance.
I speak as the current Chairman of CPLP, in full
coordination with Ambassador Ismael Gaspar Martins
of Angola, a fellow member of the Council and of
CPLP.
Brazil considers this agenda item to be highly
important on account of the historic role played by the
United Nations in the birth of independent TimorLeste. This is a vivid example of how the United
Nations can harness political will and financial and
human resources in an effective way.
My Government is pleased to note that the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor stresses that much
has been achieved in the areas of public administration,

S/PV.4913

serious crimes, internal security and Timor-Leste’s
relationship with Indonesia, which is based on
friendship and mutual respect.
Notwithstanding several positive aspects, the
report highlights that present deficiencies must be
addressed with the continued support of the
international community. UNMISET was planned on
the basis that Timor-Leste would be in a position to
achieve self-sufficiency within two years of its
independence. However, as reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s previous report, it has become increasingly
clear that further assistance to Timor-Leste will be
required in a number of areas after 20 May 2004, when
UNMISET’s mandate has been expected to expire.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s special
report, Timor-Leste’s political institutions are gaining
strength, but the early level of their development is a
reminder of their fragility. Although acts of widespread
violence have not occurred during the reporting period,
the security situation in Timor-Leste continues to be
jeopardized by destabilizing groups which continue to
operate across the border in West Timor. Indeed, the
Secretary-General’s report points out that sightings of
armed gangs and criminal elements in bordering
districts have continued, as does the suspicion of
possible preparations for destabilizing activity by other
groups with unclear agendas. This morning, UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno has provided the Council
with an example of why fears of destabilization still
persist in East Timor. The Council is confronted here
with the need to address a delicate balance.
In conformity with the report, Brazil strongly
favours retaining a military component within
UNMISET for a further 12-month consolidation phase,
since Timorese capacity to respond to destabilizing
activities still falls short of their security needs and
capabilities. The visible presence of the UNMISET
military component, supported by regular patrolling,
will certainly continue to have a deterrent effect and
help to maintain a calm environment in the country. An
international presence for an additional year would
allow Timor-Leste to reach a long-sought threshold of
stability and development. Furthermore, the military
component would also ensure the protection of United
Nations equipment and personnel on the ground.
The national police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) has
made significant strides these last three years towards
assuming full responsibility for the maintenance of law

and order. However, its capacity, experience and policy
frameworks remain limited, particularly with regard to
the special units. The Secretary-General’s report
acknowledges that it will not be possible to create an
effective rapid deployment capability force within the
PNTL to deal with armed groups in the border districts
before 20 May 2004. International civilian police can
make a crucial contribution towards building the
capacity of PNTL as a non-political, professional
police service.
Another critical area for the future of Timor-Leste
is the strengthening of the rule of law. This is a
precondition not only for promoting human rights, but
also for laying solid groundwork for a sound economic
system.
In the field of criminal justice, Timor-Leste still
faces a dearth of judges, prosecutors, lawyers,
investigators, forensic experts and interpreters. It is
also important to address legal problems that might
inhibit economic recovery and public safety,
particularly the need for the adoption of the Civil
Service Act, legislation against corruption and laws
related to the armed forces and the police.
It is also essential to maintain the current level of
public services. The deterioration of such services,
which include health and education, would affect the
most vulnerable and could constitute a blow to
confidence in the future of Timor-Leste. In due time, it
is also expected that the exploitation of oil and gas
reserves will provide the Timorese Government with
sound sources of revenue.
We have reached a critical juncture in Timor
Leste. The international community has made an
impressive investment in the future of the country and
should continue to work in concert towards helping
Timor-Leste’s institutions to attain full-fledged
sufficiency.
My Government supports the recommendation
made by the Secretary-General that the Security
Council extend the current mission for a further 12month consolidation phase. UNMISET would continue
to be headed by a special representative and the
Mission would retain civilian, police and military
components, although in a reduced and modified form,
as outlined by the Secretary-General. The United
Nations would closely monitor the needs of the
Timorese Government so as to implement the
downsizing of the configuration of UNMISET

7

S/PV.4913

accordingly. In the light of these considerations, I
would like to point out that Brazil and CPLP believe
that this debate may open the doors to the negotiation
of a consensual resolution on the future of UNMISET,
taking the Secretary-General’s recommendations as a
basis. Together with Angola, Brazil is ready to start
negotiating a draft resolution.
The fact that Timor-Leste is a remarkable success
story for the United Nations should not be
overestimated by the international community. Much
remains to be done. The struggle of the Timorese
people for independence also serves as a catalyst for
tackling challenges on the international agenda. The
Security Council and other organs of the United
Nations must continue to attach to Timor-Leste the
high priority it deserves.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): We wish
to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno for his extremely
specific briefing, which will be most useful in our
further considerations. The representative of Ireland
will shortly make a statement on behalf of the
European Union, which we fully endorse.
Like other delegations, we have many reasons to
be pleased by events in Timor-Leste. First, we take the
opportunity afforded by the presence of Mr. José
Ramos-Horta, Minister for Foreign Affairs of TimorLeste, to express our gratification at the progress that
has been made by the people of Timor-Leste since its
accession to independence and the deployment of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).
At the same time, along with that outstanding
progress, there remain reasons for concern. I refer
especially to the fact that, in some ways, the domestic
security of the country is still fragile, due in particular
to the activities of armed groups, which have already
been mentioned. Externally, the armed forces of TimorLeste are apparently unable to cope alone with
potential serious border incidents. Finally, the issue of
the repatriation of East Timorese refugees in West
Timor remains a potential source of instability.
In that context, what should we do? France, for
its part, supports an extension of UNMISET’s mandate
for a one-year period, as recommended by the
Secretary-General. Such an extension should enable the
United Nations to consolidate the gains achieved. In
our view, we should reconfigure the mandate and
emphasize assistance to Timor-Leste’s authorities. The

8

main ideas proposed by the Secretary-General seem
relevant. UNMISET must continue to provide
assistance to the country’s judicial system and
administrative agencies and must help to maintain
security and stability by supporting in particular the
training of Timor-Leste’s police force.
At this stage, it is difficult to assess either the size
or the components UNMISET will need after the
extension and reconfiguration of its mandate. For our
part, we have confidence in the proposals to be made
by the Secretary-General when he indicates the format
he believes to be best adapted to the needs on the
ground. We should, of course, also be attentive to the
concerns of the various parties involved and to the
development of the situation on the ground.
In parallel, it remains important that we define a
clear exit strategy. The extension of UNMISET’s
mandate must enable the United Nations to continue its
disengagement. Clearly, it is essential that the
Organization show its capacity to terminate its
operations when the right conditions have been met and
its capacity to extend stabilization efforts through
development assistance and involvement by bilateral
donors.
Thus, we should like to make a threefold
suggestion. UNMISET’s timetable should not exceed
one year, depending, of course, on the situation on the
ground. We believe that in order to hold to such a
deadline, we should set out a precise troop-reduction
schedule until UNMISET’s ultimate withdrawal.
Finally, we believe we should also continue to
encourage the Timorese authorities to pursue their
efforts with a view to consolidating the State and
strengthening the country’s independence.
Mr.
Pleuger
(Germany):
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting
and for inviting Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste,
whose presence we welcome. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2004/117) and
to thank Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for its
comprehensive and able presentation this morning.
The representative of Ireland will make a
statement on behalf of the European Union later in this
debate, and we fully associate ourselves with that
statement.

S/PV.4913

The report of the Secretary-General attests once
more to the remarkable achievements of the people of
Timor-Leste in building a peaceful and democratic
society. They have been supported in their endeavour
by Kamalesh Sharma, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and by all the staff of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), to whom we owe great thanks. Because
of their excellent and dedicated work, Timor-Leste is
today generally considered to be a remarkable success
story of the United Nations system.
We
agree
with
the
Secretary-General’s
observation that further assistance on the part of the
international community will be essential to
consolidate and build upon the achievements of the
past 18 months and to tackle the remaining challenges
in Timor-Leste. As the report rightly points out, the
young institutions of this country still require United
Nations support in a limited consolidation phase to
assist in the further strengthening of Timor-Leste’s
judicial and security apparatuses. We therefore support
the Secretary-General’s recommendation to extend
UNMISET for a further year in a reduced size and with
a modified mandate.
As Ambassador Negroponte pointed out in our
last meeting on this item, on 15 October 2003, the
international community should remain engaged in
ensuring the establishment of security and stability in
East Timor after May. And while we share the view
that there is a need for a continued international
security component, Germany is quite flexible with
regard to the adequate means.
Bearing in mind that the security threats — which
the Secretary-General outlined in his report — are
mostly of an internal dimension, we believe that the
proposal submitted by Australia for an emergency
security response indeed deserves consideration and
would be well suited to meet the likely security
challenges ahead. Such a force would have the
particular expertise required for police work and would
visibly reaffirm the international community’s
commitment to Timor-Leste. It would thus have the
same psychological effect as a military force but might
be more adequate than a military component in the
already advanced state of nation-building in TimorLeste.
On the other hand, we take note of the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that a security component,

comprising some 310 military personnel, be deployed
to provide protection for 42 military liaison officers, to
maintain a reassuring presence in the border regions
and to provide a quick-reaction capability if required.
We also take note of the fact that the Government of
Timor-Leste has expressed a clear preference for an
even larger military component.
From our point of view, it is now of paramount
importance to maintain the unity of the Security
Council that has been contributing so much to the
success in Timor-Leste. We must not jeopardize what
has been achieved with so much effort and dedication.
Germany is therefore prepared to join a consensus
along the lines suggested by the Secretary-General —
including with regard to the military component — if
the Security Council can agree on a continued
peacekeeping force element in Timor-Leste. Otherwise,
perhaps a compromise could be found by adding a
number of armed international police forces, provided
countries are willing to contribute in that regard, and
reducing the suggested number of envisaged military
personnel.
The international community is now in the
favourable position that in any event, only a
substantially diminished United Nations presence will
be required after 20 May 2004. The question of
whether such international security assistance will be
provided by armed police or by an armed military
component seems to me more of a technical than of a
political nature. And I am confident that this issue will
not prevent us from finding a consensual solution that
is practical, efficient and adequate.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guéhenno for
presenting the report of 13 February on Timor-Leste
(S/2004/117). We are particularly grateful for the
presence of Minister José Ramos-Horta, with whose
country Chile has deep ties of friendship. We
appreciate the analysis of the Secretary-General’s
technical assessment mission of early January, which
evaluated on the ground the assistance necessary for
strengthening Timor-Leste’s democratic foundations
and provided projections for such assistance beyond
May of this year.
I would like to begin by expressing support for
the Secretary-General’s proposal to extend the current
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor

9

S/PV.4913

(UNMISET) for a further 12-month consolidation
stage.
In connection with the first programme outlined
in the report (S/2004/117), my delegation completely
agrees that providing assistance to the justice system
and administrative structures is essential for the
viability and political stability of Timor-Leste. We are
concerned about delays in the administration of justice
and shortcomings in human rights procedures, and we
agree that capacities in this field must be strengthened.
In connection with the second programme, the
training of the police force, we agree that we must
continue to contribute to and support the process of
training the National Police of Timor-Leste. We
particularly appreciate the fact that 3,024 members of
the police force are already patrolling, in every district
in the country. However, we understand that the
National Police needs to continue its training, with a
particular view to achieving a higher level of
professionalism, effectiveness and responsibility. We
believe it is also essential that intensive training of the
Rapid Intervention Unit continue and that UNMISET
maintain assessment and monitoring personnel in that
field.
In connection with the third programme, namely
the maintenance of external security, we agree that this
is a central element in achieving stability in TimorLeste. We resolutely support the Secretary-General’s
proposal in this regard, as we deem it both appropriate
and realistic. We believe that the deployment of 42
military liaison officers to monitor the security
situation and support demarcation activities is a good
measure, as is the deployment of a military force to
support the work of those officers. A total military
peacekeeping component of about 350 troops seems to
us to be reasonable.
We are pleased to note the excellent
communication and cooperation between Timor-Leste
and Indonesia and their mutual commitments in the
political field. We hope that an agreement on
provisional border demarcation will soon be reached
and that the perpetrators of serious crimes will be
brought to justice. We also hope for continued bilateral
strengthening, since this will without a doubt further
the consolidation of stability in Timor-Leste.
In the field of human rights, we appreciate the
assistance that UNMISET has provided in the
investigation of crimes committed in 1999,

10

investigations that have led to 81 indictments.
Assistance will be needed to complete all
investigations of serious crimes. This will undoubtedly
promote greater confidence in the justice system and
strengthen the message that those who commit such
crimes will not enjoy impunity. Here, we particularly
value the work accomplished by the Commission on
Reception, Truth, and Reconciliation, and we hope that
it will continue its investigations with a view to issuing
a report by the end of October this year.
Lastly, we reiterate our view that, in order for
UNMISET’s task to be completed and for continued
support to be brought to the task of consolidating and
broadening the achievements made, the mandate should
be renewed for an additional year, reducing the
mission’s size and modifying its mandate. We hope that
the Council will display unity in supporting this
proposal for the benefit of Timor-Leste and its people.
Mr.
Baja
(Philippines):
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for convening this public meeting of the
Security Council on East Timor. We also thank UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno for his comprehensive
and positive briefing on East Timor, and we welcome
the Foreign Minister of East Timor, Mr. José RamosHorta, to our meeting.
At this stage, we can justifiably consider the case
of East Timor as a model of United Nations
involvement that is close to being a success. The
odyssey started with the United Nations Mission in
East Timor (UNAMET) in 1999, followed by the
Security Council-authorized International Force in East
Timor (INTERFET) also in that year; then came the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) in 2000 and, now, the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).
The
Under-Secretary-General
has
articulated the achievements of the United Nations
presence there.
Notwithstanding the gains made by East Timor
and UNMISET, there remain areas of concern that
could necessitate a continued United Nations presence
in East Timor in order to build a stable and sustainable
democracy. Foremost among those concerns is the
maintenance of peace and security. We believe that an
immediate pullout of the international military and
police presence there might create a security vacuum in
the country. A continued United Nations security
presence there, however, will be able to deal, under

S/PV.4913

East Timor’s operational leadership, with law
enforcement activities and to take care of possible
disturbances from remnants of the anti-independence
militia and other criminal elements. This security
presence will also be able to assist in the continued
development of the East Timor National Police and
provide protection to United Nations military liaison
officers. It will also be able to assist in institutional
capacity-building to ensure the stability and
functioning of Government in civil administration.
East Timor has requested a continued military
presence and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has recommended such an extension for
another year, in a reduced size and with a modified
mandate. We urge the Security Council to head East
Timor’s requests and vision and to support the
professional advice and recommendations of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
East Timor boasts a committed team of leaders
who not only are politically astute and mature but also
understand the challenges confronting their newly
independent country and are aware of the
responsibilities involved in ensuring its sustainable
development. East Timor inner strength also comes
from the resolve of its people to survive.
Nevertheless, efforts to create means for
sustainable development and secure economic growth
must be provided. The country is one of the least
endowed on Earth. Its population is heterogeneous in
language and culture. The country does not as yet have
major industries; unemployment is high; and the
infrastructure is poorly developed. Hope for economic
salvation lies in expected revenues from oil and natural
gas in the Timor Sea, but as revenues from this source
have been delayed, the assistance of United Nations
agencies, bilateral donors and the Asian Development
Bank must be maintained. There is also an urgent need
to concentrate on human resources development,
particularly in developing mandatory basic education
and in imbuing the people of Timor-Leste with
entrepreneurial skills.
Other key areas for assistance, as referred to by
the Under-Secretary-General, include the management
of public finances and the justice system. The judiciary,
owing to the incomplete legal and procedural
framework in which it operates, is not yet fully capable
of implementing the rule of law in a manner consistent
with international human rights standards. This

includes the conduct of serious-crimes investigations
and proceedings.
East Timor’s political and economic growth,
however, relies on a global consensus on the need to
assist the country. Japan, Australia, the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries and the
European Union are important contributors to the
creation of a viable nation. Indonesia is a key
neighbouring, and my delegation notes the growing
progress in the relations between Indonesia and East
Timor.
At the tenth ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)
ministerial meeting, held on 18 June 2003, the
ministers issued a paragraph on East Timor, which
reads:
“The
Ministers
congratulated
the
Government of Timor-Leste on its progress since
independence. In particular, the Ministers noted
the positive relationship developing between
Timor-Leste and Indonesia. They noted that a
number of ARF participants continued to make
major contributions to the post-independence
multilateral effort in Timor-Leste. The Ministers
stressed that, as part of the Asia-Pacific, TimorLeste’s future was reliant on the development of
economic, political and security ties with its
neighbours.”
We also note that a joint border commission has
been established by Indonesia and Timor-Leste to take
care of border and refugee concerns, among other
issues. A joint bilateral commission has also been
created to monitor and address other issues of common
concern. There have also been high-level visits
between the two countries, and they have just recently
concluded negotiations on an air services agreement
that is now ready for signing by the respective
Governments.
In baseball, one has to touch home plate in order
to score a run and to win. East Timor is already on
third base and in the final inning. It needs to score a
run. We urge the Security Council to help East Timor
to win by extending UNMISET for another year, as
recommended by the Secretary-General. Then, when
the success story of East Timor is told, it will be a tale
of how the United Nations, through the Security
Council and UNMISET, and the international
community as a whole, helped East Timor to stand on
its feet, make the decisive run and win against all odds.

11

S/PV.4913

Ms. Menéndez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation, too, welcomes the presence here of Foreign
Minister Ramos-Horta. Spain is also grateful for the
excellent, detailed and comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/117), which takes into
account the conclusions of the technical assessment
mission of the Secretariat that was conducted last
month. We are also grateful to Mr. Guéhenno for his
briefing.
The report of the Secretary-General contains an
assessment of the achievements made by Timor-Leste,
with the support of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), and proposes the
extension of the mission’s mandate for one year, as
well as the modification of the mandate and a reduction
in the size of the mission, in order to meet the
objectives initially established and to ensure that
Timor-Leste can be self-sufficient.
Spain fully supports the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in all their aspects, including the
maintenance of a reduced military component within
UNMISET, composed of both military observers and
troops, with a view to ensuring the stability and
security of Timor-Leste. Indeed, the additional
measures proposed in the report — comparatively
modest when compared with earlier efforts — will be
indispensable if we are to ensure the successful
consolidation of the institutions of Timor-Leste and
prevent backsliding. Clearly, the cooperation of the
Timorese institutions will also be necessary; they still
have important tasks to carry out, such as the
enactment of key legislation with regard to officials,
human rights, anti-corruption activities, the police and
defence.
We are pleased by the excellent communication
between the Governments of Timor-Leste and of
Indonesia, and we hope that they will be able to
complete work on two essential issues: the delimitation
of the land border, and the continued presence of
28,000 refugees in the western part of the island. As
the Secretary-General rightly pointed out in his report,
the situation will remain volatile until the problem is
resolved.
Of the three elements of the Secretary-General’s
proposals for UNMISET, there can be no doubt about
that relating to the maintenance of security and
stability. Those who — perhaps with excessive
optimism — believe that there are no potential risks

12

that would warrant a small peacekeeping force seem to
be forgetting that there are still certain elements that
could destabilize the country after May 2004, such as
cross-border infiltration by hundreds of former militia
members. Spain therefore supports the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that
“The ability of Timorese agencies to respond
without assistance to security incidents would be
very limited at a time when they are thinly
stretched
and
poorly
supported,
their
responsibilities are ill-defined, and their relations
with their Indonesian counterparts are at an early
and fragile stage of development”. (S/2004/117,
para. 49)
Thus, maintaining a military component in
UNMISET for just one more year will undoubtedly
reduce the risk of destabilizing incidents, in particular
in the western districts. Furthermore, it would make it
possible to consolidate stability and increase local
confidence at the same time as the East Timor security
agencies develop their own capabilities and their
relations with their Indonesian counterparts.
In conclusion, we would like to point out that the
United Nations has made an enormous effort to help
and defend the people of Timor-Leste through three
peacekeeping missions and the organization of a
referendum. The donor conference yielded many
proposals for development, institution-building,
poverty alleviation and training. We have invested too
much to lose what has been gained from one of the
most gratifying and satisfying experiences in this
Organization’s history. Spain once again wishes every
success for Timor-Leste.
Finally, we would like to say that we support the
statement to be made later by the representative of
Ireland on behalf of the European Union.
Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to welcome our distinguished
guest, Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste. We are
grateful to Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for
having introduced the special report of the SecretaryGeneral on Timor-Leste and for the detailed
information he provided on developments in the
situation in that country.
We note the ongoing stabilization of the situation
in Timor-Leste and the successes of the Timorese

S/PV.4913

authorities, with the active and vital support of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), in ensuring the establishment and
development of State institutions in the country. Of
particular importance for achieving the genuine selfsufficiency and viability of the young State is progress
towards the creation and further strengthening of the
security sector in the country.
We note the conclusion, in December 2003, of the
process of transferring responsibility for law and order
throughout the country’s territory from UNMISET to
the National Police of Timor-Leste. We also note that
the Timor-Leste authorities and the Border Patrol Unit
have undertaken control functions along the Tactical
Coordination Line between Timor-Leste and Indonesia.
We have a positive view of UNMISET’s efforts to
prepare and train the Timorese military and police
forces.
We welcome the continued development of
Timorese-Indonesian relations, particularly with regard
to such a key issue as the demarcation and settlement
of their common border. The wish expressed by both
parties to establish genuinely good-neighbourly and
mutually advantageous relations allows us to hope for a
speedy solution to the outstanding questions, including
the problem of the 28,000 Timorese refugees now on
Indonesian territory. From the point of view of the
economic development of Timor-Leste, the positive
steps in bilateral negotiations with Australia on the
demarcation of those underwater areas containing oil
resources are significant.
At the same time, despite the unquestionable
achievements, Timor-Leste continues to experience
serious problems, particularly in such vital areas as the
establishment of State administration and the
strengthening of the potential for internal and external
security, where the State agencies now being formed
are still rather fragile. Timor-Leste is yet another
example of the fact that the process of establishing
Statehood is extremely complex and labour-intensive
and cannot be artificially squeezed into rigid existing
patterns and frameworks.
In those conditions the international community,
which has made great efforts and has expended
considerable resources to achieve this final success in
Timor-Leste, must not endanger this project, which has
provided independence to the people of Timor-Leste
and enabled them to be integrated into the family of

nations on a equal footing. Russia supports the
proposal to extend for one year the activity of all three
components of UNMISET, with reduced staffing, and
believes that this measure is most fully in keeping with
the interests of a settlement in Timor-Leste. Moreover,
this is precisely what the leadership of Timor-Leste has
asked the United Nations to do.
Mr. Motoc (Romania): I too wish to welcome His
Excellency, Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta, and
through him to congratulate the authorities of TimorLeste for their steady efforts and encouraging
achievements. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his special report on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), and UnderSecretary-General Jean-Marie Guéhenno for his
briefing.
Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Irish Presidency on behalf of the
European Union. Therefore I shall confine myself to
only a few specific comments.
I will start by pointing out Romania’s confidence
in Timor-Leste’s future. With the present UNMISET
playing a valuable role, remarkable progress has been
made
in
strengthening
political
institutions,
consolidating governmental authority, promoting
regional and international cooperation and upholding
democratic principles and personal freedom. The
Government in Dili has demonstrated strong
commitment towards developing the country as a stable
and democratic nation.
Nevertheless, areas remain in which national
efforts could and should be assisted by the United
Nations beyond the present UNMISET mandate. These
include consolidating the rule of law, developing civil
society, promoting political dialogue and strengthening
the democratic institutions. Quick and resolute actions
by the Government are still required to develop the
administration’s legislative and regulatory framework,
conduct investigations of past serious crimes and
enhance observance of human rights and of the rule of
law.
Good-neighbourly relations with Indonesia
should be further pursued and strengthened. We call on
both sides to finalize the border delimitation as soon as
possible and to facilitate the return of former refugees.
Furthermore, we encourage increased bilateral
cooperation on security and justice. That will pave the
way to consolidation of confidence and stability and,

13

S/PV.4913

implicitly, an
development.

improved

climate

for

economic

Romania favours on-going support by the
international community in Timor-Leste. The Security
Council, bilateral donors and the wider international
community have invested enormous energy and
expectations in that country. The gains achieved to date
must be consolidated and expanded to secure their
irreversibility. In this regard, we welcome the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
latest report (S/2004/117). In that document he has
pointed out that a modest additional effort will
definitely make a crucial difference.
We support the extension of the United Nations
presence in Timor-Leste beyond 20 May. The three
months ahead of us will allow for the identification of
the best way ahead. We believe that the reduced postUNMISET presence, with a clear mandate, will give
the people and Government of Timor-Leste greater
confidence to continue the necessary efforts and
reforms. We are convinced that the good prospects for
development of Timorese self-sufficiency will pave the
way for the United Nations soon to leave behind a
notable account of success as our legacy there.
Finally, I wish to underline that Romania’s
genuine attachment to democratic transformation in
Timor-Leste stems from its own experience with the
challenges of transition. For us, this is one more reason
to see it as a moral duty to support Timor-Leste’s
speedy and sustainable transformation into a stable,
democratic and prosperous country.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): May I
first thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno for his briefing
and his analysis. We thank the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) and Mr. Sharma
for the excellent work accomplished. I also want to
welcome the presence of Mr. Ramos-Horta, Minister
for Foreign Affairs. He is one of the emblematic
figures in the struggle of the Timorese people for
independence.
Since its accession to independence in 2002,
Timor-Leste has made remarkable achievements, as the
Secretary-General recognized in his report. In the
course of recent months, its security situation has
improved, its political institutions are being
strengthened and its relations with its neighbours are
steadily developing. Progress has been made in
bilateral relations with Indonesia, and we welcome

14

that, particularly the work to delimit the land borders
between the two countries. We hope that the agreement
on the international land border will soon be finalized.
We appeal to the two Governments to do further work
to promote the resettlement of East Timorese returning
from West Timor and to facilitate the return of
refugees. We hope for a definitive solution to that
problem.
In spite of these achievements, there are still
important challenges to be met, particularly with regard
to the maintenance of national security and stability
and in the promotion of economic and social
development. This is completely normal for a country
that has just recently recovered its independence. In
fact, to improve capacity in public administration, to
establish and develop a justice system and strengthen
the police and national defence forces all require longterm efforts. That is why it is essential that the United
Nations and the international community continue to
support Timor-Leste.
As the Secretary-General indicated in his report,
following the end of the UNMISET mandate, there will
still be needs to be met in a certain number of fields. In
this regard, Algeria believes that the United Nations
should maintain a mission, with a clear mandate
approved by the Security Council, in order to help
improve the justice system and the structures of public
administration and to contribute to the development of
the national police and to the maintenance of security
and stability in Timor-Leste.
In that respect, we fully understand the concerns
of the Government of Timor-Leste with regard to
problems that could threaten the stability of the
country, and we believe that it is the duty of the
international community to continue to support that
young State during the crucial stage of the
establishment of its institutions.
In
that
connection,
we
support
the
recommendations of the Secretary-General that
UNMISET’s mandate be extended for a 12-month
period and that the United Nations maintain an
appropriate presence to respond to the country’s
security needs, as envisaged by the Secretariat, with,
we hope, the unanimous support of the Security
Council.
The strengthening and consolidation of peace
represent a major challenge for the international
community. It is therefore important that the United

S/PV.4913

Nations see to it that peace and development take root
in a sustainable manner in Timor-Leste. In other words,
it would be neither just nor reasonable for Timor-Leste
to be penalized for having succeeded in its transition
and for the international community to disengage itself
too quickly from that country — something that it
would eventually regret.
Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): We thank
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for his briefing,
and we welcome Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta. We
look forward to hearing what he has to say to the
Council.
The Irish Presidency will later in this debate be
making a statement on behalf of the European Union to
which the United Kingdom fully subscribes.
We join others in paying tribute to the progress
achieved in Timor-Leste over the past two years. It is a
testament to the spirit and determination of the
Timorese people. We wish also to acknowledge the
contribution that the United Nations has made under
the able leadership of Kamalesh Sharma.
It is clear already from statements this morning
that all agree with Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno
not only that there has been remarkable progress but
also that further international assistance to Timor-Leste
remains essential. The United Kingdom wishes to
support the clear emerging consensus that the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
should be extended for one further year, in a reduced
and modified form, in a consolidation phase.
As others have also said, however, much remains
to be done. There is clear continuing work for
UNMISET, and there are also areas where we would
like to see the Timorese make further progress, for
example, by passing the Civil Service Act, by
establishing the Office of the Provedor for Human
Rights and Justice, by making a commitment to rooting
out corruption, and by giving greater urgency and
commitment to the creation of an appropriate
investment culture.
We are concerned, too, about the poor relations
between the Timorese police and defence forces and
would urge the Timorese Government to address this as
a matter of urgency. We encourage the Government to
pass police and defence bills and clearly to delineate
the roles of the police and defence forces.

We share the Secretary-General’s concern about
the overall weakness of the Timorese police and
defence forces, and we remain committed to working,
both bilaterally and through the United Nations, to
assist the Government of Timor-Leste in strengthening
those institutions. We particularly welcome the
establishment of the independent inquiry into the
incident in Los Palos and hope this will be transparent
and impartial.
On the police side, the United Kingdom has been
working with Australia and the Timorese Government
on a programme for training and assistance to the
police. In that context, we would like to request the
Secretariat to coordinate plans for policing assistance
now rather than reviewing the question in December, in
order to determine appropriate numbers of police
advisers and to avoid any possible duplication.
Like other speakers, we are pleased at progress in
establishing good relations with Indonesia and at the
transformation of Timor-Leste’s external threat
environment. We urge Timor-Leste and Indonesia to
reach early agreement on their land border and
encourage both countries to continue to work together
to resolve the question of the resettlement of former
refugees and the outstanding cases of Timorese
children separated from their families.
We agree with others who have spoken previously
that we should not jeopardize the successful investment
which the international community has made in TimorLeste, and we look forward to further discussion of the
Secretary-General’s recommendations for a United
Nations presence beyond May 2004. We recognize that
there are remaining security concerns and concerns
about the preparedness of the police to deal with
security incidents. We therefore believe that the followon mission should include a security element with a
focus on policing. We continue to support a police
back-up model along the lines proposed by Australia.
Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): We would
like to associate ourselves with previous speakers in
warmly welcoming the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Timor-Leste, Mr. José Ramos-Horta. We would like
also to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guéhenno for his outstanding introduction of the report
of the Secretary-General on the commendable work of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).

15

S/PV.4913

The Council thus has before it an unvarnished
picture of the achievements and the difficulties that
characterize the daunting task undertaken in TimorLeste by the United Nations. Thanks to the unswerving
commitment of the United Nations standing by their
side, the people of Timor-Leste have, ex nihilo,
achieved indisputable progress in all areas under
consideration. Such progress is a valuable asset, and
we encourage all political players in Timor-Leste to
maintain the current dynamic.
We are fully aware of the major challenges that
must still be met by the authorities of the youngest
State in the world in establishing solid and lasting
democratic institutions that guarantee peace, security
and stability in the country.
We are also fully aware of the determination of
the authorities of Timor-Leste to do everything in their
power to build a nation that is at peace with itself and
which has good relations with its neighbours — a
nation fully committed to struggling against poverty
and for a better future. To achieve that major objective,
the problems noted must be dealt with all due attention,
and all necessary human and material resources must
be made available.
The Government of Timor-Leste, which has our
full confidence, deserves resolute support in order that
it may continue its work and undertake the necessary
measures. Here it is of critical importance to strengthen
the capacity of the Administration and the judiciary by
resorting, when necessary, to external technical
assistance. The Security Council should consider ways
and means of helping to speed up the processing of
cases involving serious crimes, in the framework of the
combat against impunity, since the overwhelming
majority of indicted individuals are outside the country.
From another point of view, we believe that the
problem of defining the respective roles of the national
police and armed forces of Timor-Leste in the
maintenance of internal security is crucial and that a
solution to that problem is decisive for maintaining the
democratic nature of the political system in TimorLeste.
The circumstances of the birth of the State of
Timor-Leste require it to have a national army with
sufficient resources to ward off external threats,
whatever their provenance. It is with real satisfaction
that we note the efforts being made jointly by the
authorities of Timor-Leste and Indonesia to establish

16

active bilateral cooperation based on goodneighbourliness, mutual respect and mutual benefit.
My delegation sees here an outstanding example
of post-conflict reconciliation. In that respect, we note
that the Secretary-General has called for close
cooperation between the forces of Timor-Leste and of
Indonesia in order to ensure the security of border
regions. That concern reflects the situation in the
region resulting from the existence of reactionary and
uncontrollable armed groups. Given that situation and
that threat, a diversification of support for the armed
forces of Timor-Leste is fully indicated.
It is fortunate that the Secretary-General has been
able to provide in his report a specific idea of the needs
to be met within a rather tight, yet energizing
timetable. We support such relevant recommendations
advocating an extension and modification of
UNMISET’s mandate to ensure an international
presence for an additional one-year period, as
requested by the Government of Timor-Leste.
Regarding recovery, reconstruction and economic
and social development, Timor-Leste now falls into the
category of least developed country. This fact was duly
consecrated by the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 58/112 of 17 December 2003. We believe
that this shows an awareness of how much work
remains in the economic and social development of the
country. We are confident that the advantages deriving
from least-developed-country status can allow TimorLeste to enjoy increased support from the international
community in the areas of international trade,
development financing and technical cooperation in a
well-defined framework with regular follow-up.
The progress registered and the clear
determination of the authorities of Timor-Leste to
establish democracy and justice form a solid basis for
creating a strong partnership with all development
partners. We are convinced that peace, political
stability, security and economic development are
inextricably interlinked, as we have often said and as
bears reiterating in the specific case of Timor-Leste.
It is true that the people and Government of
Timor-Leste are primarily responsible for building
viable and democratic institutions. My delegation is
convinced, however, that the international community
must resolutely pursue the task begun two years ago in
Timor-Leste and stand beside the people of that

S/PV.4913

country in its steadfast march towards social progress
and sustainable development.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by thanking you, Sir, for convening this morning’s
meeting on the situation in Timor-Leste. The entire
international community can rightly share in the
successes achieved by the people of Timor-Leste.
Timor-Leste is indeed one of the most recent and
remarkable success stories of our times.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report and, particularly, Mr. JeanMarie Guéhenno for the inputs he has made, which will
facilitate our discussion this morning.
I would also like to say that we are very pleased
to see Minister Ramos-Horta among us this morning to
grace our discussions. We would also like to say that
we align ourselves fully, as a member of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP),
with the statement that will be made later by
Ambassador João Augusto de Médicis, Executive
Secretary of CPLP.
My delegation is greatly encouraged by the
steady progress accomplished by Timor-Leste since its
people decided with unshakeable courage and
determination to embark on the path to independent
nationhood. The Security Council is discussing today
how best to assist the Timorese people and that young
nation across a crucial threshold of its history. The
United Nations is called on once again to continue
playing a decisive role, as it has in the recent past, in
building a future of security, justice and prosperity for
Timor-Leste.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations has
been an instrumental element of such endeavours by
carefully checking on the present and future needs of
the Timorese people and by providing a careful
assessment of the situation of the country. Despite the
fact that Timor-Leste is experiencing a remarkable
period of peace and stability, it still faces a relatively
fragile environment for a sustainable trend towards
progress and development. The main institutions of the
State — the defence forces, the police and the judicial
system — still need external assistance and
consolidation, as the report of the Secretary-General
recognizes, recommending a continuing international
presence in Timor-Leste.

We fully agree with the principles outlined in the
report on the need for further United Nations assistance
to Timor-Leste so as to consolidate and build upon the
gains achieved so far. We also concur with the
recommendation contained in the report that the
Security Council should consider the extension of the
current Mission in Timor-Leste for a further 12-month
period — a “consolidation phase”. This calls for a
modified mandate providing assistance to the justice
system and to the core administrative structures and
contributing to the continued development of the
national police and to the maintenance of security and
stability in Timor-Leste, as has been proposed. My
delegation will be ready to participate, in due time, in
the discussion of such a draft resolution.
It is my delegation’s view that the
implementation of those proposals would provide a
realistic framework for consolidating the situation in
Timor-Leste, for successfully concluding the work of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor,
and for contributing to the building of a democratic and
stable society.
We share the common view that Timor-Leste still
needs to acquire the capability to secure its selfdefence. Therefore, as proposed by the SecretaryGeneral, the presence of a minor contingent is quite in
line with the reality on the ground. We welcome the
assessment of the Timorese authorities of the good
faith and political will demonstrated by the Indonesian
Government in preventing the use of its territory for
acts of destabilization against Timor-Leste. In that
regard, we deem it essential, in order to create
appropriate conditions for the sustained stability and
development of Timor-Leste, that relations between the
two countries continue to improve — and to improve
steadily — and that they establish good-neighbourly
relations of a permanent character as a prerequisite for
Timor-Leste’s facing the future with confidence as a
country fully integrated into its geographical, cultural
and geostrategic environment.
We have also followed with great interest and
commend the authorities in Dili for the establishment
of good relations with all the countries of the region.
Australia, as a key partner in the region, can continue
in the future to play a role, particularly assisting in
strengthening the institutions of the country. That
should be viewed as a complementary effort towards
further strengthening the security and other sectors of
the country.

17

S/PV.4913

In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation’s full agreement with the proposals and
recommendations contained in the special report of the
Secretary-General, in the expectation that they will
meet with the approval of the Security Council and of
all the countries constituting the main stakeholders in
the situation in Timor-Leste. That would be a
contribution to regional peace, stability and a future of
democracy and development for Timor-Leste.
Mr. Holliday (United States of America): We
welcome the Foreign Minister of East Timor, Mr. José
Ramos-Horta. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno and Special Representative Sharma for their
continued efforts to advance political and economic
development in East Timor.
The United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET) is a success, and the United States
has been a strong supporter of the efforts of East Timor
to build a free and more hopeful future. While progress
is being achieved, we recognize that much remains to
be done. As a result, we agree with the SecretaryGeneral that UNMISET should be extended past May
2004, at reduced levels, to consolidate gains made
during the past two years of the Mission. We applaud
the progress made by the Government and the people
of East Timor in the development of a civil
administration. As the Secretary-General reports,
however, the East Timor administration continues to
have limited capacity. We also welcome the proposal
for continuation of a limited number of civilian experts
in East Timor’s ministries. We expect that any
assistance of this type past May 2005 would be
provided through normal bilateral and multilateral
donor support, rather than through a United Nations
peacekeeping operation.
In his report (S/2004/117), the Secretary-General
states that a critical element in bolstering East Timor
security is the passage of legislation and the adoption
of regulations and policies defining the roles of, and
relations among, the various East Timorese security
forces. As we stated in October, the Government of
East Timor should do its part to nurture respect for the
rule of law, including taking action to address
allegations of police misconduct. We encourage the
Government of East Timor to take those necessary
steps as soon as possible. The human rights violations
committed in East Timor in 1999 have not been
forgotten. The process of accountability for those

18

atrocities should achieve its intended goal, and that is
justice.
The security situation in East Timor is still
fragile. The Council will need to consider in the
coming weeks how best to meet the future security
needs of East Timor. We believe that there are issues
that remain unresolved regarding the strengthening of
police capability. In that regard, we believe that the
police component of the Australian proposal is very
important.
Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): First, I join others in
thanking Mr. Guéhenno for his briefing. I also take this
opportunity to welcome Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta
in our midst.
The mandate of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) is due to expire in
three months. And, as the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2004/117) states, formidable challenges
remain as this mandate draws to a close. While we
understand that Timor-Leste will continue to receive
assistance and support from a variety of international
sources, we believe that there will be a need for a
continued United Nations presence beyond May 2004.
As an Asian country, Pakistan has strong
affiliations with the region. As a troop contributor to
both the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) and UNMISET, we regard
ourselves as a stakeholder in the peace and the stability
of Timor-Leste. Our approach to the future of the
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste is guided by
the following principles.
First, no peacekeeping operation should be
terminated or withdrawn without completing the task
assigned to it. As the Ambassador of Algeria has said,
the United Nations must not prematurely disengage
itself from Timor-Leste.
Secondly, while national security, both internal
and external, is the responsibility of every sovereign
State, in post-conflict situations such as that in TimorLeste, there is still a need for a continuing, even if
symbolic, United Nations presence to provide a sense
of security to the people and a deterrence against those
who wish to undermine the country’s peace and
stability.
Thirdly, we welcome the improvement of
relations between Indonesia and Timor-Leste, and we
think that it is a prerequisite for the success of the

S/PV.4913

political process in the region. The confidence-building
tasks begun by UNMISET still need to be consolidated.
Fourthly, the safety and security of peacekeepers,
including unarmed military and civilian personnel, is
paramount in any peacekeeping operation. It is our
experience in United Nations peacekeeping missions
that formed military units are best equipped to carry
out that task.
Fifthly, the neutrality and impartiality of United
Nations personnel is paramount and must not be
compromised in any way. At no point can United
Nations peacekeepers, for any reason, be placed even
indirectly at the disposal of a sovereign Government.
Based on the above principles, Pakistan will
support the extension of UNMISET with the reduced
size and the modified mandate proposed by the
Secretary-General. We would also support the
continuation of a United Nations military presence as a
token of our collective commitment to peace and
stability in Timor-Leste for its deterrent value against
any threat, as well as for the protection of remaining
UNMISET personnel.
Pakistan looks forward to working with other
Council members to reach an early agreement on
UNMISET’s future composition and mandate.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
question of Timor-Leste (S/2004/117) and thank
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for his briefing. I
welcome once again, to today’s meeting, Mr. RamosHorta, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Timor-Leste.
Since Timor-Leste became an independent State
in May 2002, the Government and the people of TimorLeste, with the help of the international community,
have made significant progress on various aspects of
national development. Their external relations continue
to develop. They have also established extensive
relationships
with
international
organizations,
including the United Nations. We express our
satisfaction at all those gratifying achievements and
extend our congratulations to the Timorese
Government and people. We also appreciate the
positive role played by the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) in that process.

As was noted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, despite extraordinary achievements, TimorLeste is still faced with many challenges at a time
when UNMISET’s current mandate is drawing to a
close. Indeed, as a new nation, Timor-Leste faces a
long and arduous task to achieve overall social stability
and sustainable economic development. In order to
consolidate the gains that have been made and to
enable the country to attain complete self-sufficiency at
an early date, the Government and the people of TimorLeste, on the one hand, should exert greater efforts in
all areas of national development, and the international
community, on the other, should continue to provide
Timor-Leste with necessary support and assistance.
We fully understand the request of the Timorese
Government that the United Nations continue to
maintain its presence in Timor-Leste. We support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
mandate of UNMISET be extended for a further year,
and we agree with the proposal to make appropriate
modifications to its size and mandate. We hope that the
Security Council can reach consensus on the future
arrangement of the Mission in time, before 20 May
2004. Clearly, that will be essential for the further
development and the stability of Timor-Leste.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
As another measure to optimize the use of our
time, I will not individually invite speakers to take
seats at the table and invite them to resume their seats
at the side. When a speaker takes the floor, the
Conference Officer will seat the next speaker on the
list at the table. I thank everyone for their
understanding and cooperation.
I call now on His Excellency Mr. José RamosHorta, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Timor-Leste.
Mr. Ramos-Horta (Timor-Leste): I thank you,
Sir, and all the other members of the Council for
inviting me to speak here today. I am particularly
pleased that it is during your presidency that the
Council is once again considering the situation in
Timor-Leste. In view of your long involvement in and
experience with the issue of Timor-Leste since you
came to the United Nations as a young diplomat, we
feel even more confident that, under your leadership,
the Security Council will once again arrive at a

19

S/PV.4913

consensus on a continuing United Nations role in
Timor-Leste.
In view of time constraints — and despite your
generosity, Sir, in allowing me additional time for my
statement — I shall skip many pages of my written
text; the full text will be circulated to members. I shall
endeavour to address the substance of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/117).
First, I would like to congratulate the SecretaryGeneral and his staff on that outstanding presentation. I
myself could not have made a better analysis of the
situation in Timor-Leste, and I think the Secretariat
deserves high commendation for its professionalism.
Because of their having dealt with Timor-Leste for
many years, they truly understand the realities, the
challenges and the problems that we face — although I
would not subscribe to the report 100 per cent. I
probably would not subscribe to the Bible 100 per cent,
so I hope no one will take it too personally that I
subscribe not to 100 per cent of the report but to
perhaps 99 per cent of it.
The report refers to some key areas where we
have made progress, on which I shall not elaborate
now. It refers also to shortcomings in other areas, and
we are prepared to accept our failings and weaknesses
resulting, first, from the very fact that we have been
independent for less than two years; none of us had
ever governed a country before, whether in the
previous five years or in the previous 500 years under
various colonial experiments in our country. Those
failings have to do also with the lack of trained
personnel for the administration, particularly in the key
area where we acknowledge that we are most fragile:
the justice sector.
With regard to that sector, it is noted that the
Timorese side has much to do to strengthen its law
enforcement agencies, particularly the police. In the
past year and a half, our Government has invested
enormous effort in strengthening the judiciary and the
public administration. We believe that those two areas
constitute the foundation for peace and security in our
country, for development and for creating a climate of
confidence for investors.
The report of the Secretary-General recommends
a continuation of the United Nations presence in the
territory, based on three components. There seems to
be no disagreement on two components, but there
appears to be some on the continuation of a

20

peacekeeping component in the territory. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) — which have dealt with the situation in
Timor-Leste since 1999 — seem to know the situation
very well because of their close observation of the
conditions and the realities in the country: the
weaknesses of our police force and defence force; the
dynamics of our politics; the tensions in the border
area; the unresolved issue of certain elements of militia
gangs; the unresolved issue of the refugees; and the
still uncompleted talks between us and Indonesia on
the land border.
The land border is a porous one. We acknowledge
the good will and leadership of the Indonesian side in
addressing the refugee problem and, along with us,
towards concluding negotiations on land demarcation.
However, as the report of the Secretary-General notes,
the two sides — Indonesia and Timor-Leste — have
failed so far on three occasions to meet our own
deadline for signing an agreement on border
demarcation. But there is political will and
determination on the part of Timor-Leste and Indonesia
to continue the talks and to conclude the border
demarcation. On both sides, border demarcation would
help resolve some of the issues of illegal cross-border
activities.
Peace is a reality in Timor-Leste, as the report of
the
Secretary-General
and
many
observers
acknowledge. But it has also been acknowledged —
and we ourselves acknowledge — that peace is still
very fragile in our country. So are the institutions of
law and order and the institutions of the State public
administration. Therefore, the Government of TimorLeste, through our Prime Minister in a letter to the
Secretary-General (S/2004/114), has appealed for the
continuation of a peacekeeping component in a new
United Nations mission in Timor-Leste. We leave it to
the Secretariat and the members of the Council to
decide on the exact size of that peacekeeping
component, but it is our informed view — in the light
of the dynamics of the reality on the ground and in the
light of our experience, backed up by experience in
many other conflict situations — that a peacekeeping
component provides the best deterrence against any
potential violent conflict. We do not wish to underrate
an international police force, but a police force does
not have the same credibility or impact as a formed
military unit.

S/PV.4913

Obviously, we do not anticipate any external
threat. But can it be said that we are exaggerating the
potential threats in Timor-Leste? If we are, maybe it is
better and wiser to exaggerate and be over-cautious
than, because of other cost-saving calculations, to
witness a precipitate, too-early reduction of the United
Nations presence in the country.
It is for that reason — the respect that the people
of Timor-Leste has acquired with regard to a
peacekeeping force in the country — that we believe
that such a force provides the best deterrence to ensure
peace and security and to give the international
community and the Timorese Government time and
space to strengthen our police force and our defence
force, which we believe would be able completely to
take over all responsibilities by May 2005.
I have spoken here on numerous occasions in the
past. On all those occasions, one individual would sit
next to me, often here on my right. That individual was
Sergio Vieira de Mello. He was our most eloquent,
passionate advocate. I recall that the Council always
went along with his very persuasive arguments on
engaging the United Nations and the international
community in Timor-Leste. The job which he initiated
with tremendous success, carried on by Kamalesh
Sharma with equal competence and dedication, has not
been completed. Any miscalculation, for whatever
reason, in completely withdrawing the peacekeeping
force — a very important political and psychological
element — could betray and undermine the tremendous
success that has been the United Nations role in TimorLeste.
I believe that, as in the past, the members of the
Council will display their habitual wisdom and
experience and reach a satisfactory conclusion on the
basis of the Secretary-General’s report. For us, it is
extremely important that the Council — which has
been united on the issue of Timor-Leste since 1999 —
remain united. But it is equally important that we
should not, for the sake of apparent unity, reach a
consensus that really undermines the recommendations
of the Secretary-General. The substance of those
recommendations with regard to maintaining a
peacekeeping element in Timor-Leste must not be
undermined because of the necessity of unity. I leave it
to the members of the Council, with their wisdom and
experience, to find a balance between the need for
unity and at the same time retaining what is important.

That is the substance of the Secretary-General’s
recommendations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of TimorLeste for the kind words of support he addressed to me
and for circulating the text of his statement in order to
save time.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Singapore.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): At the outset,
Mr. President, I hope you will permit me to make a
small procedural suggestion. In the past, during
significant debates, the Council would, from time to
time, allow non-Council members to speak first. I hope
that that practice will be considered in due course when
we have significant debates. I make that point because
I think today’s debate is significant, as I will explain in
my remarks. I am also, of course, obliged to thank
Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Kamalesh Sharma and the
people and the Government of Timor-Leste. I apologize
for doing so quickly, but, as I have only five minutes, I
will concentrate on substance. In the four and a half
minutes that I have remaining, I would like to make
five points.
My first point, which I would like to emphasize
to the Council, is that we hope there will be a
consensus on the need for continued United Nations
assistance to Timor-Leste. I think that is the most
important decision we need to take at this meeting. The
reasons why begin with the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/117), which points out the
need to consolidate and build upon the gains already
made. I have not read the report, so I cannot say
whether I agree with it 99 per cent or 100 per cent. But
we agree significantly with the report.
The second point we would like to make is that a
precipitous withdrawal could jeopardize the fragile
success that we have had in Timor-Leste. When we talk
about the success of Timor-Leste, we should not forget
the point, just made so eloquently by Foreign Minister
Ramos-Horta, that there is still fragility. We must bear
that fragility in mind as we consider this decision. If
members of the Council read my text, they will find
that we compare building up Timor-Leste to building a
house, saying that that we may have put up the skeletal
framework of the house, but various key components
must still be put in place. That job must still be

21

S/PV.4913

completed. We hope that that message will register
with the Council.
Thirdly, we hope any drawdown will be based on
a realistic assessment of the situation. It must be based
on a hard-headed assessment of the realities on the
ground, not carried out mechanically according to some
abstract timetable. We make this point because we are
aware that, in the past, a timetable was worked out for
drawing down the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET) and was based on a reading
of the circumstances then. Circumstances have
changed, and we must take a decision on the basis of
the circumstances as they stand today. Frankly, the best
description of those circumstances is found in the
Secretary-General’s report, which points out that
institutional weaknesses pervade key institutions of
governance despite the progress made in many areas.
The fourth point we would like to make is that we
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation for an
extension of UNMISET. Here, as we are all aware, the
man of the hour is Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi; his name is
associated in the Council with the famous report that
he submitted. And, of course, we are familiar with the
Brahimi principle: that the Security Council should be
told not what it wants to hear, but what it needs to hear.
That was put across in the report presented to us today
by Jean-Marie Guéhenno, in which the SecretaryGeneral made a strong and carefully considered case
for an extension of UNMISET for another year with a
modified mandate and a reduced scale of some 58
civilian advisers, 157 civilian police advisers, 42
military liaison officers and a military contingent of
some 310, including an infantry company with support
and aviation elements.
Those
recommendations
reflect
extensive
consultations among, inter alia, the United Nations,
UNMISET and the Timorese leaders. They are not
unjustified requests and are certainly not excessive,
given the magnitude of the task at hand. Indeed, as the
Secretary-General notes, such a comparatively modest
additional effort could make a crucial difference in
broadening the scope and increasing the sustainability
of the remarkable achievements already registered and
in allowing Timor-Leste to reach a threshold of selfsufficiency.
My fifth and final point is, in some ways, the
most important. As we can tell from the debate we
have had so far and from listening to Foreign Minister

22

Ramos-Horta, the recommendation for the retention of
a military contingent will be the area of greatest
debate. It is important to put that request in the proper
context. While the security situation has remained, by
and large, uneventful over the past few months, that is
by no means indicative of the situation likely after May
2004. It is certainly not inconceivable that
troublemakers are lying low until the United Nations
withdraws its military and police presence. That is why
we support this recommendation in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
I want to reinforce the point made by Jean-Marie
this morning when he said that a small formed military
presence with aviation and support should be retained
after May 2004. He added:
“By maintaining a high level of visibility through
regular patrols and civil-military cooperation, that
component could help limit the destabilizing
effect of too abrupt a downsizing exercise.”
In my remarks, I have spelled out the reasons why this
military presence should remain. We hope that the
Security Council will support and agree to the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General.
In conclusion, we believe that Timor-Leste has
certainly come a long way, but that much remains to be
done before it can be self-sufficient and ready to stand
on its own. We hope that the Council will pay attention
to the overall situation before it makes its final
decision.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia; the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro; and the European Free Trade Association
countries Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, members
of the European Economic Area, align themselves with
this statement.
Before making my statement, I would like to
welcome back our good friend Mr. José Ramos-Horta,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste. His

S/PV.4913

contribution to this debate is most welcome and
invaluable.
The United Nations can be proud of what has
been achieved by the people of Timor-Leste. With the
assistance of this Organization, the support of this
Council and the commitment of the wider international
community, the advances made in Timor-Leste since
independence have been remarkable.
The European Union commends and supports the
efforts of the Timorese Government to consolidate the
progress made to date, especially in governance and
open leadership; the ongoing development of new
legislative and judicial frameworks, including the rule
of law; the rehabilitation of infrastructure and the
support for regional integration; the development of
planning and budgetary discipline; and, very
importantly, the commitment to democratic norms and
personal freedoms.
The European Union recognizes that a critical
element of the success so far has been the hard work of
the men and women of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), and we commend
them, and those countries that have supported them in
their efforts, for their dedication.
The European Union notes that, as determined by
the Security Council, the activities and size of
UNMISET are gradually being reduced in preparation
for the completion of its mandate on 20 May this year.
Last October, the Council heard from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma, that the international community should
consider carefully the completion of UNMISET’s
drawdown while also taking stock of what has been
achieved, reflecting on the remaining tasks to be
completed and deciding on the best way to fulfil the
legitimate needs of Timor-Leste in the post-May 2004
period. In that regard, the European Union notes that,
earlier this month, the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste,
Mr. Mari Alkatiri, wrote to the Secretary-General and
expressed his Government’s wish for the continued
presence of a United Nations peacekeeping force in
Timor-Leste beyond the expiry of the current
UNMISET mandate.
As an organization, determining our approach to
the disengagement of our peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations is a recurring challenge. Satisfying
the continuing legitimate needs of the country in
question must be balanced against ensuring the

continued growth of sustainable national capacities for
self-governance and self-reliance. In this regard, it is
necessary for the international community, on a caseby-case basis, to focus on the tasks remaining and to
carry out a careful and thorough analysis of any
continuing threats to the maintenance of peace and
security, as well as of the development of the judicial
sector and the rule of law; the humanitarian situation,
including the status of refugees and other displaced
persons; the development of national security
institutions, such as police and military forces;
progress in national reconciliation; and the creation of
a favourable climate for sustainable social and
economic development.
In this regard, the European Union welcomes the
Secretary-General’s dispatching of an assessment team
to Timor-Leste in January. The Union notes that the
resulting report (S/2004/117) confirms that significant
progress continues to be made and that further
advances in Timorese capacity can be expected in the
months ahead.
The European Union supports the efforts of the
Timorese Government to consolidate the political
institutions, to promote the social and economic
development of the country and to uphold the rule of
law while building a new nation. In particular, the
Union welcomes the fact that the security situation has
largely remained calm; relations between Timor-Leste
and Indonesia have been good; the development of the
country’s public administration has continued to make
progress; the Truth, Reception and Reconciliation
Commission continues to provide a community-based
solution for less serious crimes committed in
connection with the political conflict; and that the
national police force has assumed responsibility for
routine policing throughout the country. In addition,
and in the context of ending impunity and promoting a
culture of accountability and transparency, the EU
notes with interest that the process of prosecuting those
accused of serious crimes has continued apace. The
European Union will continue to follow closely the
relevant trials in Dili and Jakarta.
The European Union thanks the SecretaryGeneral for his thorough report on the current situation
in Timor-Leste and notes that he states that,
notwithstanding the commendable and substantial
achievements, Timor-Leste continues to face a number
of formidable challenges. The EU shares the view that
further assistance will be needed to consolidate the

23

S/PV.4913

achievements already made. In this regard, a
continuing — though modified — UNMISET presence
after May 2004 seems to be required. The SecretaryGeneral’s analysis and his recommendation for an
extension of UNMISET, with the appropriate
modifications to its mandate and composition, deserve
the Security Council’s full consideration.
Notwithstanding the fact that the primary
responsibility for a successful transition lies with the
Timorese people themselves, it remains incumbent on
the international community to consolidate the progress
that is so evident in Timor-Leste. As is the case
elsewhere in the world, we have an obligation to the
people of Timor-Leste to continue our support for their
progress through bilateral donor programmes, the work
of the family of United Nations agencies, support from
the Bretton Woods institutions and all the instruments
we have at our disposal to consolidate their
achievements and to ensure their continued
advancement. I take this opportunity to reaffirm the
European Union’s commitment to the Timorese people
to this end.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
New Zealand.
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the Secretary-General’s special report on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) (S/2004/117), as introduced by UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno this morning. I would
also very much like to join others in warmly
acknowledging the presence of Foreign Minister
Ramos-Horta in the Council again.
Like others who have spoken, we commend the
progress that has been made in Timor-Leste through
the work of UNMISET and its predecessor, the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). We also commend the work that has been
done by the Government of Timor-Leste and the
commitment of international donors to support these
efforts.
New Zealand’s principal concern is to see the
important gains made in Timor-Leste safeguarded, and
I think it is fair to say, given the comments that have
been made here this morning that this is very much a
common objective of both the Council members and
the other States who have spoken. The path to
nationhood for Timor-Leste has obviously been a

24

difficult one, and it should not come as a surprise to
any of us that there is still much to be done.
The role that the United Nations has played in
Timor-Leste has been vital in assisting this new nation.
Bilateral assistance programmes are playing an
increasingly important role, but it is clear that there is
much more to be done in establishing key institutions
and in ensuring that Timor-Leste has been placed on a
firm footing before United Nations support is ended.
In New Zealand’s view, it is important for the
international community to do its utmost to continue to
support Timor-Leste through this transition period.
New
Zealand
therefore
fully
endorses
the
recommendation of the Secretary-General for an
extension of UNMISET for a further year in a reduced
size and with a modified mandate, which would be a
twelve-month consolidation phase.
In New Zealand’s view, the composition of the
mission recommended by the Secretary-General is
appropriate, given the requirements on the ground. The
Secretary-General’s recommendation represents a
significant further downsizing of the current mission
across the board. There is to be a further reduction in
the number of civilian advisers, and the civilian police
component is to be reduced by a further 50 per cent.
The military component, observers and troops — at
present 1,750 military personnel — is to be reduced to
less than 25 per cent of the current presence, to a
minimum operational level of 350.
New Zealand agrees with the Secretary-General
and the Timor-Leste Government about the importance
of the assurances that would be provided by retention
of a modest military force, as recommended, with
quick-reaction and air-borne capability, to maintain
confidence and stability in the border areas. During the
visit of New Zealand’s Minister for Foreign Affairs to
Timor-Leste earlier this month, it was evident that
there is considerable anxiety about this issue in TimorLeste — and of course Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta
spoke very eloquently on that issue. It was also very
clear that as yet Timor-Leste has virtually no capacity
to respond on its own to any incidents that might occur
in the border areas. New Zealand remains open to
views on how best to provide those assurances. But
what is important is that they be credible and effective.
New Zealand welcomes the progress in the
bilateral relationship between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia. It will obviously be important to continue to

S/PV.4913

address border demarcation in the coming months,
including at local level in the border areas, so as to
build up mutual trust and confidence and to work
towards the normalization of local cross-border
relations.
New Zealand also strongly supports the
continuation of the work of the Serious Crimes Unit for
a further year. We also support further action on the
part of the international community to follow up on the
human rights abuses that occurred in East Timor in
1999. We further note the valuable work done by the
Timor-Leste Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation to address lesser crimes and promote
community reconciliation, and the fact that ongoing
donor support will be necessary to enable the
Commission to complete its work.
We endorse the Secretary-General’s proposal for
continuing United Nations support for capacitybuilding in the public administration of Timor-Leste.
We note that the role of the Government of TimorLeste in this process is vital. The Secretary-General has
articulated a number of concerns, particularly on the
need for the Timor-Leste Government to expedite the
development of key aspects of the administration’s
legislative and regulatory framework, including the
adoption of legislation in key areas. In this respect, I
would like to mention the civil service act; legislation
for the creation of the Office of the Provedor;
legislation to ensure transparency and accountability;
and an organic law for the police and a defence act for
the military, as well as related regulations and policies
to clarify their responsibilities and relationships.
Much has been achieved in Timor-Leste, but
much remains to be done. Timor-Leste is one of the
poorest countries in the world. It faces enormous
challenges in nation-building and in the provision of
the most basic services, such as in health and
education, to its population, more than half of whom
are under the age of 15. Continued assistance from the
international community, both through the United
Nations and bilaterally, will therefore be vital to
support Timor-Leste in this important consolidation
phase.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Australia, on
whom I now call.
Mr.
Dauth
(Australia):
Forgive
me,
Mr. President, if I dispense with courtesies, but, unlike

Ambassador Mahbubani, I need all five minutes of my
allotted time. So let me get straight to the substance.
We in Australia are proud of what we have done
to assist Timor-Leste in building a stable and
sustainable democracy. No country has done more. We
remain committed to helping Timor-Leste with its
security and development challenges. Together with the
United Nations, we have a big stake in ensuring that
East Timor is equipped to meet the challenges it faces,
and that it succeeds. Australia’s contribution has, of
course, been part of a highly cooperative and effective
international effort. It is our strong desire that this
cooperative, consensus-based approach continue as we
enter into a new phase of engagement with TimorLeste.
Despite the encouraging progress, further
international assistance to Timor-Leste remains
essential. That is not in question; it is the form of
assistance that we need to get right, and the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2004/117) is a useful point of
departure. Australia fully supports the recommendation
for a one-year extension of the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor at a reduced level. The
recommendations target the right areas of continuing
need.
It is clear that the Mission needs some form of
armed security component. Australia is firmly of the
view that a back-up United Nations policing
component is necessary to help East Timor address its
likely law and order challenges. If the Council so
decides, of course, we would also join the consensus on
a peacekeeping force.
As the Council is aware, Australia has been
carefully analysing Timor-Leste’s security needs for a
long time. In October last year, we told the Council
what we believed the threats were and how they should
be addressed. Developments since then have confirmed
that our assessment was fundamentally sound. We
consider that Timor-Leste’s security challenges —
highlighted, for example, by the 2002 Dili riot and the
armed assaults near the border in early 2003 — remain
substantial. But these are internal and will require a
police, rather than a military, response.
Timor-Leste’s external threat environment is
relatively benign. Ex-militia elements in West Timor
pose a much-reduced threat; the small group of
remaining hardliners are focused primarily on crossborder criminal activity. The last major security

25

S/PV.4913

incident took place more than a year ago, and
Indonesia continues to work against cross-border
destabilization.
We share the Secretary-General’s assessment
about the weaknesses in Timor-Leste’s security
institutions. The capacity, experience and policy
frameworks of its police service remain limited, and
this, too, suggests that a back-up emergency United
Nations police response group is likely to be required.
Our fundamental concern is that if a back-up
United Nations police unit does not help Timor-Leste
address its internal security challenges, what will? A
properly designed emergency police response group
would be able to deal with the broad spectrum of
security incidents that might arise, including in the
border area. Such a unit would serve an essential
complementary role to any peacekeeping force
presence — should, of course, the Council agree to
that.
A police unit would have appropriate training and
expertise to enable it to deal with Timor-Leste’s
internal law and order problems and would provide a
more graduated and faster response to any incident. For
example, a police unit could provide a constabulary
function and would have the power to arrest. Under the
model proposed by Australia, day-to-day and executive
policing would be the sole responsibility of the TimorLeste Government and its police service. The United
Nations police unit would deploy only in emergency
situations that risked overwhelming the local police,
and at the request of Timor-Leste’s Prime Minister. If
agreed by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral — after consulting with the United Nations
police adviser and unit commander — the unit would
be the lead agency for an incident until it was resolved
and responsibility was formally handed back to the
Timor-Leste Government. The model is similar to the
call-out arrangements proposed by the SecretaryGeneral for a peacekeeping force. Australia’s
experience suggests that such command and control
arrangements do indeed work.
I should say plainly that we fully sympathize with
the need for force protection for the unarmed military
liaison officers, and would envision the police unit also
having the capacity to protect United Nations personnel
in emergency situations, as United Nations gendarmes
have done in other contexts. The police unit must
therefore have the capacity for timely self-deployment

26

to both urban and rural areas and access to helicopter
support.
Day to day, we would envision the police unit
mentoring and providing some training to TimorLeste’s specialist police units, as well as conducting
liaison visits throughout the country. This reassuring,
visible presence would promote calm and security.
In short, we would see an armed back-up police
unit being able to perform many of the tasks the
Secretary-General has set out in his report on East
Timor’s post-UNMISET needs. The safety of such a
unit would not be predicated on the availability of a
substantial back-up peacekeeping force. The unit
would be of a size capable of handling likely law and
order threats. It would be well armed and backed by
local police and, subject to future legislation,
potentially Timor-Leste’s defence force.
We believe that the best way ahead for the new
phase of UNMISET is clear. It involves a model built
on the key recommendations of the Secretary-General
that also addresses the real internal security risks and
weak policing capacities. We encourage the Council to
move expeditiously to endorse such an outcome and
maintain the tradition of consensus on this issue.
Mr. President (spoke in Chinese): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Japan, on
whom I now call.
Mr. Motomura (Japan): Mr. President, I would
like to thank you for having convened this open
meeting of the Security Council, which provides us
with a very good opportunity for an exchange of views
on the future of Timor-Leste and the role of the United
Nations. I would like also to thank Mr. Guéhenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his comprehensive briefing, and to take this
opportunity to welcome Mr. Ramos-Horta, Foreign
Minister of Timor Leste.
The Government of Japan welcomes the fact that,
since the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET) initiated its activities, much has
been accomplished in the areas of public
administration, serious crimes, and internal and
external security matters, including progress on bordercontrol issues. We also welcome the news that TimorLeste’s relationship with Indonesia has been further
strengthened.

S/PV.4913

UNMISET’s mandate will conclude this May. We
believe, however, that it will continue to be necessary
for the international community to extend its support to
Timor-Leste, as the Secretary-General’s report points
out, in such areas as public administration, the
judiciary, and national security and stability. My
Government recognizes the consolidation and building
of peace as one of the major challenges faced by the
international community, and we believe it is crucially
important for the United Nations and the international
community to make certain that those valuable
incipient achievements in the areas of peace, the rule of
law, respect for human rights, and development take
root and endure.
What has been achieved by the international
community in Timor-Leste since the start of the United
Nations transitional administration there can be
regarded as a striking success story, and we therefore
welcome the Secretary-General’s proposal to extend
the mandate of UNMISET for one additional year, in
order to consolidate what has been achieved up to this
point on as firm a foundation as possible.
The Government of Japan would like to make two
comments relating to the extension of UNMISET. First,
it is of crucial importance for a young country such as
Timor-Leste to be provided support in the area of
nation-building by civilian experts. For that reason, we
endorse the report’s recommendation that the extended
UNMISET should have 58 civilian advisers in all areas
of Government administration, including financial
management, and in the justice sector.
The second point relates to the issue of security
and safety in Timor-Leste. Japan believes that we
should pay serious attention to the situation in TimorLeste, described in the report as follows:
“… there appears to be a lack of confidence
among the Timorese public in the security
situation after May 2004” (S/2004/117, para. 49).
The Secretary-General’s report also points out
tasks for the extended UNMISET and suggests that
there remain a small number of military liaison officers
deployed in the border area, a minimum contingent of
peacekeeping forces to provide protection for all
United Nations personnel, and civilian police advisers
to support the development of Timor-Leste’s police
force. The Japanese Government considers these
proposals to be the result of the assessment of the
situation in Timor-Leste and to reflect the will of the

Government and people of Timor-Leste. We believe
that United Nations peacekeeping operations work
most effectively when they are in accord with the
intentions of the Governments and peoples of the
recipient countries, and when they are implemented
based on a unified consensus within the international
community. We expect that the Council will seriously
consider the Secretary-General’s report in indicating
what kinds of tasks should be retained in the extended
UNMISET.
In support of building a self-sustainable TimorLeste, Japan has pledged, and has been steadily
implementing, assistance of up to $60 million over the
three-year period following independence, with a focus
on peace-building and reconstruction in three key
areas — agriculture, infrastructure, and human
resources development. We are pleased to learn that the
roads and bridges which the Engineering Group of our
Self-Defence Forces has constructed and repaired for
UNMISET’s activities are benefiting the people of
Timor-Leste as well. We believe that such support is in
line with the needs of Timor-Leste, as described in the
report of the Secretary-General.
I wish to reiterate how important it is for the
leaders of Timor-Leste to be united in governing their
country, for the people of Timor-Leste to participate in
nation-building efforts as a matter of their own
responsibility, and for the international community to
continue to extend its support. The Government of
Japan, for its part, will continue to provide appropriate
assistance for the consolidation of peace and
development in Timor-Leste.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Indonesia, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Let me start by first of all
recognizing the presence of the Foreign Minister of
Timor-Leste, Mr. Ramos-Horta. The delegation of
Indonesia has always attached great importance to any
debate relating to Timor-Leste, particularly because of
its historical, socio-economic and cultural ties with
Indonesia. My country also recognizes the role played
by the international community in helping the process
of the development of Timor-Leste, including
UNMISET, whose mandate will end in May this year.
We hope that Indonesia’s contributions to the
implementation of UNMISET’s mandate will be
recognized by the international community as well.

27

S/PV.4913

Indonesia is of the view that whatever mechanism
is to replace UNMISET, the Security Council must take
into consideration the positive relationship between
Indonesia and Timor-Leste. As we also learned from
the Secretary-General’s report, the situation in TimorLeste has been growing progressively more stable and
its relationship with Indonesia more cordial.

December 2003, over 2,000 cases had been resolved
through reunification. In addition, there are many East
Timorese children who live in Timor-Leste and are
separated from their parents who are now in Indonesia,
and should not be forgotten. This matter is one of the
issues on the agenda of the Joint Ministerial
Commission between Indonesia and Timor-Leste.

From the very beginning, Indonesia has
demonstrated its unwavering interest in developing
friendly ties with Timor- Leste. As a result, the
Government-to-Government relationship between both
nations has increasingly been strengthened. That
relationship is characterized by a strong commitment at
the highest political level, reflected in the State visits
made by both Presidents, the regular visits by the two
Foreign Ministers, and the establishment of the Joint
Ministerial Commission, the Joint Border Committee
and other bilateral mechanisms.

Indonesia and Timor-Leste have worked hard to
build a strong relationship on the basis of forwardlooking policies. It is our hope that UNMISET will
support that strong relationship.

The Ministerial Commission has established
several working groups to deal with border issues,
trade and finance, legal matters, educational and
cultural affairs, and transport and telecommunications.
At the regional level, in October 2002,
Indonesia’s Southwest Pacific Dialogue initiative, of
which Timor-Leste is also a member, was realized. The
second ministerial dialogue was held in New York in
2003. Indonesia was also quick to encourage TimorLeste to get involved in meetings of the Association of
South-East Asian Nations.
On the question of refugees, it is important to
remember that, through close cooperation between the
two Governments and with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
more than 250,000 refugees have returned voluntarily
to Timor-Leste. As of December 2002, Indonesia had
declared that there were no more refugees from TimorLeste. The remaining 28,000 East Timorese who opted
to stay in Indonesia are now being processed as
Indonesian citizens and will be given the opportunity to
be relocated within Indonesia. The Government of
Indonesia is prepared, however, to assist any of them
who voluntarily want to return to Timor-Leste.
Let me now turn to the issue of the separated
Timorese children. Since UNHCR will no longer be
directly involved in this matter, the Government of
Indonesia, in cooperation with the Government of
Timor-Leste, will fully take care of the children
through reunification and local integration. As of

28

Having stated the positive realities and underlined
the good relationship between Indonesia and TimorLeste, I must stress that it is unfortunate and a matter
of regret that the report contains unnecessary notions
that do not accurately reflect the facts of the matter.
The report suggests, for instance, that
“tensions arose following the conduct of military
exercises by the Indonesian armed forces, without
the prior knowledge of their Timorese
counterparts, on an uninhabited island near
Oecussi whose ownership has not been formally
agreed by the two countries” (S/2004/117,
para. 10).
In our view, this is capable of creating the wrong
picture of Indonesia, which is unjustifiable and would
be counterproductive. First, no tension arose in
connection with this matter in December 2003.
Secondly, existing legal national and international
documents show that the uninhabited location in
reference, Batek Island, belongs to Indonesia. As a
result of this situation, therefore, no need has arisen for
a formal agreement concerning the ownership of the
island, as the report suggests. While the Indonesian
navy did conduct a small and routine naval exercise on
the island, it did so squarely within Indonesian
territory.
Finally, Indonesia has continued to work in the
best interests of all Indonesians, their neighbours and
the international community. Its commitment and
determination to ensure improvements in Timor-Leste
have been demonstrated in various ways. I can assure
the Security Council that my Government will continue
those endeavours. It is within that spirit that the
international community should render its support.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.

S/PV.4913

Mr. De Santa Clara Gomes (Portugal): To
comply with the time limit you set, Sir, I will shorten
my statement.
I would like to begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his latest report on the situation in TimorLeste and Jean-Marie Guéhenno for his presentation. I
would also like to welcome the presence of Foreign
Minister José Ramos-Horta and his very valuable
contribution to this debate.
Since I associate myself with the statements made
on behalf of the European Union and the Community
of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, I will make only
three remarks. First, we agree with the evaluation made
by the United Nations of the situation in Timor-Leste
and share the Timorese Government’s assessment of its
own limitations in coping with internal and external
security problems. In fact, threats to internal stability
can be expected to continue beyond May 2004 and we
know that Timorese defence and security forces are
still inexperienced and vulnerable, and clearly not able
to respond effectively to major disturbances.
In this context, even relatively low levels of
destabilization could have a significant impact and
serious consequences for the stability of Timor-Leste.
We note that there is a continuing problem resulting
from the presence of 28,000 former refugees along the
border. There have been reports of sightings of armed
gangs and criminal elements and suggestions of
preparations for destabilizing activity by Timorese
groups with unclear agendas.
My second point is a direct consequence of that
perception. Under the present circumstances, Portugal
strongly supports the Secretary-General’s proposal to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) for a further 12month consolidation phase in a reduced and modified
form, as described in his report. This support would
include a military component, although much reduced
from the present level.
My final remark has to do with the responsibility
of the international community and of the Security
Council in relation to Timor-Leste. The Council can
take pride in the contribution it has unfailingly
provided to the Timorese people. The Council literally
made possible the creation of that country. All of this
began just four years ago. During this period, we have
been able to create a country literally from the ashes.
At the same time, the international presence has been

steadily decreasing. Let me recall that, in May 2002,
UNMISET included 5,000 observers and troops; two
years later, it has been reduced to 1,750. Now, the
Secretary-General is recommending today that this
presence be limited to a military component of 350
observers and troops. This clear trend shows that
Timor-Leste, far from becoming a victim of a United
Nations-dependency
syndrome,
is
successfully
preparing for the end of that peacekeeping operation in
the near future. We could simply wish that other
peacekeeping operations, despite their unquestionable
importance, had been able to achieve so much in such a
short period of time.
As in the past, Portugal will remain committed
and ready to contribute to the consolidation and
development of Timor-Leste and to the United Nations
efforts to that effect.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mrs. Laohaphan (Thailand): As this is the first
time that I address this body in my new capacity, I
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to thank you for convening
today’s open debate on Timor-Leste.
Thailand has taken a keen interest in the issue of
Timor-Leste, for that newest Member of the United
Nations is not only a neighbour in our immediate
region, but also a proven case of success for United
Nations peacekeeping operations and nation-building
exercises. That a country could become independent
and recognized in its own right in just a few years owes
much to the will and determination of its people and
more, perhaps, to the collective efforts of the United
Nations and individual countries in helping bring into
existence a new State.
The birth of a nation is always a complex and
arduous process, entailing sacrifices and pain while
procuring great joy and pride for its people. Nurturing
a nation torn by conflicts and violence until it becomes
a stable, self-reliant and responsible international
citizen is an even more daunting task that demands an
extended period of international support, as well as
necessary economic and technical assistance. The
United Nations needs to ensure that peace and security
continue to prevail and become irreversible in TimorLeste, as a safe and secure environment is a
precondition for a country to embark on smooth

29

S/PV.4913

economic and social development. The question is:
What assistance does Timor-Leste need at the moment
and to what extent should we provide it?
Thailand welcomes the Secretary-General’s report
on UNMISET (S/2004/117) and appreciates the
assessment of the situation on the ground presented by
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno. My delegation
listened attentively to the statement of Mr. José RamosHorta, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Timor-Leste, as well as to the views expressed by
Council members and other Member States. Although
opinions diverge as to the scope and nature of TimorLeste’s security requirements, a common view
emanating from around the table is that we must make
sure that the gains made over the past several years in
Timor-Leste are consolidated and that the security
environment is sound before UNMISET’s eventual
withdrawal from the field.
Given the general volatility of a nascent country
and the complexity of the whole nation-building
exercise while the rule of law and institutions are still
being strengthened in Timor-Leste, it is in the interest
of the international community that the United Nations
should remain engaged in that country for a further
period. Thailand therefore supports a continued United
Nations presence, as suggested by the SecretaryGeneral.
Thailand has always played a very active role in
assistance to Timor-Leste since 1999. Our longstanding commitment to assisting Timor-Leste is
demonstrated by our involvement in international
peacekeeping and peace-building operations from the
United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) to
the current UNMISET. Thailand now maintains 62
police and military personnel in Timor-Leste,
comprising demining experts, medical officers, military
observers and administrative officers. In that regard,
Thailand would also like to reaffirm its readiness to
continue to take part in United Nations peacekeeping
efforts in Timor-Leste after 20 May 2004.
The Secretary-General himself has repeated time
and again that there can be no peace without economic
development and no peace or economic development
without social justice. Lasting peace still remains
elusive and a distant hope in Timor-Leste, a country
that continues to grapple with prevalent poverty and
hunger, a high illiteracy rate, an inadequate public
health system and infrastructure and a fledgling

30

democracy. However, the country is not without
potential for growth and stability. If we are serious
about achieving in time the eight targets set forth in the
Millennium Declaration, we have to help Timor-Leste
as well as other countries that are less fortunate and
less equipped than we are to carry out their national
economic and social development.
The Government of Thailand is conscious of the
complementarity existing between peace
and
development and desires to promote and strengthen
human security in Timor-Leste and throughout our
region. We welcome and encourage Timor-Leste to
have more interaction with the Association of the
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and to participate
in the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF). We have also
offered bilateral technical and economic assistance to
Timor-Leste in diverse fields, covering agriculture,
public health, fisheries, trade, investment, banking and
insurance, tourism, internal security and energy. I am
happy to report a positive trend emerging from the
bilateral programme of assistance that we have
undertaken for Timor-Leste and its people, and it is our
hope that our training programmes will enable students
and officials to become valuable human resources that
are crucial for their country’s sustainable economic and
social progress.
It is my sincere hope that more can be done to
help Timor-Leste survive and thrive on its own. The
Security Council can contribute to that end by
extending the mandate of the United Nations presence
in Timor-Leste a while longer, as recommended by the
Secretary-General. Undoubtedly, a stable, democratic
and prosperous Timor-Leste will further reinforce and
contribute to regional as well as global peace and
development.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
representative of Thailand for her kind words
addressed to me. I also welcome her to her post in New
York.
I give the floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Mohd Radzi (Malaysia): Let me first
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2004/117) and to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guéhenno for his presentation on the situation in
Timor-Leste this morning. We also join others in
welcoming Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta in our midst
today.

S/PV.4913

We are pleased to note that the overall situation in
Timor-Leste continues to register encouraging
progress. We believe that the remarkable progress
recorded in Timor-Leste in the face of the numerous
constraints confronting the newly independent nation
could not have been achieved without the commitment,
determination and strong resolve of the country’s
leadership and the support of the Timorese in general.
While we applaud that progress, at the same time
we must share and acknowledge the observations and
concerns expressed by the Secretary-General: despite
the achievements, the situation in many areas
nonetheless remains fragile. We should therefore by no
all means feel complacent about what has been
achieved thus far. The reality is that, at this stage,
Timor-Leste still needs the continuing support of the
United Nations and other external assistance.
It is clear from the Secretary-General’s report to
the Council that Timor-Leste will not be ready for selfsufficiency within the period of two years of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET). The progress achieved in
many fields under UNMISET’s three programme areas
is still too fragile to be left on its own without the
continuing presence of UNMISET beyond 20 May
2004.
In the crucial area of public administration, for
example, it was highlighted in the report that the
administration continues to lack managerial skill and
has not yet acquired the skills to discharge a number of
essential tasks, including in the important area of
finance. It was also pointed out that the
administration’s legislative and regulatory framework
too is at a very early stage of development. Attention
was also drawn to the justice system in Timor-Leste,
which remains particularly weak, with serious negative
implications for the proper functioning of the justice,
police and prison services.
Similarly, in the area of security, the National
Police of Timor-Leste, which is the central, core
institution of the country’s security and stability, has
yet to be able effectively to fulfil its responsibilities.
While significant progress has been made in the
development of the national police force, it was noted
with concern that its capacity, experience and policy
framework remain limited.
It was also noted that the Timor-Leste defence
force will not be able to create before 20 May 2004 an

effective rapid deployment capability to deal with
armed groups in the border districts. That is attributed
mainly, among other things, to delays in the
recruitment, equipping and training processes.
The Secretary-General has highlighted many
more instances in many areas that point to the need for
the extension of UNMISET’s mandate beyond 20 May
2004. He has stressed that further assistance will be
essential to consolidate and build upon the gains that
have been made in an atmosphere of peace and
stability. The Secretary-General concluded his report
by recommending to the Council the extension of
UNMISET’s mandate for a further year, in a reduced
size and with a modified mandate.
Malaysia supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend UNMISET’s mandate for a
further year, in a reduced size and with a modified
mandate, as contained in his report to the Council. We
believe that, given the relatively short period since
Timor-Leste gained its independence, it would be too
ambitious to expect that the various institutions that
were established with the assistance of the United
Nations and bilateral assistance could now become
fully operational and ready to ensure the full enjoyment
of security and stability in this very young nation.
Timor-Leste must be given the necessary support and
adequate time to ensure that the peace and stability and
the progress that have been built will not be wasted.
In supporting the recommendations of the
Secretary-General as contained in his report, we wish
to underline that, when determining the size of a
peacekeeping force, it is also necessary to give careful
consideration to the actual threat anticipated in the
country. The size of the force should be appropriate to
and commensurate with the actual threat. We wish to
emphasize that an oversized force might not bode well
for the confidence-building measures that are being
nurtured, and which are highly essential for peace and
security in the region. Maintaining it would also entail
unnecessarily high costs.
As a country of the region, Malaysia will
continue within its capacity and capability to extend
support and assistance to Timor-Leste in its nationbuilding process. As we have assured Timor-Leste, we
are prepared to share our past experiences in nationbuilding, as Malaysia shares many similarities with that
country. We will continue to provide technical
assistance in various fields, as discussed and agreed

31

S/PV.4913

between our two Governments, to assist Timor-Leste in
its national development.
We believe it is crucial for the friends of TimorLeste in the region in particular, and for the
international community to offer their full support to
Timor-Leste. We warmly welcome the cordial and
constructive contacts and the friendly bilateral
engagements between Timor-Leste and its most
immediate and important neighbour, Indonesia. We
believe that that augurs well for Timor-Leste in its
desire to play a useful role in the region and for the
aspirations of the countries in the region to peace and
stability.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): It gives me pleasure to welcome the presence
of Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Timor-Leste. I wish him and the
Government and people of Timor-Leste every success
in building their nation. I should like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his special
report on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) (S/2004/117) and to thank Mr.
Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Under-Secretary-General, for
presenting the report. In addition, the efforts of Mr.
Kamalesh Sharma, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, merit our full
appreciation.
The Secretary-General’s special report reviews, in
a general and comprehensive manner, all the important
developments in Timor-Leste since its independence,
the achievements made thus far in its reconstruction
and the changes facing the country. We agree with
many of the statements made thus far that Timor-Leste
is one of the success stories of the United Nations
because of intensive follow-up as a result of the efforts
undertaken by the General Assembly and its Special
Political and Decolonization Committee, the Security
Council and the Secretariat. The delegation of Syria
concurs with the report that the political institutions
developed by Timor-Leste and the progress it has
achieved are worthy of admiration.
My delegation expresses its satisfaction with
paragraph 9 of the report, which indicates that the
excellent communication that has characterized the
relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia continued

32

over the reporting period, supported by commitment at
the highest political levels on both sides. We hope that
the Governments of both countries will, as soon as
possible, reach agreements that serve the interests of
both countries with regard to the issues mentioned in
the report.
The report of the Secretary-General contains a
special proposal to provide assistance to Timor-Leste
in the coming period in the areas of stability, justice,
internal security, the rule of law, external security and
border control. There are also a number of excellent
observations at the end of the report. We agree with the
Secretary-General’s analysis and his important ideas
for follow-up by the United Nations, including the
provision of the assistance needed to consolidate and
build upon the gains already made. While we express
our appreciation to donor countries, we hope that they
will continue to assist in Timor-Leste’s reconstruction
and development process.
My delegation notes in particular the SecretaryGeneral’s assertion that UNMISET continues to play a
decisive role as the country’s security capabilities are
being built. We agree with him that the capacity of the
Timorese authorities to meet the challenges ahead still
requires assistance and support from the United
Nations. In that regard, my delegation takes note of the
letter dated 12 February 2004 from Mr. Mari Alkatiri,
Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2004/114), in which he requests the
presence of United Nations peacekeping troops, a
battalion-sized military force, backed by helicopters, in
Timor-Leste beyond May 2004.
In the light of the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General and the urgent need
for such a force, as emphasized in the Prime Minister’s
letter and in the statement made to the Council this
morning by Timor-Leste’s Foreign Minister, Syria
supports the request for an extension of UNMISET’s
mandate. We hope that any decision taken by the
Security Council with regard to Timor-Leste will be
reached by consensus. That would help to ensure an
environment of stability, which would improve and
strengthen the capacities of the institutions of this
nascent nation.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): Let me
begin by welcoming the presence of the Minister for

S/PV.4913

Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste and by thanking the
Secretary-General for his special report on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
(S/2004/117). My delegation also expresses its
gratitude to Mr. Guéhenno for his informative briefing.
Over the past 18 months, significant progress has
been made towards the fulfilment of UNMISET’s
mandate in the areas of democratization, security and
economic and social development. Credit for the
considerable achievements made in that short time span
should be given to the newly established Timorese
Government for its unswerving commitment and efforts
and to the people of Timor-Leste for persevering in the
face of formidable challenges.
The United Nations, too, has played a pivotal role
in the progress made in Timor-Leste. The stable
environment provided through the actions of the
Security Council has proved crucial to the success of
the ongoing endeavours to consolidate the nascent
nation’s independence. In that regard, we cite the close
partnership between Timor-Leste and the United
Nations as a model for future undertakings in postconflict situations.
Timor-Leste now stands at a critical juncture in
the peace-building process. Like many newly
independent countries, it faces the daunting challenges
of achieving stability, developing democracy and
overall capacity-building on its road towards a selfsustaining society. In that regard, my delegation shares
the concerns reflected in the previous and current
reports of the Secretary-General.
My delegation believes that the SecretaryGeneral’s assessments aptly reflect the request of the
Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, His Excellency, Mr.
Mari Alkatiri, and the recommendations of the
technical assessment mission that visited Timor-Leste
last month. From the reports, it is clear that TimorLeste requires further assistance to sustain what has
been achieved and to make further progress in the areas
of stability, democracy and justice, internal security
and law enforcement, and external security and border
control. We concur with the view of the SecretaryGeneral that the United Nations should continue to
play a role in the country’s nation-building until such
time as Timor-Leste can firmly stand on its own two
feet.
Noting the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral with deep interest, we support an extended

presence of the United Nations in Timor-Leste beyond
May 2004. Clearly, the substantial support and
assistance of the international community must not be
phased out prematurely. The Republic of Korea
believes that the overall assessment of the situation on
the ground should serve as the basis for decisionmaking on how to best organize and structure the
international efforts.
My delegation is confident that the efforts and
assistance of the international community, in
conjunction with the dedication and determination of
the people of Timor-Leste, will prevail in establishing a
nation underpinned by the rule of law, human rights
and sustainable development. The Republic of Korea,
as one of the major troop-contributing countries from
1999 to 2003, remains committed to assisting in the
realization of that noble goal.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Fiji.
Mr. Draunimasi (Fiji): As the last speaker on
this issue, Sir, I wish to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency and, through you, to
thank the Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. José
Ramos-Horta, for his personal attendance at this
important meeting.
The Secretary-General’s comprehensive report
(S/2004/117) recognizes the need to consolidate and
build upon the gains in peace and security in TimorLeste. Clearly, Timor-Leste needs to reach a level of
self-sufficiency and sustainability without fear of the
return of an environment of destabilization. History has
taught us that, when peace operations are prematurely
withdrawn, situations often revert to violence and
conflict. We have spoken in the past about the
enormous waste that would result from a non-strategic
exit from Timor-Leste, which would expose any latent
vulnerabilities in the newly emerging democracy.
The United Nations must be vigilant in guarding
against what would appear to be a neo-colonial
tendency in terms of developing democratic processes.
This vigilance, however, needs to be balanced with the
needs of the Government and the people of TimorLeste in the process of nation building. We note that,
for Timor-Leste, the sine qua non for achieving the
essence of democracy is a sound and secure
environment. We are therefore sensitive to that
country’s requests for a continuing level of
peacekeeping, which would engender an environment

33

S/PV.4913

that is more conducive to the Government, assisted by
the United Nations, being able to nurture stability and
security.
The Secretary-General’s recommendations in
paragraph 64 of his report are sound and strategic and
give credibility to the immense international,
intergovernmental and bilateral investment in TimorLeste leading up to the successful mission under the
very able stewardship of Ambassador Kamalesh
Sharma.
We have every confidence that the Government of
Timor-Leste will thus be better positioned to engage its
resources and political will in order to take any
outstanding legislative or executive measures. Much
progress has reportedly been made on the very
sensitive issue of border demarcation. We again feel
assured that both Timor-Leste and Indonesia will work
together to resolve and push forward on this issue.
Ultimately, the resolution of this issue has an important
bearing on the status of refugees and displaced persons
and on sustainable peace and security.
While we fully support the democratic process in
Timor-Leste and the engagement of a battalion of
around 300 troops, it must be emphasized that a
timeline aiming at an end to the mission must be
respected. This will ensure that Timor-Leste achieves
full independence and has a smooth transition, marked
by development, in a timely manner.
Much is at stake in the Asian region in relation to
the state of affairs in Timor-Leste. We take pride in the
successful intervention of the United Nations in this
case. We can strengthen this commitment with the
support of the international community for an early and
imminent process of peaceful, democratic and stable
development. We look forward to that day.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
representative of Fiji for his kind words addressed to
me.
I now give the floor to the Executive Secretary of
the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries,
Mr. João Augusto de Médicis.
Mr. De Médicis: Mr. President, in response to
your request and following the good example of
Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta, I shall present a very
short version of my statement. I understand that the full
text will be distributed.

34

Let me thank you, Mr. President, and the other
Security Council members for inviting the Community
of Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP) to take part
in this meeting. Such an opportunity is a milestone in
the history of our organization and constitutes an
important acknowledgement of our work.
Our Community was created in 1996 by the
Governments of Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, GuineaBissau, Mozambique, Portugal and Sao Tome and
Principe. From day one, we took to heart Timor-Leste’s
quest for sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. More than just our first, this was our
founding initiative. Indeed, our maturity as a group of
fellow nations was marked on 20 May 2002, when we
proudly accepted Timor-Leste as our eighth member
State. That day, the eight Portuguese-speaking
countries internationally asserted their peaceful and
democratic agenda. That was also the day when we
reclaimed a cultural heritage rooted in five centuries of
history and exchange among Asia, Africa, Europe and
South America.
Our Community brings together countries of
different sizes, resources and degrees of development.
Some of our member States rank among the world’s
poorest nations. Timor-Leste’s struggle to overcome its
misfortunes and the efforts of its society over the past
four years to reaffirm the country’s potential have
constituted quite a success story. But an attentive
observer will understand that this recent achievement is
still far from being safely established.
With dedication and professionalism, the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), under the outstanding leadership of Sergio
Vieira de Mello, helped create a new nation, with high
standards for its public life and a strategic vision for its
future. That challenging task is currently being
complemented by UNTAET’s successor, the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). Although much has been accomplished,
the CPLP understands that Timor-Leste still needs the
support of the United Nations in order to become a
stable and self-sustaining nation.
The special report of the Secretary-General on
UNMISET (S/2004/117), presented last week, points
correctly to the necessity of applying the concept of
downsizing in a balanced and careful way. The CPLP
welcomes the report and endorses the observations and
recommendations set out in paragraphs 62 to 68.

S/PV.4913

In the area of human rights, as the report made
clear, further efforts will be necessary in order to bring
open issues to closure and allow for solid advances in
national reconciliation. In the area of public
administration, international assistance will also
continue to be required for some time to assure that
crucial tasks are discharged.
Concerning UNMISET’s police and military
components, the CPLP agrees with those who believe
that it is too early for a handover of full defence
responsibilities to the Government of Timor-Leste.
Although the situation in the country is peaceful, one
could argue that this very situation relies on the
stabilizing role played by the United Nations
peacekeeping force. Potential threats are dormant to a
great extent because a sound element of deterrence is
in place.
As the memory and the physical evidence of the
events of 1999 still linger over Timor-Leste, some
important issues, such as serious crimes and former
refugees, remain unresolved. Consequently, the CPLP
believes that the hard-won achievements of nationbuilding in Timor-Leste must not be jeopardized by an
untimely withdrawal of the UNMISET military
component.
Internal security and law enforcement are issues
that also need to be addressed. The UNMISET police
forces, in which personnel from CPLP countries take
part, are an element of stability that should be
preserved. Moreover, the National Police of TimorLeste could only benefit from the extension of the
mentoring and monitoring provided by the UNMISET
police component.
That is the message the CPLP would like to
convey to the Security Council. The United Nations
has been doing a superb job in Timor-Leste. We share
the common hope that the Security Council will
continue to help that new nation overcome the
problems of its past, providing it with the necessary
means to advance towards a stable, peaceful and
prosperous future.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Mr. Hédi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General,
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, to respond to
comments.
Mr. Annabi: I will be very brief. I just wanted to
respond to an important issue raised by Ambassador
Thomson of the United Kingdom and to say that we
fully agree that proposed bilateral assistance for the
Timor-Leste police should be coordinated with
multilateral assistance now and that that coordination
should not be delayed.
We based our estimate of the residual requirement
of the Timor-Leste police on the information that was
available to us at the time we prepared the report. We
would therefore very much welcome any further
information that bilateral partners might be willing to
share on specific plans that they have developed for
assistance to the Timor-Leste police and, more
important, on the timetable for the deployment of their
proposed assistance to the Timorese police. We will
then be able to adjust our own estimates to reflect the
offers of bilateral assistance in our end-of-April report,
but we believe that adjustments should ultimately be
made not only on the basis of anticipated assistance but
on the basis of the assistance that will be effectively
available on the ground in East Timor by the end of
April, before the Council takes a decision at the end of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Annabi for his comments.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.
On behalf of the Security Council, I would like
once again to thank Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste,
for attending today’s meeting.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

35
