UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S//1995/498
21 June 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

REPORT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL MISSION TO WESTERN SAHARA
FROM 3 TO 9 JUNE 1995
Letter of transmittal
Letter dated 20 June 1995 from the members of the Security
Council mission to Western Sahara addressed to the President
of the Security Council

We have the honour to transmit herewith the report of the Security Council
mission to Western Sahara, which took place from 3 to 9 June 1995. The report
is submitted to the Council in accordance with the terms of reference for the
mission agreed upon by the Council on 30 May 1995 (S/1995/431) and pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 995 (1995) of 26 May 1995, in which
the Council decided to send a mission of the Council to the region with a view
to accelerating the implementation of the settlement plan.

(Signed) Legwaila Joseph LEGWAILA (Botswana),
Chairman of the mission

95-18503 (E)

210695

(Signed)

Emilio J. CARDENAS (Argentina)

(Signed)

Hervé LADSOUS (France)

(Signed)

Gerardo MARTINEZ BLANCO (Honduras)

(Signed)

Salim Bin MOHAMMED AL-KHUSSAIBY (Oman)

(Signed)

Karl F. INDERFURTH (United States of
America)

/...

S/1995/498
English
Page 2

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
In his report to the Security Council of 19 May 1995 on the situation
concerning Western Sahara (S/1995/404), the Secretary-General drew attention to
the fact that the identification of applicants for participation in the
referendum on Western Sahara, as envisaged in the settlement plan, had
progressed incrementally, but slowly. He stressed that the identification
process could not be brought to a successful conclusion without the full
cooperation of the parties. He called on them once again to work with the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) in a
spirit of genuine cooperation.
2.
By its resolution 995 (1995) of 26 May 1995, the Security Council decided,
inter alia, to send a mission of the Council to the region, with a view to
accelerating the implementation of the settlement plan. At the consultations of
the whole held on 30 May 1995, the Council agreed to send a six-member mission
to the region, to depart from New York on 3 June 1995.
3.
The terms of reference of the mission, as set out by the Security Council
(S/1995/431), were as follows:
(a) To impress upon the parties the necessity of cooperating fully with
MINURSO in the implementation of all aspects of the settlement plan and to
underline the fact that any further delay would put the whole operation at risk;
(b) To assess progress and identify problems in the identification
process, bearing in mind the deadline for the referendum of January 1996;
(c) To identify problems in other areas relevant to the fulfilment of the
settlement plan (including the reduction of Moroccan troops, the confinement of
troops of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Saguia el-Hamra and Río de Oro
(the Frente POLISARIO), the release of political prisoners and detainees, the
exchange of prisoners of war and the return of refugees).
4.
The Security Council mission was led by Mr. Legwaila Joseph Legwaila
(Botswana). Other members of the mission were Mr. Emilio J. Cárdenas
(Argentina), Mr. Hervé Ladsous (France), Mr. Gerardo Martínez Blanco (Honduras),
Mr. Salim Bin Mohammed Al-Khussaiby (Oman) and Mr. Karl F. Inderfurth (United
States of America).
5.
The Security Council mission to Western Sahara wishes to express its
gratitude to the Governments of Morocco, Algeria and Mauritania and to the
leadership of the Frente POLISARIO for their hospitality and support to the
mission, including the provision of means of transportation. The mission also
wishes to thank Mr. Erik Jensen, Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Western Sahara and the MINURSO staff for their assistance
to the mission and their continuous efforts to ensure implementation of the
settlement plan.

/...

S/1995/498
English
Page 3

II.

ACTIVITIES OF THE MISSION

6.
Prior to its departure, on 31 May 1995, the mission held successive
meetings with the Permanent Representatives of Morocco, Algeria and Mauritania
to the United Nations and with the representative of the Frente POLISARIO in
New York, in order to elicit their views on the mission’s terms of reference.
It also asked them to facilitate contacts with the parties and observers with
whom the mission would hold meetings and discussions.
7.
The mission left New York on 3 June and visited Morocco, Algeria and
Mauritania where it held meetings with senior government officials of those
countries, including an audience with Mr. Maaoya Ould Sid’Ahmed Taya, President
of Mauritania. In addition, the mission visited Tindouf, where it met with the
leadership of the Frente POLISARIO. In Tindouf, the mission also held a
briefing session with officials of MINURSO and some of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) observers currently there and witnessed the identification
operation in two centres. The mission then went to Laayoune, where it attended
a meeting with local Moroccan government officials, was briefed by the MINURSO
Force Commander and Civilian Police Commissioner and met with the remaining OAU
observers and some MINURSO staff. While in Laayoune, the mission also witnessed
the identification operation (see annex I for a full schedule of the mission’s
activities).

A.

Briefing by the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Western Sahara

8.
The Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Erik Jensen, joined the mission in Rabat and remained with it throughout the
period it stayed in the region. During his briefing, Mr. Jensen explained the
position of the two parties vis-à-vis the settlement plan and, in particular,
the holding of the referendum. After the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 907 (1994) of 29 March 1994, approving option B of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/1994/283/Add.1) of 21 March 1994 and calling upon the
Identification Commission to proceed with its work on the basis of the
Secretary-General’s compromise proposal, both parties agreed to move forward
with the identification process. Mr. Jensen alerted the mission that the Frente
POLISARIO believed that the settlement plan was weighted against it and was
concerned about certain developments in the identification process.
9.
When asked about the guidelines on which the Identification Commission
based its procedures, Mr. Jensen informed the mission of the following: in the
event that an applicant was not included in the Spanish census, did not present
any documentation confirming his/her identity and substantiating his/her claim
for admission under one of the remaining criteria, and if the two sheikhs who
were called upon to provide the relevant oral testimony disagreed, the burden of
proof would rest with the respective applicant to offer convincing evidence to
the Identification Commission that he/she qualified for inclusion in the
electoral roll.
10. Mr. Jensen informed the mission that although both parties stressed their
commitment to the process and their desire to see it through under the
/...

S/1995/498
English
Page 4

settlement plan, in practice they had difficulty from time to time in
cooperating fully with all aspects of the process thus often causing
interruptions in the identification. Even after agreeing to the Deputy Special
Representative’s formula for solving the problem of the non-timely availability
of sheikhs to provide oral testimony, the two parties still had some difficulty
in always providing and accepting each other’s alternates to replace the absent
sheikhs, thus causing further interruptions in the identification operation.
11. The Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General further briefed
the mission on the status of the work on the implementation of other aspects of
the settlement plan. He expressed the hope that after the mission’s visit the
recurring problems in the identification could be resolved, allowing him time to
concentrate on the implementation of the other aspects of the settlement plan.

B.

Meetings with officials of the Government of Morocco

12. In Rabat, the mission first met with Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs Mr. Abdellatif Filali and officials of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. Mr. Filali reiterated Morocco’s desire to resolve all problems before
the end of the year and hold the referendum in January 1996 as provided for in
the settlement plan. Mr. Filali stressed that the presence of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the Territory had become essential as
D-Day approached.
13. Mr. Filali emphasized that MINURSO needed four essential conditions to be
met for the implementation of the settlement plan: (a) permanent support by the
Security Council; (b) full cooperation by the two parties; (c) assurances of
cooperation and support by the neighbouring countries; and (d) availability of
the necessary financial resources. In that context, he observed that while
Morocco accepted the criteria for identification, the other party recognized
them formally but, he believed, had instructed their sheikhs to accept only
three of them in the identification process. This, he stressed, constituted a
serious obstacle to the process.
14. When requested by the mission whether Morocco could increase its
contribution to the financing of MINURSO, he agreed to consider the request, but
he needed specific details through a formal request to Morocco’s Permanent
Mission to the United Nations in New York. Mr. Filali finally stressed that
MINURSO’s withdrawal prior to the fulfilment of its mandate could be dangerous
for the region as it would be a factor of instability.
15. The mission then met with Mr. Driss Basri, Minister of State for the
Interior and officials of the Ministry of the Interior. Mr. Basri and his
colleagues pointed out that scheduling adjustments to the original timetable,
brought about as a result of the cease-fire, impeded progress and resulted in an
extra financial burden for the MINURSO operation. Mr. Basri pointed out that,
until May 1995, the Government of Morocco had contributed $25 million to cover
the accommodation and food of MINURSO staff. In addition, $632,000 covering
value added tax had been returned to MINURSO as well as $179,000 covering
landing rights.

/...

S/1995/498
English
Page 5

16. Mr. Basri further reminded the mission of Morocco’s view that the 100,000
applicants currently not residing in the Territory would have to be identified.
Those applications were not presented in computerized form along with the
material relevant to persons living in the territory and therefore were not
taken into account in MINURSO’s timetable for completing the identification
process. With respect to such numbers, Mr. Basri put forward his Government’s
offer to provide the logistical and technical support for the identification of
those applicants either by transferring them to the Territory or by transporting
the Identification Commission to them with the aim of identifying 30,000 to
50,000 persons per month. To that effect, he requested the opening of more
identification centres.
17. According to Mr. Basri, the Spanish census did not take into account the
structure of the Saharan society, hence Morocco’s position that additional
criteria were needed for the identification of potential voters. He pointed out
that, in Morocco’s view, criterion 4 was equal in value to others and that
applicants under this criterion should not be systematically rejected. He
stressed to the mission that all applicants who might not be registered would
have a right to appeal.
18. With regard to the reduction of Moroccan troops to 65,000, Mr. Basri
reiterated that Morocco had appointed those who would be responsible for dealing
with the matter. The mission was informed that Morocco would cooperate with the
military component of MINURSO once D-Day had been determined. In the Moroccan
Government’s view, the confinement of the POLISARIO troops should take place in
Algeria. Mr. Basri further confirmed to the mission that the matter of the
release of political detainees had been discussed with the independent jurist
during his recent visit and that Morocco intended to continue its cooperation
with him. He also stressed that once the identification process was completed,
Morocco would be ready to accept repatriated refugees, ensuring their honour,
security and freedom and providing housing, schooling and whatever else would be
necessary for their rehabilitation.
19. At Laayoune, the mission attended a meeting at the Palais de Congrès, where
local government officials, several sheikhs and representatives of the Saharans
made various presentations. All the speakers pledged their allegiance to
His Majesty King Hassan II of Morocco. They also pledged their support to
MINURSO and underlined their determination to see the process come to a
successful end to enable Morocco to put the finishing touches to its territorial
integrity. They all stressed that the slowness of the identification process
was due to obstacles created by the other party, who wanted to impede the work
of the Commission. The speakers also reiterated the promise made by the
Minister of the Interior to accelerate the pace of identification in order to
reach 30,000 to 50,000 applicants per month.

C.

Meetings with officials of the Frente POLISARIO

20. Upon its arrival at Tindouf on 6 June 1995 and after meeting with MINURSO
Identification Commission staff, the mission met with the leadership of the
Frente POLISARIO, including Mr. Mohamed Abdelaziz, its Secretary-General,
Mr. Bachir Mustapha Sayed, Deputy Secretary-General and coordinator with
/...

S/1995/498
English
Page 6

MINURSO, and other senior Frente POLISARIO officials. In the Smara refugee
camp, the mission met with representatives of the sheikhs.
21. Mr. Abdelaziz reiterated the Frente POLISARIO’S willingness and
determination to see a free and fair referendum as a lasting solution to the
problem of Western Sahara. He stated that, as a sign of goodwill, the Frente
POLISARIO had made many concessions in order to allow for the settlement plan to
proceed. It later found out that more concessions were expected in order to
make implementation of the plan possible.
22. Mr. Sayed stressed that, in the Frente POLISARIO’S view, the list of voters
should be based on the 1974 census, with a small margin of increase to allow for
population growth. He informed the mission that the Frente POLISARIO had
expressed serious reservations about the implementation of criteria 4 and 5 and
about the admission of oral testimony by the sheikhs and had asked for
guarantees that their concerns would be addressed by the United Nations.
However, the Frente POLISARIO felt very concerned about the manner in which the
identification operation was being conducted and about MINURSO’s ability to
ensure fairness in the process. According to Mr. Sayed, so far in the
identification, the two sheikhs appeared to disagree in 60 per cent of the
cases; there had not been one single agreement among the party teams observing
the process in the identification centres.
23. He stressed that the Frente POLISARIO had accepted the cease-fire in order
to achieve self-determination through peaceful means. In its view, alterations
made later to the settlement plan had led to one party controlling the process.
He reiterated that the Frente POLISARIO expected fair implementation of the
settlement plan as agreed upon by both parties and as adopted by the Security
Council.
24. Mr. Sayed spoke about the difficulty the POLISARIO sheikhs had in being
called to testify in the identification of persons, only 20 per cent of whom had
been included in the Spanish census and 80 per cent of whom were said to be
without adequate documentation. It would not be easy for the POLISARIO to
convince the sheikhs to continue participating in a process characterized by
lack of transparency.
25. The difficulty the sheikhs had with the process was later reiterated to the
mission by the sheikhs themselves when they addressed the mission at a meeting
that took place at the Smara refugee camp. All the speakers rejected the
present occupation of the Territory by Morocco and attributed delays in the
identification process to obstacles created by the other party. Some of the
sheikhs pointed out that in 75 per cent of the cases they had disagreed over an
applicant’s identification; also that some of their colleagues on the Moroccan
side had expressed fear about testifying freely. The sheikhs proposed that, in
order to expedite and make the identification process more credible, the
sub-fraction leaders should decide in advance about the persons who belonged in
their sub-fraction and then provide the list to the Identification Commission.
26. With regard to the confinement of its troops, the Frente POLISARIO
reiterated that they should be confined in the area between the sand-wall (berm)
and the international border. When it came to the withdrawal of Moroccan
/...

S/1995/498
English
Page 7

troops, the Frente POLISARIO expressed doubts about MINURSO’s ability to monitor
the Moroccan withdrawal and to neutralize the Moroccan paramilitary forces as
called for in the settlement plan.
27. For the Frente POLISARIO, the question of the repatriation of refugees was
more than a humanitarian problem; it was also a political issue as the United
Nations would have to convince the refugees that it would be safe to return to
their land. On the same subject, POLISARIO expressed disappointment that
neither the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
nor the Security Council had intervened at the time that Morocco transferred
thousands of people to the Territory, in violation of the settlement plan.
28. The Frente POLISARIO did not wish MINURSO’s withdrawal prior to the
completion of its mandate. It strongly supported the holding of a fair and
transparent referendum, asking for guarantees to that effect from the Security
Council. At the same time, the mission observed the POLISARIO leadership’s
increasing doubts about MINURSO’s ability to ensure fairness in the process,
doubts that some observers believe could place the settlement plan at risk. The
mission argued, in the strongest terms possible, that the interests of the
POLISARIO were best protected by staying with the plan, that the plan was the
only possible solution and that there was no credible alternative to it.

D.

Discussions with officials of the Government of Algeria

29. In the afternoon of 5 June 1995, the mission travelled to Algiers, where it
met with Mr. Mohammed Salah Dembri, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation, and other officials of the Foreign Ministry. Mr. Dembri argued for
a political solution without victors or vanquished. He said that, in Algeria’s
view, Western Sahara was a typical case of decolonization. Inclusion of
additional criteria had diverted the settlement plan from its original
objective, leading to quantitative mechanisms that could not be mastered.
Moreover, further attempts had been made to erode and weaken the settlement
plan.
30. On the matter of the confinement of the POLISARIO troops, the Government of
Algeria strongly rejected the proposal made in 1991 by the then Special
Representative of the Secretary-General that they be confined in Algeria. In
the Government’s view, this would extend the theatre of conflict to Algerian
territory. Algeria expressed the view that the cantonment of POLISARIO troops
should be part of a consultation process, as defined by the initial United
Nations and OAU resolutions, outside any military and administrative
constraints. Algerian government officials further pointed out that the
settlement plan stipulated placing the Moroccan forces along the berm, which is
not part of the international border. In Algeria’s view, the troops of both
parties should be confined in an equitable manner within the Territory.
Similarly, the return of refugees and the exchange of prisoners of war should be
addressed by the parties in a bilateral manner.
31. Mr. Dembri stressed that for any solid progress to be made, there should be
consultation between the two parties as the United Nations cannot replace them.
He reiterated Algeria’s commitment to peace, security and stability in the
/...

S/1995/498
English
Page 8

region and its intention to continue helping the two parties to reach compromise
through dialogue on other aspects and emphasized that the two parties must have
a vision of the post-referendum period.

E.

Meetings with officials of the Government of Mauritania

32. On 7 June 1995, the mission visited Mauritania, where it met with
Mr. Maaoya Ould Sid’Ahmed Taya, President, and Mr. Mohamed Ould Boubakar, Prime
Minister, in the presence of Mr. Mohamed Salem Ould Lekhal, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, and other Foreign Ministry officials. The President of Mauritania
informed the mission that the settlement of the Western Sahara issue was of
great importance to Mauritania, owing in part to the long border it shared with
the Territory.
33. Authorities in Nouakchott follow developments of this issue very closely,
which is of the utmost importance to the security of the subregion. Mauritania
has already had difficulties in the past because of the existence of the
conflict in Western Sahara. In Mauritania’s view, the United Nations should
persevere and be more forceful in trying to achieve a solution. A premature
withdrawal of MINURSO would be catastrophic for the subregion. Mauritania
offered to put its limited resources at the disposal of the United Nations in an
effort to find a peaceful solution. The President agreed to enable MINURSO to
proceed as soon as possible with the identification of applicants living in
Mauritania.

F.

Meeting with observers of the Organization of African Unity

34. In both Tindouf and Laayoune, the mission met with the OAU observers
assisting the Identification Commission in its work. Some of the OAU observers
saw many problems in the manner in which the identification operation was being
conducted, causing MINURSO to have almost lost control of it. In their view,
the Council should entrust MINURSO to take over the identification operation
completely. Others acknowledged that the problems were not insurmountable and
that MINURSO had come a long way in the search for peace.
35. The OAU observers cautioned that it would not be easy to proceed with the
other aspects of the settlement plan and that there were no guarantees that
innovative ways to resolve them would succeed. Although a January deadline for
the referendum might not be realistic, it would be unthinkable to talk about
MINURSO’s withdrawal at the present stage. The observers also cautioned that
the African continent would find it difficult to understand the reasons behind
MINURSO’s withdrawal.
36. All OAU observers urged the Security Council to be more forceful on the
question of cooperation by the parties and to elicit their consent to abide with
their agreement with MINURSO; the Council should also entrust MINURSO to take
over the identification operation completely.

/...

S/1995/498
English
Page 9

G.

Briefing by the Force Commander and the Civilian
Police Commissioner

37. In Laayoune, the mission was briefed by the MINURSO Force Commander,
Brigadier-General Andre Van Baelen, and the Civilian Police Commissioner,
Colonel Wolf-Dieter Krampe. The Force Commander highlighted the difficulties
faced by MINURSO’s military component in its operational capabilities as a
result of administrative problems and financial limitations placed on the
mission. Those problems and limitations had caused critical logistical
deficiencies. He stressed that, to a large extent, the success of the
cease-fire had been due to MINURSO’s ability to monitor it regularly. He
expressed concern that if MINURSO’s military presence in the field were to be
reduced because of the above-mentioned constraints, the two parties might lose
their confidence in it.
38. The Civilian Police Commissioner explained to the mission the role of the
civilian police in the identification operation. He also highlighted some of
the tasks that the civilian police would be expected to undertake once MINURSO
went into full expansion.

III.

OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

39. In its discussions with the two parties the mission observed that there was
continuing suspicion and lack of trust. As a result, in the course of
identification, technical problems that could have been resolved easily had
there been goodwill, had become politicized and blown out of proportion, with
each party blaming the other for the lack of progress. This could make it
nearly impossible for MINURSO to meet its objectives unless both parties
improved their performance. The parties’ cooperation must be combined with the
necessary resources being made available to MINURSO, if there is to be any
realistic hope of maintaining the timetable.
40. Given the complexity of the tasks to be performed, the continuing delays
caused by the two parties and the constraints imposed by limited resources and
local conditions, the mission is concerned that the time necessary to perform
the functions associated with the identification process and other aspects of
the settlement plan has been underestimated. The mission therefore feels that
there is a real risk that the identification process may be extended beyond the
time previously envisaged and the referendum may not be held in January 1996.
41. In the course of the mission’s discussions with the two parties, while
trying to elicit their commitment to abandon their insistence on reciprocity in
the number and operation of identification centres on each side, each party
insisted that its performance be conditional on the performance of the other.
The mission strongly recommends that both parties abandon their insistence on
reciprocity in the number and operation of identification centres on each side
and refrain from their habit of blaming their lack of cooperation on the other
side.
42. With regard to mobile identification teams, it was explained to the mission
that it was hardly realistic to move around the desert the generators, computers
/...

S/1995/498
English
Page 10

and other equipment necessary for the identification, in addition to the teams
of party and OAU observers, rotating sheikhs and MINURSO personnel. While
moving through the desert, all these people would have to be supplied with food,
water and accommodation. The Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral therefore suggested, and the mission agreed with him, that additional
identification teams be mobilized instead, in temporary fixed centres.
43. There should be no limit to the number of persons to be identified on any
given day. Moreover, other practices aimed at ensuring a faster pace of the
identification process should be strongly encouraged. The mission urges that
the highest possible number of identifications per day, as many as a full
working day allows, be permitted to take place.
44. A key element of the identification process is the work of the legal review
office. The substantive review of the undecided cases has recently commenced.
Unless this is expedited, the time needed to review those cases will further
delay the date of the referendum. The mission recommends that MINURSO speed up
the substantive review of the identification case files and the compiling of
preliminary voter eligibility lists.
45. In that respect, the mission further recommends measures that will ensure
full confidentiality in dealing with the review cases. MINURSO should maximize
security arrangements with respect to information about the identification.
46. The mission calls upon the Government of Morocco to conduct preliminary
vetting of the 100,000 applicants currently not residing in the Territory prior
to examination by the Identification Commission, in order to enable MINURSO to
maintain its timetable for completing the identification process.
47. MINURSO should without delay commence the identification operation for
applicants living in Mauritania, in cooperation with the Government of
Mauritania, with a view to completing that operation as soon as possible.
48. Reports on the progress of identification should be made to the Security
Council every two weeks. Should the identification operation be interrupted or
slowed down for any reason, this should be reported immediately to the Council.
49. The mission calls upon the two parties not to inhibit access to the
identification centres and to take all necessary steps in order to facilitate a
free and fair process on the basis of the guidelines outlined by the Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in paragraph 9 above.
50. The mission recommends speeding up the administrative decision-making
process to enable MINURSO to have all the human and other resources that could
be required to expedite its work.
51. It is important that communiqués issued by MINURSO be transmitted over the
radio by both parties, as requested by the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
52. Given the prevailing conditions following the cease-fire, the original
timetable for the identification was delinked from D-Day. The Deputy Special
/...

S/1995/498
English
Page 11

Representative of the Secretary-General, in consultation with the two parties
and the observer countries, should seek ways to secure a date in the near future
for the reduction and confinement of troops in order to allow the SecretaryGeneral to make his ruling in the matter in early September. The mission
recommends that the Deputy Special Representative should also consult with the
two parties on the exchange of prisoners of war and the release of political
detainees, so that those issues could be removed from the timetable and linked
closely to the commencement of the transitional period.
53. Finally, the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General should
give immediate attention to problems associated with the registration of
refugees called for in the settlement plan, including the time required for this
process and the resources made available to date. UNHCR should take steps to
ensure that commencement of voluntary repatriation of refugees not be delayed.
54. The mission calls attention to the fact that one of MINURSO’s main
successes has been the establishment and maintenance of the cease-fire. It was
very clearly communicated to the mission that in the event of MINURSO’s
withdrawal before completing its mandate, the risk of a return to some form of
hostilities would increase.
55. In its continuing consideration of this issue, the Security Council needs
to keep in mind the stake it has in ensuring the credibility of the process.
56. Finally, the mission acknowledges that some progress has been made in the
identification process in recent weeks and underscores that, while fairness must
be guaranteed, such progress will have to be sustained and improved
significantly to allow the referendum to take place early next year.

/...

S/1995/498
English
Page 12

Annex I
SECURITY COUNCIL MISSION TO WESTERN SAHARA:

SCHEDULE OF ACTIVITIES

Saturday, 3 June 1995
Departure from New York
Sunday, 4 June 1995 - Arrival in Casablanca/Rabat - Morocco
Afternoon

Briefing of the mission by the Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General

Evening

Dinner (reception) hosted by the Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Morocco
Monday, 5 June 1995
10 a.m.

Meeting with the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Morocco

11.30 a.m.

Meeting with the Minister of State for the Interior of Morocco
Algeria

5.30 p.m.

Meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Algeria

9 p.m.

Dinner hosted by the Secretary-General of the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs of Algeria at Residence El Mithak

Tuesday, 6 June 1995
Morning

Working session with senior officials of the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs of Algeria
Courtesy call on and brief meeting with the Secretary-General
of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Noon

Departure for Tindouf

Tuesday, 6 June 1995 - POLISARIO:

Tindouf

2.30 p.m.

First round of meetings with the Frente POLISARIO

7.30 p.m.

Meeting with local sheikhs (Chioufs)

10.30 p.m.

Meeting with OAU observers in Tindouf

12.30 a.m.

Second round of meetings (working dinner) with the Frente
POLISARIO

/...

S/1995/498
English
Page 13

Wednesday, 7 June 1995
Morning

Third round of meetings with the Frente POLISARIO

Noon

Visit to Smara and Ayoune identification centres

1 p.m.

Meeting with President Mohamed Abdel Aziz of the Frente
POLISARIO
Luncheon hosted by President Mohamed Abdel Aziz
Departure for Laayoune
Laayoune

4.30 p.m.

Meeting with Moroccan officials and Sahraouis at the Palais de
Congrès
MINURSO; Laayoune

5.45 p.m.

Briefings by the Force Commander
Briefings by the Police Commissioner

6.15 p.m.

Meeting with the OAU observer delegation at Laayoune

6.45 p.m.

Individual interviews of MINURSO personnel by some members of
the mission

8.30 p.m.

Dinner hosted by the Wali (Mayor) of Laayoune

Thursday, 8 June 1995
9.30 p.m.

Visit to the identification centre at Laayoune and inspection
of MINURSO identification facilities, as well as observation
of the identification process
Individual interviews of MINURSO personnel by some members of
the mission

10.30 a.m.

Departure for Nouakchott
Mauritania

2 p.m.

Meeting with the President of Mauritania
Brief meeting with the Prime Minister

2.45 p.m.

Luncheon hosted by the Secretary-General of the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation

/...

S/1995/498
English
Page 14

3.30 p.m.

Individual meetings between members of the mission and
representatives of their Governments in Mauritania
Departure for Casablanca
Morocco

8 p.m.

Arrival in Casablanca
Visit to the Hassan II mosque

10 p.m.

Meeting of the mission to discuss its report to the Security
Council

Friday, 9 June 1995
9.15 a.m.

Press conference by the Chairman of the mission at Casablanca
airport

9.30 a.m.

Departure for New York

/...

S/1995/498
English
Page 15

Annex II
LIST OF OFFICIAL CONTACTS

1.

Government of Morocco
Mr. Abdellatif Filali, Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
Mr. Driss Basri, Minister of State for the Interior
Mr. Ahmed Snoussi, Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United
Nations
Mr. Brahim Hakim, Ambassador
Mr. Hafid Benhachem, Governor
Mr. Mohamed Azmi, Governor
Mr. Othman Bonabid, Governor
Mr. Aziz Hasbi, Adviser
Mr. Chanki Serghimi, Adviser
Mr. Hamid Charbar, Interior Ministry official
Mr. Hassan Duchen, (Wali) Mayor of Laayoune
Mr. Brika Zeroccali, parliamentary representative for Laayoune
Mr. Ali Ould Said, representative of the Sahraouis
Mrs. Leila Maa El-Ainine, representative of Saharan women
Mr. Abdelouahab Bellouki, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Morocco to the
United Nations

2.

Government of Algeria
Mr. Mohammed Salah Dembri, Minister for Foreign Affairs
Mr. Mohamed Amine Kherbe, Director-General for Multilateral Affairs in the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Mr. Mimouni Sofiane, Director for Multilateral Relations
Mr. Sabri Benhadoum, Director for International Policy
Mr. Abdelaziz Sbaa, Head of the Communications Division of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs
/...

S/1995/498
English
Page 16

Mr. Sabrie Benkadoun
Mr. Sofiane Mioune
Mr. Mamedine Ayani, Deputy Director for United Nations Political Affairs
and Disarmament, General Directorate for Multilateral Affairs
Ambassador Abdel Kadir Taffar, Secretary-General in the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs
3.

Frente POLISARIO
Mr. Mohamed Abdelaziz, Secretary-General
Mr. Bachir Mustapha Sayed, Deputy Secretary-General and coordinator with
MINURSO
Mr. Ahmed Boukhari, Representative at the United Nations
Mr. Mohamed El Omali, observer with the MINURSO Identification Commission
Ms. Sena Ahmed, Secretary-General of the National Union of Sahraoui Women
Mr. Radi Bachir Sgaiar, Representative for the Nordic Countries
Mr. Mohamed Fadel Ismail, Political Adviser to the Saharan National
Commission for the Referendum
Mr. Naddadi Cheij Ahmed Leheiba, observer with the Identification
Commission
Mr. Yahir Banhaubaime, Official Coordinator with the Identification
Commission
Mr. Faddi Mohamed Ahmed, Military Liaison Officer

4.

Meetings with the Government of Mauritania
Mr. Maaoya Ould Sid’Ahmed Taya, President
Mr. Mohamed Ould Boubakar, Prime Minister
Mr. Mohamed Salem Ould Lekhal, Minister for Foreign Affairs (in attendance)
Mr. Khatry Ould Jidou, Secretary-General, Ministry for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation
Mr. Abdersahmane Ould Hamza, Director of International Organizations
Mr. Drahite Mamedou, Director, Legal and Consular Affairs

/...

S/1995/498
English
Page 17

5.

Meetings with Observers of the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
Mr. Doudou Diop
Mr. Marcel Diouf
Mr. Solomon Gomes
Mr. Jean Raymond Loumabeka
Mr. Tshimanga M. Motoke
Mr. Ibrahim Saley
Mr. Alpha Ibrahim Sow

6.

Meetings with MINURSO staff
Mr. Erik Jensen, Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Brigadier-General Andre Van Baelen, MINURSO Force Commander
Colonel Wolf-Dieter Krampe, MINURSO Police Commissioner
Mr. Ali Ouni, Chief Administrative Officer
Mr. Raouf Abdel-Kader, Registration Officer
Mr. Martin Bentz, Administrative Liaison Officer
Mr. Robert Chen, Finance Officer
Mr. Jean-Jacques Edeline, Executive Assistant, Office of the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General
Mr. Eric Korchan, Movement Control Office
Mr. Sizostris Makar, member of the Identification Commission
Ms. Katlyn Thomas, member of the Identification Commission
Ms. Beatriz Bosque, member of the Identification Commission
Ms. Domitila Icha, registration clerk
Mr. Bachir Al-Okla, member of the Identification Commission
Mr. Arnaud Blasco, computer specialist
Mrs. Chantal Buffet, secretary
Mr. Jeffrey Smith, technician
Mrs. Jacqueline Chenard, registration officer
Mrs. Liliane Delbarre, secretary
Mrs. Paulette Forest, secretary
Mr. Youssef Gemayel, member of the Identification Commission
Mrs. Sophie Jacquin, MINURSO Spokesperson
Mrs. Juliette Jayet, secretary

-----
