285

IX. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2. Calls upon all States becoming parties to Protocol I
to consider the matter of making the declaration provided
for under article 90 of that Protocol;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session a report on the
status of the Protocols based on information received from
Member States;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Status of the Protocols
Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts:
report of the Secretary-General".
99th plenary meeting
13 December I 984

39/78. Development and strengthening of goodneighbourliness between States
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the determination of the peoples of the
United Nations, as expressed in the Charter of the United
Nations, to practise tolerance and live together in peace
with one another as good neighbours,
Recalling the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, approved by its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24
October 1970,
Recalling its resolutions 1236 (XII) of 14 December
1957, 1301 (XIII) of 10 December 1958, 2129 (XX) of21
December 1965, 34/99 of 14 December 1979, 36/101 of9
December 1981, 37/117 of 16 December 1982 and 38/126
of 19 December 1983,
Bearing in mind that, owing to geographic proximity
and to other relevant reasons, there are particularly
favourable opportunities for co-operation and mutual
advantage between neighbouring countries, in many fields
and various forms, and that the development of such cooperation may have a positive influence on international
relations as a whole,
Considering that the great changes of a political, economic and social nature, as well as the scientific and technological progress which has taken place in the world and led
to unprecedented interdependence of nations, have given
new dimensions to good-neighbourliness in the conduct of
States and increased the need to develop and strengthen it,
Taking into account the working paper concerning the
development and strengthening of good-neighbourliness
between States,9 as well as the written replies sent by States
and international organizations on the content of goodneighbourliness and on ways and means to enhance it 10
and the views expressed by States on this subject in the
General Assembly,
Recalling its opinion that it is necessary to continue to
examine the question of good-neighbourliness in order to
strengthen and develop its content, as well as ways and
modalities to enhance its effectiveness, and that the results
of this examination could be included, at an appropriate
time, in a suitable international document,
I. Reaffirms that good-neighbourliness fully conforms
with the purposes of the United Nations and shall be
founded upon the strict observance of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and of the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with
9 A/38/440, annex.

the Charter of the United Nations, and so presupposes the
rejection of any acts seeking to establish zones of influence
or domination;
2. Calls once again upon States, in the interest of the
maintenance of international peace and security, to develop good-neighbourly relations, acting on the basis of these
principles;
3. Reaffirms that the generalization of the long practice
of good-neighbourliness and of principles and rules pertaining to it is likely to strengthen friendly relations and
co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter;
4. Deems it appropriate, on the basis of the working
paper concerning the development and strengthening of
good-neighbourliness between States mentioned above. as
well as of other proposals and ideas which have been or
will be submitted by States, and the replies and views of
States and international organizations, to start clarifying
and formulating the elements of good-neighbourliness as
part of a process of elaboration of a suitable international
document on the subject;
5. Decides to proceed with the task of identifying and
clarifying the elements of good-neighbourliness within the
framework of a working group or other appropriate organ
of the Sixth Committee as may be decided upon by the
Committee when organizing its work at the fortieth session
of the General Assembly;
6. Invites once again Governments, United Nations
bodies and programmes and the specialized agencies.
within their respective fields of competence, to communicate to the Secretary-General their views and suggestions
or, if they deem it appropriate, to update the replies
already given by them, on the content of good-neighbourliness and ways and means to strengthen it;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session a report containing the replies received in accordance with paragraph 6
above;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Development and
strengthening of good-neighbourliness between States".
99th plenary meeting
13 December I 984

39/79. Peaceful settlement of disputes between
States
The General Assembly,
Having examined the item entitled "Peaceful settlement
of disputes between States",
Recalling its resolution 37 / I 0 of 15 November 1982, by
which it approved the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes, annexed thereto,
Recalling also its resolution 38/ 131 of 19 December
1983,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of conflict situations and the emergence of new sources of disputes and
tension in international life, and especially at the growing
tendency to resort to force or the threat of force and to
intervention in internal affairs, and at the escalation of the
arms race, which gravely endanger the independence and
security of States as well as international peace and
security,
Taking into account the need to exert the utmost effort
in order to settle any situations and disputes between
IO See A/36/376 and Add I, A/37/476 and A/38/336 and Add. I.
