49

III. Relolullom adopted on tlle reportll of the Flnt Committee

7. Requests the Security Council to institute effective enforcement action, bearing in mind the recommendations of the United Nations Seminar on Nuclear
Collaboration with South Africa,1• against the racist
r6gime of South Africa, so as to prevent it from further
enclan,ering international peace and security through its
acquisition of nuclear weapons;
8. Demands that South Africa submit all its nuclear
installations to inspection by the International Atomic
Energy Agency;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
necessary assistance to the Organization of African Unity
towards the realization of its solemn Declaration on the
Denuclearization of Africa;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Implementation
of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979

B
NUCLEAR CAPABILITY OF SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Deeply alarmed at the report that South Africa may
have detonated a nuclear explosive device in September 1979,
Recalling its decision 34/404 of 26 October 1979,13
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,16
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the action taken by him in pursuance of General
Assembly decision 34/404;
2. Appeals to all Member States in a position to do
so to provide all relevant information at their disposal
to the Secretary-General;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the situation closely and in the light of further relevant information to be submitted by Member States;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare, with the assistance of approt>riate experts,1 7 a
comprehensive report on South Afnca's plan and capability in the nuclear field and to submit the report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
97th plenary meeti'ng
11 December 1979

34 /77. Establlshment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the region of the Middle East
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3263 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, in which it overwhelmingly commended the
idea of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the region of the Middle East,
Recalling also its resolution 3474 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, in which it recognized that the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East
enjoyed wide support in the region,
1' See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fourth
Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1979, document S/131S7, sect. VII.
13 For the text of the decision, see sect. X.B.1.
16 A/34/674 and Add.I.
17 Subsequently referred to as the Group of Experts on South
Africa's Plan and Capability in the Nuclear Field.

Bearing in mind its resolution 31/71 of 10 December 1976, in which it expressed the conviction that progress towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East would greatly enhance the cause
of peace in the region and in the world,
Considering its resolution 32/82 of 12 December
1977, in which it expressed the conviction that the development of nuclear capability would further complicate
the situation and immensely damage the efforts to create
an atmosphere of confidence in the Middle East,
Guided by the relevant recommendations in the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly, dealing with the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East,18
Recalling also its resolution 33/64 of 14 December 1978,
Recognizing that the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East would greatly enhance international peace and security,
1. Urges all parties directly concerned seriously to
consider taking the practical and urgent steps required
for the implementation of the proposal to establish a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and, as a means of promoting this objective,
invites the countries concerned to adhere to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;19
2. Invites those countries, pending the establishment
of such a zone in the Middle East and during the process
of its establishment, to declare solemnly that they will
refrain on a reciprocal basis from producing, acquiring
or in any other way possessing nuclear weapons and nuclear explosive devices;
3. Calls upon those countries to refrain, on a reciprocal basis, from permitting the stationing of nuclear
weapons on their territory by any third party and to
agree to place all their nuclear activities under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
4. Further invites those countries, pending the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East and during the process of its establishment, to declare their support for establishing such a zone in the
region consistent with paragraphs 60 to 63, in particular
para~aph 63 (d), of the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session and to deposit those declarations with the
Security Council for consideration as appropriate;
5. Reaffirms again its recommendation to the nuclear-weapon States to refrain from any action contrary
to the spirit and purpose of the present resolution and
the objective of establishing in the region of the Middle
East a nuclear-weapon-free zone under an effective system of safeguards and to extend their co-operation to
the States of the region in their efforts to promote these
objectives;
6. Renews its invitation to the Secretary-General to
continue to explore the possibilities of making progress
towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the region of the Middle East;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Establishment of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone 'in the region of the Middle East".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
1 s Resolution S-10/2 para. 63 (d).
19 Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.
