24

Genel"al Assembly-Sixteenth Senion

and social development in order that education may
adequately fit the specific requirements of each country's
present stage of development,
Welcoming the decisions of the Conference of African States on the Development of Education in
Afijl!ka convoked jointly by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the
Economic Commission for Africa and the Outline of a
Plan for African Educational Development established
by the African States at that Conference, 24 embodying
broad targets and priorities, particularly for secondlevel education, costs and national contributions for the
period 1961-1965,
1. Calls upon the African countries to continue to
devote increasing and ample resources to the development of edu~ation in their territories, in accordance
with the broad targets of the five-year programme set
forth in the Outline of a Plan for African Educational
Development;

2. N ates, however, that, in spite of increasing national allocation to education, the financial deficit faced
by the African countries is estimated, in relation to
these targets, at:
$140,000,000 for 1961;
$150,000,000 for 1962;
$260,000,000 for 1963 ;
$310,000,000 for 1964;
$450,000,000 for 1965;
3. Notes further that, while the deficit for 1961 is
covered by external aid, the amount of such aid, if
deficits in subsequent years are to be met, will have to
be considerably increased;

4. Invites States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies to contribute
financial and technical assistance to the African countries in accordance with the needs of these countries,
taking into account the estimate of the Conference for
the years 1961-1965;
5. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
837 (XXXII) of 3 August 1961 which invites the
support of all the appropriate organs of the United
Nations, including the Technical Assistance Board, the
Special Fund and the United Nations Children's Fund,
as well as the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization and the other agencies of
the United Nations system, including the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the
International Development Association, to help the
African countries in every way in putting into effect
the decisions of the Conference ;
6. Calls upon the inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations outside the United Nations
system which are active in the field of education to
extend their full co-operation with a view to fulfilling
the objectives assigned by the Conference;
7. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to convene in 1963,
jointly with the economic Commission for Africa, another Conference of African States to review the execution, costs and targets of the plan adopted by the
Conference, a_nd to. analyse national educational programmes with a view to assisting the integration of
"'Transmitted to members of the General Assembly by a note
of the Secretary-General ( A/4903).

these programmes m over-all national development
plans.
1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

1718 (XVI). Economic development of Africa
The General Assembly,
Noting that low standards of living continue to
prevail all over Africa,
Conscious of the urgent necessity to take measures
to strengthen and consolidate the economic independence of the African States,
Affirming that, while ~he primary _responsibility for
rapid economic development and social progress. rests
with the African States themselves, concerted mternation~l co-operation has a very important role_ to play
in the economic and social development of Afnca,
Convinced that diversification of production, industrialization and the development of highly productive
agriculture are crucially important for the economic
advancement of all African States,
Bearing in mind the necessity to further an accelerating pace of economic and social development of the
African States within the framework of well-integrated
long-term plans,
Appreciating the willingness of Member States to
contribute significantly to an international programme
for African development,
Bearing in mind also the importance of international
trade to the economic development of African States
and other under-developed countries and the necessity
of taking appropriate measures to improve the terms of
trade in favour of exporters of primary commodities
and of eliminating the excessive fluctuations of the
prices of these products, so that African States can
increasingly finance their economic development from
expanding earnings of foreign exchange,
Affirming that it is essential to expand the volume
of domestic savings and the inflow of foreign investment
capital, public and private, for financing an accelerating
rate of economic development in African States,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1519 (XV), 1520 (XV), 1521 (XV), 1522
(XV), and 1527 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and
Economic Commission for Africa resolutions 25 (III)
of 15 February 1961, 27 (III) and 29 (III) of 16
February 1961, and 31 (III) of 17 February 1961, and
Economic and Social Council resolutions 831 (XXXII)
of 2 August 1961 and 836 (XXXII) of 3 August 1961,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 1527 (XV) of IS-December 1960, particularly paragraphs 3 and 4 thereof;
2. Urges the establishment, within the Economic
Commission for Africa, of a programming institution
to complement the work of the Economic Projections
and Programming Centre envisaged under General
Assembly resolution 1708 (XVI) of 19 December 1961;
3. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To lend. his full support to the establishment,
under the auspices of the Economic Commission for
Africa and, at the request of the Governments concerned, with the assistance of the Special Fund, of an
African institute of economic development and planning- which will provide advisory services and train
qualified personnel in the field of economic develop-

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

ment, especially in the techniques of economic planning
and development;
( b) To provide, on request, through the Economic
Commission for Africa and its institute of economic
development and planning when it is established, the
advisory services and other technical assistance required for the preparation of national and regional development plans ;
4. Requests the Economic Commission for Africa,
acting through its Executive Secretary and with the
fullest assistance of the Secretary-General :
(a) To convene as soon as possible, in consultation
with the appropriate institutions and organs and under
the auspices of the Standing Committee on Trade of
the Economic Commission for Africa, a meeting of
African countries to examine their policies on international trade and to work out immediate and common solutions regarding the disposal of their principal
products on external markets;
( b) To prepare a further and up-to-date study of
the impacts, on a short-term basis as well as in the
long run, of the European economic groupings on the
trade and economic development of the associated as
well as the non-associated African countries;
( c) To study further, in consultation with the Governments of African countries and appropriate institutions:
(i) The measures required for increasing the volume of domestic savings in the African countries;
(ii) The measures necessary for accelerating the
flow of foreign public and private capital to
African countries and to report on these meaures to the Economic and Social Council at
its thirty-fourth session;
5. Urges the importance of establishing regional
economic development banks for Africa taking into
account the study called for in resolution 27 (III) of
the Economic Commission for Africa, and requests the
Secretary-General to consult with the appropriate institutions, particularly the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, on the immediate steps
necessary for the early establishment of these regional
development banks ;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to
strengthen the authority and increase the substantive
and operational functions of the Economic Commission
for Africa and to provide it with the requisite personnel
and other resources in keeping with the policy of decentralization, as reaffirmed in General Assembly resolution 1709 (XVI) of 19 December 1961;
7. Invites the Economic and Social Council at its
thirty-fourth session to examine the progress achieved

25

in the implementation of the present resolution and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventeenth session.
1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.
1719 (XVI). Pop~lation growth and economic
development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1217 (XII) of 14 December
1957 and Economic and Social Council resolution 820
(XXXI) of 28 April 1961,
Recommends that the item entitled "Population
growth and economic development" should be included
in the agenda of its seventeenth session.in view of the
fact that a draft resolution on this item 211 was distributed to the Second Committee on 1 December 1961
but could not be considered because of lack of time.
1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.
1720 (XVI). Permanent sovereignty over natural
resources
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1314 (XIII) of 12 December
1958,
Desiring to promote the strengthening of permanent
sovereignty of peoples and nations over their natural
wealth and resources,
1. Expresses its thanks for the revised study on the
status of permanent sovereignty over natural wealth
and resources, prepared by the United Nations Secretariat ;26
2. Requests that arrangements be made speedily for
the printing of that study, together with the report of
the Commission on. Permanent Sovereignty over
Natural Resources, 27 so that these documents may be
available to all who wish to consult them for the useful
information they contain;
3. Decides that the United Nations work on permanent sovereignty over natural wealth and resources
shall be continued and recommends that priority be
given for the discussion of this matter in the Second
Committee at its next session.
1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.
"'Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth SessioK,
Annexes, agenda item 84 document A/5059, para. 4.
•A/ AC.97 /5/Rev.1 and Corr.1 and 2 and Add.I.
"'Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Thirty-second Session, Annexes, agenda item 9, document
E/3511.
