UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3323
15 December 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-THIRD MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Wednesday, 15 December 1993, at 12.45 p.m.

President:

(China)

Brazil
Cape Verde
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. JESUS
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. FELIX-PAGANON
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. HATANO
Mr. BENJELLOUN-TOUIMI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. LI Zhaoxing

Mr. RICHARDSON
Mr. WALKER
Mr. TAYLHARDAT

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

93-87406 (E)

S/PV.3323
2
The meeting was called to order at 12.45 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN ANGOLA
REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON THE UNITED NATIONS ANGOLA
VERIFICATION MISSION II (UNAVEM II) (S/26872 and Add.1)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):

I should

like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Angola in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Van Dunem "Mbinda"
(Angola) took a place at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):

The Security

Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM II), documents S/26872 and Add.1.
Members of the Council also have before them document S/26877,
which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Council’s prior consultations.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it.

Unless I hear any

objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

S/PV.3323
3
(The President)
I shall first call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements before the voting.
Mr. SARDENBERG (Brazil):

May I first of all congratulate

you, Sir, on your assumption of the office of President of the
Security Council for the month of December.

Your skill and

leadership are proving to be important elements in ensuring the
efficiency, effectiveness and smoothness of our work.

Please know

that you can count on the cooperation of the Brazilian delegation.
I also wish to express the Brazilian delegation’s recognition
of the outstanding work carried out in the busy month of November
by your predecessor, Ambassador José Luis Jesus, a most
distinguished representative of the diplomacy of the sister country
of Cape Verde.
The Brazilian Government is encouraged by the resumption of
direct talks between the Government of Angola and UNITA under the
auspices of the United Nations and by the preliminary reports of
some progress in the negotiations towards reinstating the
implementation of the "Acordos de Paz" and resolutions of the
Security Council and, hence, towards establishing an effective and
sustainable cease-fire in Angola.
We commend the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, to facilitate
those negotiations, which, as noted by the Secretary-General, are
crucial for the future of Angola.

The results achieved thus far

are indeed encouraging, in particular the formal adoption of
principles relevant to the establishment of a cease-fire.
May I also express our gratitude to the Government of Zambia
for supporting and hosting the talks in Lusaka.

The endeavours of

African countries, particularly those in the subregion, will no
doubt continue to play a fundamental role in promoting the Angolan

S/PV.3323
4
(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
peace process and in ensuring the implementation of Security
Council resolutions.
Last September the Council took a significant decision by
acting to adopt measures under Chapter VII aimed at preventing the
continuation of UNITA’s military actions, which had derailed the
peace process.

Since then, the situation in Angola has improved to

some extent, with a reduction in the intensity of military
conflict, with relative progress being made in humanitarian
activities and with the resumption of peace talks.

S/PV.3323
5
(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
That confirms the importance of respect for the legal and
political framework established by the Security Council for
promoting peace in Angola.

It is appropriate that the Lusaka talks

are being conducted within that framework, as defined in the
exploratory talks.
We note once again the commitment of the Government of Angola
to work towards peace and to implement the resolutions of the
Security Council.
Let me stress the importance we attach to the fact that the
Secretary-General has been able to report some progress towards
respect for previous Security Council resolutions on Angola.

In

particular, we welcome the report that UNITA has now accepted the
validity of the "Acordos de Paz" and, in particular, the validity
of the 1992 democratic elections, held under United Nations
supervision.

We understand that, as reflected in the draft

resolution before the Council, such acceptance cannot but be
without reservations.

We further welcome the fact, also indicated

by the Secretary-General, that UNITA has now accepted the content
of operative paragraph 8 of resolution 864 (1993), which requires
the immediate withdrawal of its forces from the locations occupied
since the resumption of hostilities.
Those are positive signs, and it is our sincere hope that as
the negotiations advance it will be possible to build on those
initial steps and to achieve an early agreement on a cease-fire and
on the full implementation of the "Acordos de Paz" and Council
resolutions.
It is important that the Council continue to follow closely
the situation in Angola and the evolution of the peace talks.

The

draft resolution to be adopted today reaffirms the readiness of the
Council to take action, at any time, to impose further measures

S/PV.3323
6
(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
under the Charter of the United Nations, as foreseen in operative
paragraph 26 of resolution 864 (1993), if this proves to be
necessary.

Nevertheless, as I stated, we like to think that the

signs are now positive and that such additional measures will not
be required.
While our eyes are now turned to Lusaka and to the
expectations for definitive results in the direct negotiations, the
Security Council must confirm and strengthen its unequivocal
commitment not only to support such negotiations but also to
contribute substantially to the implementation of an eventual
agreement between the Government of Angola and UNITA.
We read with interest the remarks by the Secretary-General, in
his report (S/26872), on the need for a possible significant
expansion of the United Nations presence in Angola, should the
outcome of the negotiations be the establishment of an effective
and sustainable cease-fire.

We encourage the Secretary-General to

proceed with the necessary contingency planning and to make his
recommendations to the Council as soon as he believes appropriate
in the light of his efforts to promote the peace process.

Brazil

will be ready to work with other members of the Council to ensure
prompt consideration and action to support peace and democracy in
Angola.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):

I thank the

representative of Brazil for the kind words he addressed to me and
to my predecessor.
Mr. MARKER (Pakistan):

Let me begin, Sir, by expressing

our congratulations to you and our pleasure at seeing you presiding
over the deliberations of the Security Council.

Pakistan has

always enjoyed the closest friendship with your great country, and,
as you are well aware, the Government and the people of China are

S/PV.3323
7
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
held in very high esteem by the Government and the people of
Pakistan.

We have been deeply impressed by the wisdom and skill

with which you have been conducting the Council’s business.

I

would also like to take this opportunity to pledge to you the
unqualified support of my delegation as you discharge your
responsibilities as President of the Security Council.
His Excellency Mr. José Luis Jesus, the Permanent
Representative of Cape Verde, conducted the work of the Security
Council during the course of the past month with great ability and
dedication.

He has indeed been a valued colleague, whose wise

counsel, cooperation and friendship have been greatly appreciated
by all the members of the Council.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his excellent
report (S/26872) on the latest developments in Angola.

We are

encouraged by the results so far achieved in the Lusaka talks and
hope that by early January 1994 the Government of Angola and UNITA
will be able to reach agreements to put the peace process in Angola
on a firm footing.

In this context one cannot overemphasize the

very important contributions made by the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative, the three observer States and the
Government of Zambia.
While appreciative of the progress made in the Lusaka talks as
well as of the lessening of the intensity of the fighting in
Angola, we are concerned at the continuing reports of hostile
activities by both sides.
In the prevailing situation, we feel that the mandate of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) should be
extended for a period of three months and that the sanctions
against UNITA, approved by the Council through its resolution
864 (1993), should not be imposed for the time being.

We also

S/PV.3323
8
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
believe that in case progress is made in the Lusaka talks the
United Nations should respond accordingly, expanding its
involvement in Angola.
The draft resolution before the Council meets all these
requirements.

My delegation, therefore, will support it.

The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):

I thank the

representative of Pakistan for the kind words he addressed to me
and to my predecessor.
Mr. JESUS (Cape Verde):

I am pleased, Sir, that you will

be presiding over the deliberations of the Security Council during
the course of this month.

As already shown by your excellent

performance, your personal and professional qualities are of
immense value to the Council in coping with the important issues on
our agenda in an efficient and results-oriented manner.

I pledge

to you the full cooperation of my delegation.
On many occasions, my delegation has stated before the Council
that in our view there is no alternative to negotiations if peace
is to prevail in Angola, for we do not believe in a military
solution to this conflict.

We have therefore been following with

great interest the ongoing Lusaka talks between the Government of
Angola and UNITA.
so far.

We are very much encouraged by the progress made

After many failed efforts and disappointments, we expect

the Lusaka talks to produce concrete and final results that would
finally bring about peace and stability in Angola.
Nothing should deter the parties from pursuing and actively
participating in the commendable efforts of the United Nations in
the Lusaka talks.

It is only natural that in a complex process

like this one we are bound to face, once in a while, some
accidents.

However, we believe that such accidents, if they

happen, should in no way threaten or jeopardize the talks.

S/PV.3323
9
(Mr. Jesus, Cape Verde)
My delegation strongly appeals to both parties not to lose the
momentum created by the Lusaka talks.

It would be a historical

mistake not to pursue and conclude these talks.
We commend the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative in assisting the Angolan peace process
and encourage them to continue their efforts actively.
My delegation is one of those that, throughout this long and
difficult process, have insisted that the United Nations should
continue its efforts to bring the parties to the negotiating table
and assist them in every possible way to reach a compromise that
would restore the peace process and bring stability to Angola.

S/PV.3323
10
(Mr. Jesus, Cape Verde)
In that context, my delegation believes that United Nations
assistance to the Angolan peace process is of fundamental
importance.

We believe that, as requested by the two parties, much

stronger involvement by the United Nations will be required once a
cease-fire has been established, as mentioned by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/26872) - and I lay particular emphasis on
paragraphs 41, 42 and 43.

We welcome the action already taken by

the Secretary-General to prepare contingency plans allowing for
immediate deployment of additional observers and forces to Angola
as soon as the cease-fire is established.
The humanitarian situation in Angola remains critical and
requires particular attention by the international community.

We

call on all States, United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations to continue, and indeed increase, their humanitarian
assistance to Angola.

We appeal to all those involved to cooperate

fully with the United Nations and to ensure the unimpeded delivery
of humanitarian assistance to the civilian population in need.
We pay a tribute to the Government of Zambia for the positive
role it is playing in creating a favourable environment conducive
to concrete results in the Lusaka talks.

My delegation takes this

opportunity also to pay a tribute once again to all the personnel
of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) for
their commitment and for the work they have done under difficult
circumstances.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):

I thank the

representative of Cape Verde for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. RICHARDSON (United Kingdom):

Let me first

congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month.

And let me thank Ambassador Jesus

equally warmly for the skill and courtesy with which he guided us
during the particularly busy month of November.

S/PV.3323
11
(Mr. Richardson, United Kingdom)
My delegation welcomes the encouraging developments in the
ongoing negotiations in Lusaka, details of which are contained in
the Secretary-General’s excellent report of 13 December (S/26872).
We pay a tribute to the efforts of the Secretary-General, to those
of Mr. Beye and to those of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM II) in restoring the peace process on the basis of
the "Acordos de Paz" and relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.

We also pay a tribute to the invaluable efforts of the

three observer countries and to the efforts of many African
Governments, particularly the Government of Zambia, in seeking to
promote peace in Angola.
Although progress has been made in the Lusaka talks, it is
absolutely vital that the momentum should be maintained.
negotiations must not be allowed to drag on forever.

The

We therefore

urge the parties to continue to negotiate with maximum flexibility
and maximum urgency.

It is essential that all military actions

come to an end and that an effective and sustainable cease-fire be
established quickly.
While the United Nations clearly has a role to play, it cannot
solve the problems of Angola alone.

The parties themselves have a

crucial role to play, as we have said so many times before.
The real victims of the tragic conflict in Angola have been
the civilian population.

The Secretary-General’s report makes

clear the appalling humanitarian situation that still exists there.
We welcome the increased flow of aid into Angola, and to the most
vulnerable groups, and call upon the parties to assure unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian assistance.

My own country is playing its

full part in the provision of humanitarian assistance to Angola.
Our contribution to relief there this year totals £10 million and
includes the provision of medical aid and nurses for assistance in

S/PV.3323
12
(Mr. Richardson, United Kingdom)
the mass immunization programme of the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF).
The draft resolution we are about to adopt underlines the
Council’s determination to see the restoration of the peace process
in Angola and an end to the suffering of the Angolan people.
intended to give further stimulus to the peace process.

It is

We very

much hope that the Secretary-General will soon be able to report
further substantial progress in the peace process.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):

I thank the

representative of the United Kingdom for the kind words he
addressed to me and to my predecessor.
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):
As this is the first time I have addressed the Council this month,
I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the firm and skilful
way in which you are guiding our deliberations; your presidency
reflects your experience and estimable professional abilities.

I

assure you of our continuing assistance and our cooperation.
I wish also to convey my delegation’s gratitude to
Ambassador José Luis Jesus of Cape Verde for the most able manner
in which he guided our deliberations in November.
My delegation welcomes the imminent adoption of a draft
resolution extending the mandate of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Angola (UNAVEM II) for an additional period of three
months, until 16 March 1994.

In that way the Council will reaffirm

the international community’s commitment to Angola and its
determination to promote the peaceful settlement of a conflict that
has lasted far too long.
Clearly, the principal role in reaching that goal falls to the
Government of Angola and to UNITA, which must demonstrate the
flexibility necessary to reach a satisfactory agreement in the

S/PV.3323
13
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
framework of the "Acordos de Paz" and the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council.
In that context, we are pleased to note the progress that has
been achieved since the last time the Council met to discuss the
situation in Angola, on 15 September 1993, when it adopted
resolution 864 (1993), in which sanctions against UNITA were
spelled out.

Thanks to UNITA’s confirmation that it accepts the

"Acordos de Paz" and the relevant Security Council resolutions, as
well as the outcome of the elections held in Angola, it has been
possible to resume the negotiations, this time in Lusaka, with the
active participation of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Beye, on the basis of the progress made
earlier at Abidjan.
The pace of the Lusaka talks between the parties shows that in
a spirit of constructive dialogue, and setting aside exaggerated
positions, it will be possible to find a point of convergence and
overcome obstacles that had seemed insurmountable.

We must appeal

urgently to the parties to reach a prompt agreement, for the future
of Angola and the well-being of its people depend on this.
As we have done with respect to other United Nations peacekeeping operations, we must stress that any efforts by our
Organization to help resolve a conflict will be futile or
transitory without the full cooperation and determination of the
parties involved.

Thus, by the terms of the draft resolution we

hope will be adopted today, the Security Council will review the
situation in Angola and the progress made in the Lusaka talks no
later than 1 February 1994.

If, as we hope, the Government of

Angola and UNITA lay the foundations for an Angolan peace process
in accordance with the well-defined parameters of the "Acordos de
Paz" and the relevant Security Council resolutions, we will then be
in a position to consider new elements in the mandate of UNAVEM II

S/PV.3323
14
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
to enable it to make a decisive contribution to the progress of the
peace process.

The establishment of an effective and lasting

cease-fire would be a first, crucial step in that direction.
Moreover, the Council must be prepared to adopt other kinds of
measures, including new measures against UNITA in the event that
UNITA fails to cooperate in good faith with the peace process.

In

that connection, paragraph 14 of draft resolution S/26877 is
sufficiently explicit.
The report of the Secretary-General clearly describes the
current situation in Angola, and provides a point of reference for
any future United Nations action in that country.

S/PV.3323
15
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
In our view, the report includes the guidelines that should be
followed by the Council in assisting the parties to proceed as we
trust they will without further delay.
Finally, my delegation considers it necessary to stress that
it is important to keep in mind the humanitarian situation in
Angola and therefore the need to assist a population which in major
areas of the country is still in need of sustained attention by the
international community.

We are pleased that, in accordance with

what the Secretary-General reports, the Government of Angola and
UNITA have facilitated the provision of humanitarian assistance to
the civilian population in need, helping humanitarian organizations
and giving them access to the entire territory of Angola.

We trust

that that attitude will continue in the future.
I wish to congratulate the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Mr. Beye, for their constant vigilance and
continued efforts, in cooperation with the three observer States the United States of America, the Russian Federation and Portugal as well as with the Government of Zambia, to assist the parties in
reaching an agreement so that the people of Angola may finally
begin to build their future in democracy and development.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):

I thank the

representative of Spain for the kind words he addressed to me and
to my predecessor.
Mr. WALKER (United States of America):

I would like to

congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council and to assure you of our full support.

I also wish to

thank your predecessor, Ambassador Jesus, for his wise leadership
of the Council during his tenure as President.
The United States has long been deeply concerned over the
tragic civil war in Angola.

We have worked in concert with the

international community, particularly the United Nations and troika

S/PV.3323
16
(Mr. Walker, United States)
members Portugal and Russia, to ameliorate the desperate
humanitarian situation and end the fighting.

We congratulate

United Nations Special Representative, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, on
his leadership in the Lusaka negotiations.
We have been heartened by the progress achieved at the Lusaka
talks where UNITA has engaged seriously in the negotiations,
reaching agreement with the Government of Angola on a range of
complex military issues.

The current Security Council draft

resolution on Angola takes into consideration these contributions
to advance the peace process.
We none the less recognize that the Government of Angola and
UNITA must still address the particularly difficult question of
national reconciliation.

Both parties need to approach this

crucial phase of negotiations in a spirit of compromise and
flexibility.

While the United States stands ready to assist both

parties in any way to reach agreement, ultimately it is only their
commitment that will make peace possible.

The international

community will need cogent demonstrations from both the Government
and UNITA that they are indeed committed to peace if it is to
assist in implementing an eventual peace accord.
In the current hopeful circumstances in Lusaka, we deplore
each and every incidence of fighting in Angola and call on both
parties to abstain from offensive military action.

These actions,

which undermine the fragile confidence-building efforts at Lusaka,
imperil the peace process.

They must stop.

On the other hand, we are encouraged by the improved
humanitarian situation arising from the overall reduction in the
level of fighting in Angola.

Deliveries of humanitarian assistance

are now reaching virtually all regions of Angola.

We recognize,

however, that millions of Angolans remain at risk and that an

S/PV.3323
17
(Mr. Walker, United States)
increased level of assistance will be required to avert a crisis.
For that reason alone, this conflict must be brought to an end.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):

I thank the

representative of the United States for the kind words he addressed
to me and to my predecessor.
I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/26877.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France,
Hungary, Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Venezuela

The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):
15 votes in favour.

There were

The draft resolution has been adopted

unanimously as resolution 890 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements following the voting.
Mr. FELIX-PAGANON (France) (interpretation from French):
My delegation would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council and to thank the
Ambassador of Cape Verde for the manner in which he conducted the
business of the Council last month.
France welcomed with great satisfaction the announcement last
October of the resumption of contacts in the capital of Zambia
between the Angolan parties.

We are also happy that these

exploratory contacts, made possible by the decisive work done by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, led on
15 November to a resumption of negotiations to achieve
implementation of the "Acordos de Paz", which seek to end the
tragic crisis of Angola.

S/PV.3323
18
(Mr. Felix-Paganon, France)
My country notes that substantial progress has been made to
achieve the results that the Secretary-General reported on for the
Council in his report of 3 December 1993 (S/26872).

This explains

why the Council has decided not to take further measures against
UNITA.

Given these positive developments, my delegation voted in

favour of the resolution just adopted by the Council.
My country hopes that the negotiations will conclude very soon
and make it possible to implement an effective and lasting
cease-fire for the whole of Angola.

France therefore appeals to

the parties to conclude as soon as possible a comprehensive
agreement aimed at putting an end to the fighting in Angola and
preparing for the restoration of democracy in that country.
France will spare no effort to achieve that result.

We are

also ready to give favourable consideration to the United Nations
taking an active part in the implementation of an agreement.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):

I thank the

representative of France for the kind words he addressed to me and
to my predecessor.
Mr. HATANO (Japan):

I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on

your assumption of the presidency of the Council.

Already the

Council has been operating efficiently under your skilful
leadership.

I also express my gratitude to Ambassador Jesus of

Cape Verde for his guidance during the busy month of November.
My Government wishes to commend the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative Mr. Beye, and the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission II (UNAVEM II) personnel for their mediation
efforts aimed at an early and peaceful solution to the Angola
crisis.

We are encouraged by the decrease in the number of hostile

actions there and by the recent positive developments in the peace
process.

That both parties have formally adopted the principles

S/PV.3323
19
(Mr. Hatano, Japan)
governing the re-establishment of the cease-fire is indeed welcome,
but much more work will be necessary before a final settlement can
be reached.

My Government once again urges the two parties to

resolve the remaining issues as soon as possible through
negotiations.

S/PV.3323
20
(Mr. Hatano, Japan)
Japan is concerned about the reported bombardment of the city
of Cuito, which UNITA alleges was an attempt to assassinate
Mr. Savimbi, and Japan stresses that the negotiations must not be
derailed by this isolated incident.

Japan calls upon both parties

to honour the commitments that they undertook at the Lusaka talks
and urges them to exercise maximum restraint.
My Government reiterates to UNITA that the international
community is ready to review those measures currently in effect,
should significant progress towards peace be achieved.

It is also

ready to give prompt consideration to the possible expansion of the
existing mandate of UNAVEM II.
I wish, in conclusion, to emphasize the importance of
humanitarian assistance.

While noting that humanitarian activities

have continued to see appreciable progress and that the two parties
have played a significant role in this respect, my delegation
stresses the need for the unimpeded delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the civilian population in need throughout the
country.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):

I thank the

representative of Japan for his kind words addressed to me and to
my predecessor as President of the Council.
Mr. VORONTSOV (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian):

I should like, first, to congratulate you, Sir - the

representative of a country that is a great and friendly neighbour
of my country - on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December.

In your complex work,

you can count fully on the support of the Russian delegation.
We are grateful to your predecessor, Ambassador Jesus of Cape
Verde, for his effective and considerate guidance of the work of
the Council during the month of November.

S/PV.3323
21
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian
Federation)
The Russian delegation welcomes the direct negotiations in
Lusaka between the delegations of the Government and of UNITA,
whose purpose is to secure a peaceful settlement in Angola on the
basis of the Bicesse agreements and the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
Thanks to the active efforts of the Secretary-General and of
his Special Representative, Mr. Blondin Beye, and those of the
three countries - Portugal, the Russian Federation and the United
States of America - charged with the task of observing the Angola
settlement, the parties managed, following a dialogue that lasted
three weeks, to arrive at a number of important compromise
solutions, including agreed general and special principles for a
cease-fire, as well as the constitution of Angola’s armed force.
Thus, an important stage in the negotiations - solution of the
military aspects of a settlement - has been completed.
But even more persistent efforts are required when it comes to
completing the equally complex key stage of securing agreement to
the terms of national reconciliation.

As is noted in the report of

the Secretary-General, although there has been a significant
reduction in the intensity of hostilities in several parts of
Angola, we receive reports of continuing troop movements and armed
conflicts, as a result of which innocent civilians are dying and
the humanitarian situation remains difficult.
In this connection, we regard as appropriate the appeal
contained in the resolution that the Council has just adopted - the
appeal to the parties to honour the commitments made at the Lusaka
talks, to exercise their maximum restraint and to stop immediately
all military actions.

S/PV.3323
22
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian
Federation)
In the opinion of the Russian delegation, the primary
condition for successful progress towards a peaceful settlement is
complete compliance by UNITA with the Bicesse agreements and the
unconditional recognition by its leaders of the results of the
democratic elections held, under United Nations supervision, on
30 September 1992.

The Security Council should respond duly to any

attempts by UNITA to delay the process of securing a peaceful
settlement - inter alia, by taking additional measures against that
organization, as is provided for in the resolution that the Council
has just adopted.
We hope that the leaders of UNITA will demonstrate political
realism and a sense of responsibility and, in the national
interests of the country, will actively cooperate with the
Government to restore peace to the long-suffering land of Angola.
The Russian Federation, together with its partners in the
group of three observer States and the Special Representative of
the United Nations Secretary-General, will do everything possible
to assist the parties in the speedy establishment of peace and
national reconciliation in Angola.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):

I thank the

representative of the Russian Federation for his kind words
addressed to me and to my predecessor as President of the Security
Council.
Mr. TAYLHARDAT (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish):
The encouraging developments in the situation in Angola that have
taken place since the Security Council’s adoption of its resolution
864 (1993) of 15 September this year led us to express the
satisfaction of the Government of Venezuela with the current
favourable prospects for the peace process in that country.
has been made possible by the joint determination of the

This

S/PV.3323
23
(Mr. Taylhardat, Venezuela)
Secretary-General and the Security Council to ensure the continuity
of the commitment of the United Nations in Angola despite the very
compelling reasons that existed until recently for abandoning the
effort.
Today, the Secretary-General, in his report, confirms that
there is a desire among the parties for peace and reconciliation in our view, a prerequisite for the Council’s commitment of the
authority and resources of the United Nations or for Member States
to make voluntary contributions with a view to securing a solution
of the crisis.
During the past two years Angola has been a model of what can
be expected of the United Nations, of what the Organization can do
to help put an end to a conflict; to lay the groundwork for the
development of democracy in a country beset by ideological and
strategic conflicts; to assist in a humanitarian crisis of alarming
proportions; and to channel international assistance.

But it has

also been a disquieting case of delays, compromises, unfulfilled
commitments and misunderstandings.

To all of the members of the

Council, it has been a reminder and a warning of the continuing
validity of the axiom that, without the will and cooperation of the
parties to a conflict, demonstrated by strict compliance with their
own mutual commitments and with their commitments to the
international community, the United Nations should not, and cannot,
become involved.
Fortunately, the efforts of the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative in the area of mediation and good offices,
together with the efforts of the countries, within and outside the
region, that are friendly towards Angola, have made it possible
today to realize that full implementation of the "Acordos de Paz"
is an imminent and real possibility.

S/PV.3323
24
(Mr. Taylhardat, Venezuela)
We wish, in particular, to congratulate the Government of
Zambia for having facilitated the most recent rounds of bilateral
talks between the Government of Angola and UNITA, as a result of
which many obstacles and misunderstandings with respect to
implementation of the "Acordos" appear to have been overcome.
Thus, we are pleased to note that the preliminary talks held in
Lusaka led to a resumption of negotiations, which, in turn, have
resulted in the formal adoption of a set of general and specific
principles on the establishment of the cease-fire and practical
modalities, including the timetable for the implementation of those
principles.
In the same context, we must express concern about the
persistent fragility of efforts to establish an effective ceasefire and about the delay in the process of achieving final
political agreements between the parties in the light of the
results of the elections of September 1992.
We fully support the appeal to the parties to continue the
process of perfecting their understanding so that, as soon as
possible, the international community may once again be able to
assess the means by which more effective assistance in the
consolidation of lasting peace in Angola could be secured.

S/PV.3323
25
(Mr. Taylhardat, Venezuela)
For all those reasons, and bearing in mind the progress made
so far in the Lusaka talks, Venezuela agrees with the
Secretary-General’s recommendation to extend the mandate of
UNAVEM II for a limited period and to postpone any action to impose
new sanctions against UNITA.

This is a way to facilitate and

encourage progress in the exploratory contacts between the parties
and to gain their cooperation in humanitarian assistance activities
in the country, in the hope and expectation that early next year a
final agreement will be reached enabling the Secretary-General to
present updated recommendations on the United Nations future role
in Angola.
Mr. ERDÖS (Hungary) (interpretation from French):

I

should like to extend to you, Sir, our congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of December and to assure you of my delegation’s full cooperation.
I should also like to convey to your predecessor,
Ambassador Jesus of Cape Verde, our gratitude and appreciation for
the excellent work he did and the great skill with which he guided
the Council’s deliberations last month.
Hungary voted in favour of resolution 890 (1993).

The

situation in Angola is developing in such a way that it continues
to demand the Council’s sustained attention.

We have to note that

an effective cease-fire has not yet been established.

However, the

Lusaka negotiations appear to be promoting not only political
dialogue between the parties but also certain measures by both
sides that could reduce the hostilities.

We believe that in those

circumstances the Security Council has acted wisely in giving the
parties more time to agree, through direct negotiations, on a
peaceful settlement of the Angolan conflict, in keeping with the
"Acordos de Paz" and the relevant resolutions of the Council.

The

S/PV.3323
26
(Mr. Erdös, Hungary)
resolution we have just adopted makes it clear that the
international community is prepared to strengthen the presence of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) if
significant progress is made in the peace process.
While welcoming those results, we must remain aware of the
road we must still travel before a settlement can be reached, a
process in which the establishment of an effective cease-fire is
only the first step.

UNITA’s unreserved acceptance of the results

of the 1992 democratic elections and its compliance with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council are also integral
parts of the process of reconciliation and peace in Angola.

In the

light of the bitter experience of earlier phases of the Angolan
crisis, we must also face the fact that the present situation is
still delicate.

The Security Council must therefore remain

vigilant in order to promote positive developments.
It is equally important that no one regard as indefinite the
lack of action initially envisaged by the Council.

Resolution

890 (1993) clearly states the limits to the tolerance the Council
is offering the parties.

The Angolan parties bear a heavy

responsibility to their people to continue the talks, and it is
primarily up to them to make them succeed, to restore peace and to
put the country back onto the democratic path laid out for it in
last year’s elections.
We believe that the extension of the mandate of UNAVEM II for
an additional three months should be sufficient for the successful
conclusion of the ongoing negotiations and should induce the
parties to take concrete and practical steps to put an end to the
tragedy of the Angolan people.

S/PV.3323
27

The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):

I thank the

representative of Hungary for the kind words he addressed to me and
to my predecessor.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.
Today’s adoption of resolution 890 (1993) shows that the
Security Council is determined to continue its support for the
peace process in Angola.

It also demonstrates that the

international community stands ready to continue its efforts to
help to restore peace and stability in that country.

The Chinese

Government wishes to express its complete support for those
objectives.
It is in that same spirit that the Chinese delegation supports
the recommendations of the Secretary-General to extend the mandate
of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II), and
voted in favour of the resolution.

The Angolan people have been

victims of war for 17 long years.

In the final analysis, the

Angolan people can only rely on their own efforts to free
themselves from the suffering of the past and again enjoy peace and
happiness in the years to come.
The peace process in Angola is now at a crucial stage.

The

talks between the two Angolan parties that began a month ago in
Lusaka have achieved gratifying results.

The Chinese delegation

supports the Lusaka talks and is pleased to see them take a
positive turn.
The Angolan peace process has benefited from the great efforts
made by the Secretary-General and his Special Representative, as
well as by the three observer States and Angola’s neighbours.
wish to express our appreciation to them.

We

The Chinese delegation

believes that the removal of differences between the parties and

S/PV.3323
28
(The President)
the achievement of Angola’s national reconciliation are possible
only through negotiations and dialogue.

It is our hope that, in

fulfilling the commitments made during the Lusaka talks, the two
Angolan parties will put State and national interests first,
cooperate with UNAVEM II to establish an effective cease-fire
forthwith and fully implement the "Acordos de Paz" and relevant
Security Council resolutions in order to create conditions for the
promotion of the peace process and the realization of national
reconciliation.
I now resume my functions as President of the Security
Council.
There are no further speakers on my list.

The Security

Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.
