UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/55
16 December 1997
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND
RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3841st meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 December 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Afghanistan", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security of 14 November 1997 (A/52/682-S/1997/894),
which was also considered by the General Assembly.
"The Security Council reiterates its grave concern at the continued
military confrontation in Afghanistan, which has caused human suffering and
material destruction, which threatens to lead to the disintegration of the
country and which represents a growing threat to regional and international
peace and security. It deplores the unwillingness of the Afghan warring
factions to lay down their arms and cooperate with the United Nations for
peace.
"The Security Council stresses that the Afghan conflict has no
military solution and that the primary responsibility for finding a
peaceful settlement lies with the Afghan parties themselves. It urges all
Afghan parties to take genuine confidence-building measures, to agree
immediately on a ceasefire, and to engage without preconditions in a
political dialogue aimed at achieving national reconciliation, a lasting
political settlement of the conflict and the formation of a broad-based,
fully representative government that will protect the rights of all Afghans
and abide by Afghanistan's international obligations.
"The Security Council deplores the fact that foreign military support
to the Afghan parties continued unabated through 1997 and reiterates its
call to all States to end immediately the supply of arms, ammunition,
military equipment, training or any other military support to all parties
to the conflict in Afghanistan, including the involvement of foreign
military personnel.

97-36876 (E)

161297

/...

S/PRST/1997/55
English
Page 2

"The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General and Member
States to undertake preliminary studies on how an effective arms embargo
could be imposed and implemented in a fair and verifiable manner.
"The Security Council insists that the United Nations, as a
universally recognized and impartial intermediary, must be given all
necessary support so it can continue to play a pivotal, central role in
coordinated international efforts, including the efforts of interested
countries and organizations, towards a peaceful resolution of the Afghan
conflict. It believes that peace and stability in Afghanistan can best be
attained through intra-Afghan political negotiations under United Nations
auspices with the active and coordinated assistance of all countries
concerned. The Council reiterates its full support for the activities and
mandates of the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan and those of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan.
"The Security Council supports the efforts of the Secretary-General
aimed at the establishment of a solid international framework in order to
address the external aspects of the Afghan question and, in this context,
welcomes the convening of meetings of concerned countries as well as those
of the immediate neighbours and other countries.
"The Security Council remains deeply concerned at the continuing
discrimination against girls and women and other violations of human
rights, as well as at violations of international humanitarian law in
Afghanistan.
"The Security Council notes with deep concern the reports about mass
killings of prisoners of war and civilians in Afghanistan and supports the
Secretary-General's intention to continue to investigate fully such
reports.
"The Security Council expresses serious concern over the looting of
United Nations premises and food supplies and deliberate restrictions
placed on the access of humanitarian organizations to some parts of the
country and on other humanitarian operations, and urges all parties to
prevent their recurrence.
"The Security Council reiterates that the continuation of the conflict
in Afghanistan provides a fertile ground for terrorism and illegal drug
production and trafficking which destabilize the region and beyond, and
calls upon the leaders of the Afghan parties to halt such activities.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to
keep it regularly informed about the situation in Afghanistan and his
efforts.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
