asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6948

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6948th meeting
Wednesday, 17 April 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Mushikiwabo/Mr. Nduhungirehe/Mr. Kayinamura . . . .

(Rwanda)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Chao Tae-yul
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Kandangha-Bariki
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on sexual violence in conflict (S/2013/149)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-29364 (E)

*1329364*

S/PV.6948

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of Her Excellency
Baroness Thatcher, former Prime Minister of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
The President: At the outset of this meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the members of the Security
Council, to express profound grief and sorrow at the
passing of Baroness Thatcher, former Prime Minister
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland. The members of the Council convey their
deepest sympathy to the family of Baroness Thatcher
and to the Government and people of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
I now invite the members of the Council to rise and
observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of
Baroness Thatcher.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Expression of sympathy for the victims of the
Boston Marathon bombing
The President: Let me also take this moment to
express our deepest sympathy for the victims of the
senseless killing that took place in Boston two days
ago. To the families, the people and the Government
of the United States of America, the Security Council
expresses deep sympathy.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on sexual
violence in conflict (S/2013/149)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General, the Ministers and other
representatives present in the Security Council Chamber
this morning. Their participation is an affirmation of
the importance of the subject matter under discussion
today.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia,

2

Ethiopia, Fiji, Germany, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines,
Portugal, Qatar, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tanzania and Viet Nam to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Saran Keïta
Diakité of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
I propose that the Security Council invite
Archbishop Francis Assisi Chullikatt, Apostolic
Nuncio, Permanent Observer of the Observer State of
the Holy See to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules
of procedure and previous practice in that regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/149, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on sexual violence in conflict.
I now have the pleasure to give the floor to His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Thank you very much,
Madam President, for convening this important meeting
on conflict-related sexual violence, an issue of grave
importance to the innumerable civilians who have been
affected, to all of us around the table and to the entire
United Nations system. I welcome Rwanda’s initiative
and your presence here today. I also thank the Security
Council for its recognition of this matter as a serious
concern for international peace and security.

13-29364

S/PV.6948

Wartime rape not only destroys individual lives,
it lays waste to families and communities. It is also
an impediment to reconciliation and sustainable
development. Thanks to the Council, the world now
has a solid framework for preventing and addressing
conflict-related sexual violence. Resolutions 1325
(2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010) help
guide the work of United Nations agencies, Member
States and other stakeholders. My dynamic and
persuasive Special Representative on this issue carries
out global advocacy.
Other important actors and tools include the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict, the women protection advisers and the
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements. The
report now before the Council (S/2013/149) reflects
the progressive improvement of analysis and data over
the past few years, which is a direct result of greater
awareness on the ground and the strengthened capacities
of missions to monitor, investigate and respond.
As we learn more about sexual violence used as a
tactic of war, certain patterns are becoming clear. One
is that the negative effects of wartime rape persist long
after the guns fall silent. From the Balkans to Africa,
United Nations entities and others continue to provide
vital medical and psychosocial support to victims and
survivors. Another pattern we see is that, although this
vicious crime disproportionately affects women and
girls, men and boys are also targeted.
My Special Representative has also noted other
emerging trends, including the link between conflictrelated sexual violence and the illegal exploitation of
natural resources; the impact of sexual violence on
displacement; and the importance of addressing sexual
violence during ceasefire negotiations, wider peace
processes and security-sector reform efforts. Building
on the work of her predecessor and of the 13-entity
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
network, which she chairs, my Special Representative
has continued to fight impunity for conflict-related
sexual violence. Ms. Bangura has stressed prosecution
as a means of prevention. But she has also emphasized
the importance of national ownership and leadership,
which I fully support.
The prosecution support cells in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, created by the Government
with the support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, are a positive example of combining the
13-29364

two approaches. Other peacekeeping operations intend
to carry out similar projects. The Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region also represents
an opportunity to address the root causes of conflictrelated sexual violence.
Ultimately, however, we must strengthen our
collective efforts to prevent sexual violence in the first
place.
Our peacekeeping missions in the Sudan, South
Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
together with United Nations country teams, are
working to establish monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements. That is a priority that I hope we can
accomplish before the end of the year.
Together with tools such as the updated human
rights database of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the protection
monitoring project of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and other information
systems, we will be better placed to systematically
identify trends and patterns, and thereby become better
at preventing these crimes.
The sustainability of that work requires funding.
We have now deployed eight women protection advisers
in South Sudan, where the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan is the first peace mission to budget for and
appoint such advisers. We are also recruiting advisers
for our missions in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire and the Central African Republic.
I call on Member States to provide adequate resources
for the deployment of additional advisers in those and
other situations of concern. We must make this a regular
feature of planning and budgeting.
I would also like to call for sustained funding
for the Team of Experts that works to strengthen the
capacity of national rule of law and justice actors. The
Team has worked with the authorities in Colombia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Liberia
and South Sudan, and could do even more with the
necessary backing.
Preventing sexual violence is first and foremost a
responsibility of States, in particular of security forces,
which are often the perpetrators of that grave human
rights violation. But prevention is also a collective
responsibility. To succeed, we must use all the tools
at our disposal. That includes our peacekeeping and
political missions, our mediation efforts and our efforts
3

S/PV.6948

to protect human rights and deliver humanitarian
assistance. It also encompasses the work of all
those involved in building peace in the aftermath of
conflict — from restoring the rule of law and advancing
gender equality to promoting early recovery and
longer-term development. As we deepen that effort, I
look forward to the Council’s sustained leadership and
support.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bangura.
Ms. Bangura: I wish to thank the Government of
Rwanda for convening this debate on sexual violence in
conflict. I am also grateful for your presence, Madam
Minister, to preside over the debate, as well as for this
opportunity to address the Security Council.
I should like to start my statement by thanking
the Secretary-General for his personal leadership
in advancing this agenda, which has made a huge
difference for me in carrying forward that agenda.
Three weeks, ago I visited Somalia. In Mogadishu,
I met Luul Ali Osman, who, three months ago, faced
the terrible weight of censure, arrest and imprisonment
for having dared to speak out about her rape by security
forces in a camp for internally displaced persons. Her
case reminds us of the tremendous risks associated
with reporting sexual violence, not only for the
survivors themselves but for their families, the staff
of non-governmental organizations who provide vital
services and the journalists who try to shed light on
such crimes.
For too long, war has been waged on the bodies
of women like Luul. For too long, women have borne
the crippling consequences — physical, psychological,
social and economic — of wartime rape. They have been
ostracized by their communities, cast out by husbands
and families, left destitute with their children.
With sexual violence women lose everything, and
in the process communities themselves are lost, because
women are the life force of their communities. They are
mothers and caregivers to the next generation; they are
the healers, the economic backbone, the peacemakers
and the peacekeepers.
That is why today we lift our voices in unison and
once again join hands around this high table to renew
our pact to break the silence and turn the tide on war’s
oldest and least condemned crime. In so doing, we
4

stand in solidarity with the many thousands of victims
and survivors around the world — not only women, but
also children and men — to say to them that they are
not forgotten, that their plight is of the highest priority,
at the highest level of the international system.
Over the course of five years we have witnessed
progress towards eradicating this crime. The Council
has led from the front, ushering in a paradigm shift
that has fundamentally altered our approach to
dealing with sexual violence in conflict. Crucially,
the Security Council’s engagement has challenged
long-standing myths that sexual violence is cultural,
private, inevitable, or simply the random acts of a few
renegades.
Resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960
(2010) affirm that sexual violence, when committed
systematically and used as a tool of war, is a
fundamental threat to the maintenance of international
peace and security, and as such requires an operational
security and justice response. It is an affirmation that
there can be no credible security approach that does not
take into account the security of women as part of its
central calculus. Practically, it requires us to expand
the circle of stakeholders beyond gender experts to also
engage uniformed peacekeepers, mediators, ceasefire
monitors, war-crimes prosecutors and the full range of
civilian-protection actors.
Notwithstanding the progress that has been made
as a result of the engagement of the Council, the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/149) before
members today paints a grim picture. In total, it
covers 22 situations: conflict, post-conflict and other
situations of concern. It also lists 32 parties in the
annex to the report. Of those, six are State actors, while
26 are non-State actors.
The report highlights some critical themes such
as the nexus between sexual violence and the illicit
extraction of natural resources; sexual violence as
a driver of the displacement of civilian populations;
forced marriage, rape and sexual violence by armed
groups; sexual violence as a tactic in the context of
detention or interrogation; and the plight of children
born out of wartime rape, about whom there is little or
no information available and therefore no meaningful
programmatic interventions.
The report emphasizes the urgency of ensuring
that sexual violence considerations are explicitly and
consistently reflected in peace processes, ceasefires

13-29364

S/PV.6948

and peace agreements, and in all security-sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes in which the United Nations is involved.
The report also stresses the acute lack of services for
victims. It is absolutely essential that we continue to
meet our obligations to the survivors — the critical
health, psychosocial, legal and other interventions that
they must have to rebuild their lives. At the same time,
we also have to throw a more concerted spotlight on the
perpetrators, that is, those who commit, command or
condone sexual violence in conflict.
The continued engagement of the Security Council
must serve as an unequivocal statement of intent:
sexual violence in conflict will not be tolerated, and
the full force of international order will be brought
to bear to ensure accountability for such crimes. The
perpetrators must understand that there can be no
hiding place, no amnesty, no safe harbour. They must
know that they will be pursued by any and all means at
our collective disposal. In the process, we will begin to
transfer the stigma of this crime from the survivors to
the perpetrators.
The main promise of resolution 1960 (2010) is
prevention. It sets us on the path of accountability
and deterrence. In that respect, it marks a political
commitment to bring all of the Security Council’s tools
to bear in preventing the atrocity of wartime rape. The
purpose of the 1960 (2010) accountability regime is to
influence the conduct of perpetrators and would-be
perpetrators.
Going forward, we must reinforce that regime. An
effective compliance system can, for the first time, raise
the cost and consequences for those who would commit
such crimes, where until now the price has been borne
by their victims. Today it is still largely “cost-free” to
rape a woman, child or man in conflict. Sexual violence
has been used through the ages precisely because it
is such a cheap and devastating weapon. We can and
must reverse that reality, making it a massive liability
to commit, command or condone sexual violence in
conflict.
Since taking office in September 2012, I have placed
particular emphasis on engaging national stakeholders
in order to foster national ownership, leadership and
responsibility. While actions by the Council or the
work of international justice mechanisms such as the
International Criminal Court are essential to send a
zero-tolerance message to perpetrators, ultimately they
complement the measures that must be taken at the
13-29364

national level. It is at the country level that the political
will is most required to strengthen national laws,
institutions and capacities to prosecute sexual violence
crimes, and to care for survivors.
This cannot be only a United Nations issue. It
belongs first and foremost to Member States, who bear
the primary legal and moral responsibility to ensure
the protection and well-being of their citizens. The role
of my Office, of the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, and of the United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict
network, which is composed of 13 United Nations
entities working together to address this problem, is
to support national authorities so as to strengthen their
responses.
However, I cannot overemphasize that the
commitment of the United Nations system, however
great it may be, can never substitute for the political
will and action of national authorities.
Three weeks ago I undertook my first trip to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I visited a
community where last year 11 babies between the
ages of 6 and 12 months old were raped by elements
of Mai-Mai Simba/Lumumba, led by Morgan. It is
unimaginable that anyone could have committed such
atrocities.
Yet, under the cold light of strategy and tactics,
the rationale and purpose is clear. What more effective
way can there be to destroy a community than to target
and devastate its children? Faced with such horror, we
are compelled to turn the despair in our hearts into
unshakeable resolve that this will not happen to our
children — a resolve that matches the ruthlessness of
those who would commit such crimes with our own
relentless and unwavering pursuit of accountability,
and, ultimately, deterrence and prevention.
I am pleased today to announce a joint communiqué
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations to strengthen
cooperation in a number of critical areas, signed by the
Prime Minister at the end of my visit. It reflects the
firm commitment that was made to me by President
Kabila Kabange to more effectively prosecute crimes
of sexual violence.
The Parliament of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is also committed to establishing a parliamentary
working group on sexual violence, and the Senate and
the National Assembly will hold a special session on
5

S/PV.6948

the issue. The communiqué presents an opportunity
for renewed action on sexual violence prevention
and the response in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Together we must hold the President to his
commitments. At the same time, we must support him
and his Government — technically and financially — so
that they can deal decisively with the problem.
In Somalia, our collective efforts over the past
months have freed Luul Ali Osman and those who
have dared to speak out in support of her cause. Last
week, President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, speaking to
military cadets in Mogadishu, declared that security
forces who raped citizens of Somalia would be fought
and defeated like any enemy of the State. I commend
the President and his Government for their resolve
to address the problem. We anticipate that a joint
communiqué outlining a framework of cooperation to
address sexual violence will be adopted in early May,
when the international community convenes for the
Somalia conference to be held in London.
The fact that preventing sexual violence will be
one of the central issues discussed at that conference
is an important commitment in itself. It signals that the
issue does not remain on the margins of the discourse
on peace consolidation in Somalia. Addressing sexual
violence is an essential prerequisite for durable peace
and development. I urge international donors to match
their strong political commitment with the necessary
financial resources, particularly for the provision
of services to survivors on the ground. If we are to
break that evil in Somalia and elsewhere, the level of
financial commitment must meet the level of political
commitment.
As the Council is aware, I also visited the Central
African Republic in December 2012. Like all of us
around this table, I am distressed by the subsequent
outbreaks of conflict that have shredded the Libreville
Peace Agreement, costing lives and resulting in sexual
violence, child recruitment and other grave human
rights violations. A number of commitments were made
by the parties during my visit, which were expressed
in two communiqués. We must send a clear message to
the Séléka coalition and all the parties to the conflict
that they are expected to uphold the commitments
made. They must immediately identify and release
all forcibly recruited children and women from their
ranks. They also have to issue and implement clear
orders prohibiting sexual violence and investigate
all allegations, so as to hold perpetrators to account.

6

The international community and the Council should
insist that no party can be a credible partner in the
peace process unless those basic conditions are met.
I wish to highlight the fact that the ceasefire signed
by the Séléka coalition in January did include explicit
reference to sexual violence as part of the definition
of that ceasefire. As a principle, that reference was
exemplary and must be carried forward in the Central
African Republic process and elsewhere.
Let us therefore make the commitment around
this table today that, in situations where sexual
violence is a concern, there will never again be a
peace agreement, ceasefire agreement or ceasefire
verification mechanism that does not explicitly address
sexual violence. That includes the agreements that must
eventually be concluded in Mali and Syria to bring an
end to those conflicts.
I also wish to draw the attention of the Council
to the visit to Colombia by my predecessor, Margot
Wallström, shortly before she left office. During
her visit, the Vice-President, speaking on behalf of
the Government, expressed openness to the idea of
developing what he referred to as a “framework of
cooperation” that outlined key technical areas in which
the United Nations and the Government might enhance
cooperation to address sexual violence in conflict. The
multifaceted response of the Colombian authorities to
sexual violence in conflict carries important lessons
for our global response. The key challenge in Colombia
remains implementation, and it is my intention to follow
up on Ms. Wallström’s visit and to offer the technical
support of the United Nations, including the Team of
Experts, which have already conducted a follow-up
visit. In the meantime, I urge the Colombian authorities
to ensure that sexual violence considerations are
explicitly reflected in the ongoing peace talks with the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia.
I also intend to take up invitations by the authorities
in Syria, Mali and South Sudan to visit as soon as
possible. Conducting country visits will continue to be
a key aspect of the mandate. Through such visits, we
can bear witness to the plight of survivors and carry
their voices to those in power. They are intended to open
space locally for dialogue and action on sexual violence.
They serve as a means to engage parties to conflict to
make tangible protection commitments. They aim to
foster international cooperation on the implementation
of such mandates. The gravitas of the Council and the
mandate established by the Council to address sexual

13-29364

S/PV.6948

violence in conflict open doors at the highest levels. We
will continue to rely on the Security Council to support
such an engagement-based approach.
I was also delighted last week to participate in the
Group of Eight ministerial meeting in London, which
endorsed the historic declaration on the prevention of
sexual violence in conflict. The declaration represents
important political and financial support. It gives
us additional momentum at a crucial moment. The
impetus afforded by such support at the highest levels
of the international system is key to driving forward the
prevention and protection agenda on the ground.
We have an opportunity, unlike at any time in
history, to break the back of this age-old evil. We must
believe that sexual violence in conflict is not inevitable.
To eradicate it is not a “mission impossible”, but will
require political leadership and political courage,
matched by bold protection initiatives on the ground.
It is our hope, therefore, that, on the basis of the
Secretary-General’s report and his recommendations,
the Security Council will once again show its resolve
and unity of purpose and adopt in June a new
resolution on sexual violence in conflict — one focused
on accountability and prevention so as to further
consolidate and institutionalize the sexual violence
response in the context of the United Nations peace and
security architecture and Council mandates. May this
be a decisive moment — our moment to put an end to
the crime that is a blight on our collective humanity.

We also welcome the analysis and recommendations in
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/149)
on conflict-related sexual violence, including the
recommendations that emphasize the ongoing necessity
for disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
security-sector reform programmes that are explicitly
gender-responsive. The report highlights the urgency
of addressing sexual violence in conflict in various
situations — such as Afghanistan, the Central African
Republic, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, South Sudan and the Syrian Arab
Republic. The report also highlights the devastating
impact of sexual violence in the conflict in my own
country, Mali.
Effectively addressing the complexities of conflictrelated sexual violence requires powerful and urgent
leadership at all levels, the local, national, regional
and international. Commitment and action in times of
conflict, as well as post-conflict times and times of
peace, are essential.
Today I will address several key areas where making
progress is essential, namely, women’s participation
and equality, prevention, response, accountability, and
resources.

Ms. Keïta Diakité (NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council. I speak
today on behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security. I am also here in my capacity as
the President of the Peace and Security Network of
Women of the Area of the Economic Community of
West African States.

With regard to participation and equality, sexual
violence in conflict brutally reinforces the notion that
women are not equal to men, and that they can be
violated with total impunity. Achieving sustainable
peace and the elimination of sexual violence in conflict
will continue to be impossible if the root causes of
inequality are not addressed. In practice, that means
ensuring women’s equality at every stage of the peace
process and that all peace agreements include effective
responses to crimes committed against women. And that
means including guarantees of women’s human rights
in the content of peace agreements, stating that sexual
violence violates ceasefire agreements, and forbidding
amnesty for sexual crimes. Forceful action must be
taken on this issue, particularly in order to ensure that
the international community rejects peace agreements
lacking women’s participation and involvement, and
also that political processes ensure that women’s human
rights are protected and that women representatives are
included in the decision-making process.

We at the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security appreciate the ongoing work by
numerous actors to combat violence against women,
including the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

The prevention of sexual violence in conflict
and of the underlying causes of conflict itself is the
most powerful instrument we have. As the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2013/149) demonstrates, and
as I myself saw in Mali in recent months, there is a

The President: I thank Ms. Bangura for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Saran Keïta Diakité
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security.

13-29364

7

S/PV.6948

devastating link between the flow of arms and the
perpetration of sexual violence. The members of the
NGO Working Group have campaigned for an arms
trade treaty that takes into account the problems
associated with discrimination against women, not
because women are vulnerable but because we are
targets. It is now up to Member States to recognize
how much the availability of arms affects violence
against women and women’s participation in social
and political life. We call on States to uphold their
commitments regarding women and peace and security
in all disarmament processes.
In cases of sexual violence, the response to
victims and survivors is crucial. Survivors and their
families have the right to adequately funded medical,
psychological and legal support and rehabilitation
programmes. Without such services, victims’ physical
and mental health can be irreparably damaged. Besides
that, impunity for perpetrators too often remains the
norm. In Mali, the 2012 military coup d’état drove
many of those providing services for victims out of the
country, leaving survivors without access to emergency
medical services or to any psychological help. With
the support of UN-Women, my organization, the
Association of Malian Jurists, and some others were
able to partially fill that gap. But the political crisis
highlights just how precarious the situation remains
for survivors and service providers. In addition, with
services mainly concentrated in Bamako, many female
victims of the conflict in the north of the country were
unable to get help.
Comprehensive services, from medical to
psychological to legal, must be available, safe and
easily accessible by the victims. Medical care for
survivors must be of the highest quality possible and
provided in accordance with international humanitarian
law and World Health Organization guidelines,
while recognizing the right of women and girls to
non-discriminatory medical care, including the right to
terminate a pregnancy resulting from rape.
With regard to accountability and reparations,
impunity for perpetrators of sexual violence,
unfortunately, remains overwhelmingly the norm. In the
context of conflict, the reform of the security and justice
sectors must ensure that crimes of sexual violence are
effectively addressed and responded to. Every recourse
to justice, including referrals to the International
Criminal Court, should be pursued. Reparations, as the
Secretary-General’s report says, can be an important

8

form of transitional justice for all victimes of sexual
violence, especially women and girls, and an important
tool for redress and acknowledgement of suffering
borne. Such efforts should include activities aimed at
combating the stigma that accompanies crimes of sexual
violence. In Mali, for example, we need collective
recognition of the crimes of sexual violence that have
been committed during the conflict. In the absence of
such recognition, women who attempt to seek justice
often have great difficulty accessing courts, and many
are even accused of being prostitutes. It is imperative
that survivors of sexual violence cease to be blamed
and victimized when they seek assistance and justice.
Concerning support for the work of organizations
headed by women, civil society plays a key role in
combating sexual violence in conflict. Sufficient
resources must be directed to civil-society organizations
led by women, particularly those that help victims and
that give women access to justice and the political
decision-making process. Because of the nature of their
work, defenders of women’s human rights continue to
be the target of attacks and threats in many parts of the
world. Member States should immediately take the steps
necessary to ensure that such defenders are protected
and supported, and to recognize and reduce the risks
they face. In that way the States Members of the United
Nations, particularly those on the Security Council, can
ensure that the voices of the victims of sexual violence
are heard and their situation is improved.
When conflict and violence arose in Mali, we
women mobilized for peace but, sadly, had neither the
power nor the training needed to make our voices heard.
With the assistance of international partners, including
UN-Women, 80 Malian women have been trained in
mediation, negotiation and mobilization — skills that
are essential to ensuring that women in danger can be
heard.
Today I have discussed several examples from
my country, Mali, but, sadly, there are many similar
examples in many other countries. In all those countries,
we are aware of how we need to work together to prevent,
to respond, to have accountability and to ensure that
women can achieve their full potential. While we have
made great strides in terms of identifying the scourge
of sexual violence in conflict, we look forward with
impatience to the day when the commitments made by
so many of those in the Chamber bear fruit.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Keïta
Diakité for her briefing.
13-29364

S/PV.6948

(spoke in English)
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for your presence here today and for convening this
important debate. I would also like to express my
sincere appreciation to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and his Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, for their informative and insightful briefings.
My special thanks also go to Ms. Saran Keïta Diakité
for her statement on behalf of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security.
The Security Council has achieved significant
progress in combating conflict-related sexual violence
over the past few years, including by adopting resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010). While those
documents reaffirm our strong commitment to ending
sexual violence in conflict, this egregious crime
remains a daunting challenge for the international
community in many new and ongoing armed conflicts.
In that context, my delegation welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on sexual violence in conflict
(S/2013/149). It shows that sexual violence continues to
occur in conflict and post-conflict situations throughout
the world, and that in some cases such acts have become
systematic and widespread. The report also reveals
worrying emerging trends, such as the nexus between
sexual violence and the illicit extraction of natural
resources and the displacement of civilian populations.
What is more worrying is that sexual violence is almost
universally under-reported. Against that backdrop, my
delegation would like to stress following key points.
First, we would like to underline the significance
of the fight against impunity. We can never expect
to eradicate sexual violence without ensuring that
those responsible are systematically brought to
justice. We strongly support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation in his report that the Council employ
all the means at its disposal to address sexual violence
in conflict, including referrals to the International
Criminal Court and mandating international
commissions of inquiry.
Ensuring accountability at the national level is
equally important. However, it is regrettable that the
lack of adequate national capacity to investigate and

13-29364

prosecute sexual violence remains one of the main
impediments to ensuring accountability for such
crimes. In that regard, my delegation would like to
commend the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict, established pursuant
to resolution 1888 (2009). We further encourage the
Team to focus its efforts on strengthening institutional
safeguards against impunity at the national level.
Secondly, we need to be more systematic in
incorporating the issue of conflict-related sexual
violence into the work of the Security Council. The
Council, for its part, should give due attention and
consideration to sexual violence in authorizing and
renewing the mandates of peacekeeping and special
political missions through the inclusion of specific
language on that issue. Furthermore, the deployment of
women’s protection advisers to United Nations missions
should continue to be encouraged.
My delegation also believes that the adoption of
targeted measures by the relevant Sanctions Committees
against perpetrators of sexual violence crimes is another
crucial means at the Council’s disposal. It serves as a
strong deterrent to conflict-related sexual violence by
raising the stakes for perpetrators. We welcome the fact
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo Sanctions
Committee imposed measures on those responsible for
committing sexual violence last year. My delegation
would like to encourage other Sanctions Committees
to similarly focus on sexual violence crimes. The list
of parties that are credibly suspected of committing or
being responsible for patterns of rape and other forms
of sexual violence in situations of armed conflicts,
contained in the Secretary-General’s report, could be a
good basis for such action by the Council.
Thirdly, we need to pay more attention and care
to victims and survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence. Priority should be given to providing them
with sustainable assistance, including medical,
psychological, legal and other multisectoral services.
Those services should be tailored to the specific needs
of survivors. To that end, it is imperative to strengthen
the capacities of the relevant national institutions and
allocate adequate resources to the relevant programmes.
In that regard, we support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to ensure that reparations awarded
through judicial or administrative mechanisms be
established and made available to victims of sexual
violence in conflict. It is particularly important that

9

S/PV.6948

post-conflict reconstruction processes strengthen
overall systems for reparation, including the provision
of adequate and timely resources.
As a member of the Group of Friends of resolution
1325 (2000), the Republic of Korea has been actively
engaged in international efforts to combat conflictrelated sexual violence. In that context, my delegation
welcomes the timely adoption of the declaration on
preventing sexual violence in conflict by the Foreign
Ministers of the Group of Eight (G-8) last Thursday
in London. As the ministers of the G-8 recognized in
the declaration, efforts to address sexual violence in
armed conflict should be consistent with resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women,
peace and security. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that
the declaration highlights the importance of wider
efforts to promote better implementation of the relevant
resolutions.
To that end, the Korean Government is also working
on a draft national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), with the involvement of all the
relevant ministries and in close consultation with civil
society. The plan is expected to include measures to
combat conflict-related sexual violence and to provide
assistance to the victims and survivors of sexual
violence in conflicts.
Before concluding, my delegation would like
to commend the tremendous efforts of Special
Representative Bangura and her exemplary dedication
to the fight against conflict-related sexual violence. We
extend our full support for her mandate. The Republic of
Korea will continue to be committed to implementing all
resolutions to eradicate conflict-related sexual violence
in cooperation with the international community.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I should
like to thank you, Madam President, for organizing
this event and for your presence here today. Let me
also thank you for the expression of sympathy to the
American people. I would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-Moon and his Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura, for their
briefings. I also thank Ms. Keïta Diakité for helping us
better understand how women in Mali are combatting
sexual violence. Women’s civil society organizations
are making critical contributions in that area and need
our support.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on sexual violence in conflict (S/2013/149). Tragically,

10

the report and today’s briefings remind us that this
issue is a global problem. It is also complex and
multifaceted — from sexual violence used as a tool for
coercive population displacement to forced marriages
by armed groups and the challenges of the widespread
unreporting of abuse and the plight of children born out
of rape.
Today, I would like to draw attention to the need
for greater emphasis on prevention, including at
the communal level and within the United Nations
system, for engaging parties to conflict to address
sexual violence and for integrating sexual violence
prevention and response efforts into security and justice
sector reform. At the community level, improving
the prevention of sexual violence requires a better
understanding of existing protection mechanisms
and leveraging grass-roots networks that can provide
local information to inform prevention efforts. There
is progress in that area: for example, the community
policing centres run by displaced persons in camps in
Darfur and the enlistment of imams as advocates for
sexual violence prevention in South Darfur.
For United Nations missions, better prevention
involves equipping peacekeepers and civilian staff
with the guidance and expertise to respond to early
information about threats of large-scale abuses. The
training modules designed by the United Nations are
a positive step in that direction, as is the creation of a
United Nations international network of female police
peacekeepers, which links more than 1,000 United
Nations female police officers around the world to share
best practices and advocate and mentor female police.
Bringing deeper gender expertise to United Nations
field missions is essential for the enhanced prevention of
sexual violence. United Nations leadership in New York
and in the field should commit to a greater presence of
gender experts and women protection advisers in United
Nations missions. Furthermore, the deployment of such
experts should be routine in United Nations technical
assessment missions. We note a particular need for
that expertise in Libya to address the root causes of
sexual violence perpetrated during the conflict and
the resulting trauma. Encouraging parties to conflict
to discuss sexual violence within their ranks, although
challenging, is another critical avenue of prevention.
The agreements that Special Representative Bangura
brokered in the Central African Republic are models of
such engagement.

13-29364

S/PV.6948

Changing the behaviour of armed parties requires
political will, as well as better monitoring and
reporting and, where appropriate, the credible threat
of consequences, such as naming and shaming and
sanctions. Furthermore, mediators and envoys should
routinely address conflict-related sexual violence in
their ceasefire and peace negotiations. But the spectrum
of action for countering sexual violence must not be
limited to a conflict and its conclusion. It must be
prioritized throughout the peace processes, including
in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
phase and in security sector reform. Rigorous vetting
should ensure that perpetrators and those who have
directed sexual violence are denied entry to the security
sector. There should be strong protection mechanisms
for civilians in close proximity of cantonment sites.
The best way to ensure such protection is for women
themselves to participate meaningfully in security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme design and implementation
and to have more women working and leading in the
security sector. It is clear that female survivors of
sexual violence are more likely to report to a female
police officer or a women’s police station, as our
experience in Haiti has borne out. Women’s civil society
organizations need greater capacity to monitor, inform
and provide security services in conjunction with law
enforcement authorities. We must also build reformed
national justice sectors and local institutions that can
hold accountable those responsible for sexual violence,
while international criminal justice mechanisms
continue to play their important role in ending impunity
for those crimes.
Last week, in its declaration on preventing sexual
violence in conflict, the Group of Eight reaffirmed
that rape and other forms of serious sexual violence in
armed conflict were war crimes and emphasized the
need to promote justice and accountability for such
crimes.
These issues are hardly theoretical. The scourge
of sexual violence persists. We are alarmed by the
horrific abuses occurring in Syria, including against
men and boys, and we affirm that those responsible for
violations of human rights will be held accountable. The
United States continues to support the documenting of
evidence of atrocities committed by all sides for use in
future Syrian-led transitional justice and accountability
processes.

13-29364

Beyond Syria, the United States has proven its
commitment to prevent and address gender-based
violence around the world, providing more than
$100 billion in 2012 for those efforts.
In conclusion, I wish to commend the excellent
work that Special Representative Bangura and her staff
are doing. I urge the entire United Nations system to
give due attention to prevention efforts and facilitate
the deployment of necessary expertise to conflict
areas. The United States looks forward to continuing
collaboration with all those who seek to end the scourge
of sexual violence in conflict, including through a new
Council resolution to address outstanding challenges
on these issues.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank Rwanda for the
initiative of holding today’s open debate. I welcome the
presence of Her Excellency Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda, to preside over
today’s meeting. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Bangura for their briefings. China also listened
attentively to the statement made by the representative
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security.
Respecting and protecting women’s rights is not
only a reflection of progress in human society and
civilization, it is also closely linked to global peace
and development. Women are vulnerable to becoming
victims of all sorts of violence in situations of armed
conflict. Not only is that a grave infringement upon
women’s rights, but it is also a challenge to the full
resolution of conflicts and the rebuilding of society.
In recent years, States Members of the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
have cooperated closely to fight sexual violence in
armed conflict. China welcomes that. At the same time,
in today’s many conflict situations, sexual violence
against women remains prevalent. The international
community has a long way to go in defending women’s
security, rights and interests.
China condemns all violence against women in
armed conflict, including sexual violence. China
supports the full implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Council and urges parties in conflict
to abide by international humanitarian law and other
relevant international law to effectively protect the

11

S/PV.6948

safety of women and other disadvantaged groups. I
would like to emphasize three points.
First, in all countries, it is the Government that
bears the primary responsibility for women’s safety
and rights. Conflict situations are all different. The
international community should support the countries
concerned in their efforts to safeguard women’s rights
and interests and should provide constructive assistance
in that regard. External support should fully respect
the sovereignty of the countries concerned, focus on
enhancing their capacity-building and help them to
resolve funding and technical difficulties.
Secondly, the United Nations should play its unique
role fully and enhance cooperation and coordination
with other relevant bodies. The Security Council, as
the primary body tasked with maintaining peace and
security, should focus on conflict prevention, dispute
mediation and post-conflict peacebuilding, so as
to create political, security and legal environments
conducive to eliminating sexual violence. The General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the Human
Rights Council and UN-Women should coordinate their
efforts and cooperate closely with the Security Council
to foster synergy.
Thirdly, safeguarding women’s rights and
preventing and containing sexual violence in
conflict require the full development of women. The
international community cannot just pay attention
to the phenomenon of sexual violence in conflict,
demanding increased pressure and punishment and the
establishment of monitoring mechanisms; it should also
eliminate the sources of conflict, devote major attention
to economic and social development, advance the status
of women in real terms and make the empowerment of
women a reality.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Rwandan presidency for convening
this important open debate. It is particularly relevant
that our debate is being chaired by Minister Louise
Mushikiwabo, to whom we convey our thanks. We
also thank the Secretary-General for the presentation
of his report (S/2013/149). We are very aware of his
commitment to combating sexual violence in armed
conflict.
We also welcome Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura and
commend her on the great work she is carrying out in
her role. We thank her for the compelling presentation
of her report on her recent visit to Somalia and the

12

Democratic Republic of the Congo. It demonstrates how
extensive and serious, at least in those two countries,
sexual crimes, including rape as a weapon of war, are.
We also thank Ms. Saran Keïta Diakité for her
moving statement.
We recognize the importance of mediators and
envoys in mediation, ceasefire, peace and preventive
diplomacy processes engaging with the parties to a
conflict in dialogue on sexual violence, and for such
violence to be addressed in peace agreements. We
agree with the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral that sexual violence should be included among
prohibited acts and reflected as specific provisions in
peace agreements related to security arrangements and
transitional justice. It should be recalled, in that regard,
that the Organization has developed guidelines for
mediators on how to address sexual violence in armed
conflicts. Those should be included in the training and
orientation of teams that negotiate ceasefires and peace
agreements.
We have participated in several informative
events conducted by agencies of the system and
non-governmental organizations that work in areas of
armed conflict. The stories they tell are frightening and
reinforce the urgent need for victims and survivors of
sexual violence to have access to medical services and
HIV-related treatment and care. It is also necessary to
address the difficult situations faced by survivors who
have children and by the children born as a result of
rape, who then become victims of stigma and social
exclusion.
We are highly aware of the priority that must
be given to developing and building the capacity of
national institutions, in particular the health, judicial
and social welfare systems, as well as local civil society
networks. That is certainly an area where public-private
partnerships are of particular relevance.
It is also worth mentioning the critical role of
women’s civil society organizations in supporting
the prevention and resolution of armed conflicts and
in peacebuilding. That was precisely the approach
taken in the presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/23)
adopted under our presidency of the Security Council
in October 2012. In that statement, as part of the fight
against impunity for perpetrators of sexual and genderbased crimes, the Council categorically condemned
all violations of international law committed against

13-29364

S/PV.6948

women and girls in armed conflict and post-conflict
situations.
Guatemala has supported without reservation the
work that the Security Council has been carrying out
for several years now aimed at strengthening collective
action to combat sexual violence in armed conflict,
in particular through the adoption of resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010). Now, as elected
members of the Council, we find that our commitment
has been further deepened.
In that regard, we are encouraged by the important
change in how sexual violence is being dealt with by
the International Criminal Court, in particular with
respect to the charges against Bosco Ntaganda of
crimes against humanity, rape, sexual slavery and war
crimes. The same could be said about the prosecution
of Jean-Pierre Bemba. Both cases set a precedent
concerning the principle of officers’ responsibility
for sexual violence as a war crime and crime against
humanity. That constitutes an important complement
to the work of national courts and mixed tribunals in
the fight against deeply rooted discriminatory practices
that are embedded in a culture of impunity.
In addition, it helps us to combat the perception
that it is useless to denounce the crimes of sexual
violence and contributes to the strengthening of the
administration of justice, whether civil or military,
by holding perpetrators accountable before the law.
Moreover, it also helps to realize specific commitments
on prohibiting sexual violence committed by seniorranking officials of armed forces and armed groups,
and promotes the adoption of codes of conduct that
prohibit sexual violence.
We believe that another step in the right direction
is the judgment in the case of Thomas Lubanga Dyilo.
Although he was not charged with crimes of sexual
slavery and rape, the judgment against him includes
specific guidance on the reparations to be made to the
victims of sexual violence, thus making possible specific
reparation for the immediate and long-term harm
experienced by the victims. That act of international
justice affords hope, dignity and compensation to the
victims and enforces accountability for the perpetrators.
What I have referred to leads us to conclude that
the annex to the report of the Secretary-General, which
lists the parties and individuals credibly suspected of
committing or being responsible for systematic rape
and other forms of sexual violence during conflict and

13-29364

post-conflict situations, is useful, and that we must
increase the pressure on those responsible for those
acts and, when appropriate, submit their names to the
relevant committees.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for having
organized this open debate and for your presence here,
which shows your commitment to this issue. I would
also welcome the statements by the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Ms. Bangura. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2013/149) and would like to
highlight its clear, concise and strategic nature. We
also welcome Ms. Keïta Diakité, and we take note of
and appreciate the presence of the Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea.
We would like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation for the work of the Office of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We commend Ms. Bangura for her efforts since taking
up her responsibilities, including the services provided
by the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. We fully support
the recommendations contained in the report.
My country aligns itself with and supports the
proposal to establish an appropriate monitoring
mechanism within the Security Council on the problem
of sexual violence in conflict.
In 2012, the United Nations stated that, whatever
the geography of conflict and its structural causes, from
Côte d’Ivoire to Mali and from Libya to those affected
by the earthquake in Haiti — in every instance — over
70 per cent of those displaced were been women and
children. We know that women in camps, women
refugees and displaced women are particularly at risk
of becoming victims of violence, exploitation and
poverty. However, just as clearly, we do not accept that
that should be their fate.
We note that the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees has introduced a
robust policy on women refugees, has prepared action
guidelines for the protection of women refugees and
will continue to include the gender dimension in its
assistance and protection work.
However, with the same firmness with which we
require comprehensive protection for victims, we
would like to say that it is vital that women be included

13

S/PV.6948

in all decisions that affect their lives, as participation
promotes protection.
Resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security, together with other Council resolutions,
signified and still represents a huge breakthrough. In
that resolution, the Council recognized the fundamental
role that women played in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and in peacebuilding. It underlined the
importance of effective and equal participation by
women in the maintenance of peace and security and
the need to include women, under equal conditions,
in decision-making processes for the prevention and
resolution of conflicts.
However, UN-Women recently announced that, of
the 585 peace agreements signed between 1990 and
2010, only 16 per cent mentioned women. Seventeen per
cent refer to gender equality, and only 3 per cent make
any reference at all to gender-based sexual violence.
We are aware that there is much more to do. It is
terrible and painful to acknowledge that women and girls
have been and remain the main victims of violence in
armed conflicts, specifically of sexual and gender-based
violence. It is particularly serious that such violence
is often abetted by the indifference and complicity of
those responsible for protecting civilians — and women
and children — who may include members of a State’s
armed and security forces, peacekeeping operations or
non-governmental organization volunteers working in
the field.
That is why we agree with the idea that all
peacekeeping mandates should explicitly include
the gender perspective in the protection of civilians
and incorporate specific guidelines on preventing,
eradicating and punishing all forms of violence against
women, with a focus on human rights, as well as a full
and multidimensional understanding of that scourge.
We also support the idea of a special adviser for all
peacekeeping missions in the area of human rights for
women and gender and ensuring the resources necessary
to effectively implement the Council’s resolutions and
incorporate follow-up mechanisms for the analysis and
presentation of reports on violence against women,
particularly sexual violence. The impact of conflicts on
women is not only determined by the nature or level
of the conflict, but also by the particular role of each
women
It is also true that the general needs of women must
be recognized, as that is fundamental in meeting the

14

specific diverse and multifaceted needs of women. We
must understand the local and cultural context, which
is crucial to understanding and responding to conflictrelated violence.
We agree with the need for security-sector reform,
which should include training in human rights,
particularly the human rights of women and children,
and take into account the need to prevent sexual
violence.
We encourage the training of peacekeepers, both
civilian and military and police, and the strengthening
of the human rights component, particularly with
regard to women’s and children’s human rights, as well
as comprehensively addressing the various forms of
violence against women, particularly sexual violence.
We agree with the need for a human rights focus
in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as
well as in mediation, ceasefire, peace and preventive
diplomacy processes, with an intensified focus on
women and girls. In that respect, we believe that women’s
participation in all consultation and decision-making
processes should not be the exception, but rather the
rule. As women, our role in conflicts is not passive, nor
is it exclusively or necessarily that of victims.
Allow me to refer to work that has been carried
out in my country, known as “Cracks in the Silence”,
by the women’s organization CLADEM, which has
investigated sexual violence against women during
the period of State terrorism in my country. The
investigation helped to reveal the sexual crimes
committed during that cruel and painful period. It
showed that those crimes had been broadly suppressed
and made invisible; not only because seeking justice
for individual crimes of sexual violence as individual
cases and crimes against humanity — they are not
like crimes of torture or abuse — was a difficult and
complex process, but because it was also necessary to
confront and overcome enormous cultural, political
and institutional obstacles in determining the criminal
responsibility of the perpetrators of the crimes and
reparations for the victims.
In that context, the recommendations issued by the
Human Rights Committee to Argentina on bringing
the crimes of the recent dictatorship to trial covered
gender-based crimes as well. The Committee noted
that the State party should continue to make rigorous
efforts to prosecute those cases in order to guarantee
that serious human rights violations, including those

13-29364

S/PV.6948

crimes that deprived women of their right to liberty and
a life free of violence, not go unpunished.
We can also cite, in that connection, the
recommendations made by the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women with
regard to proactive measures to publicize trials and
punishment for sexual violence perpetrated during
dictatorships or conflicts.
One can say, without exaggeration, that, during
times of conflict, very few women have been able to
chronicle the sexual violence of which they were victims.
That was clearly seen when the International Criminal
Tribunal for your country, Madam President, pointed
out in the Akayesu case, that cultural sensitivities have
a bearing on the discussion of intimate matters. That
case, which related to sexuality, revealed the pain, the
reticence and the inability of the women concerned to
reveal details of sexual violence of which they had been
victims.
We also know that feelings not only of guilt, but
also of humiliation, contribute to silence. Internalized
social shame takes hold of women who have been
victims of sexual violence, because sexuality is
considered an intimate and private domain. To speak
publicly about such things indicates that everybody
knows that the victims have been humiliated, violated,
raped and forced to submit.
On the other hand, the generalized indifference
in investigating acts of violence against women
leads directly to impunity, increasing the situation of
insecurity and fear among women.
In that respect, the Commission to Clarify Past
Human Rights Violations and Acts of Violence That
Have Caused the Guatemalan Population to Suffer
indicated in its final report that the absolute impunity
protecting those responsible for sexual violations
increased women’s insecurity and contributed to the
victims’ not reporting the facts.
We cannot explain why sexual violence against
women and sexist and gender-based violence has
occurred with growing and overwhelming frequency
in armed conflicts, unless we also add to the equation
the inequality between men and women, gender
stereotypes and the reproduction of hierarchical and
discriminatory relationships in which women find
themselves materially subordinate and symbolically
devalued in various times and cultures.

13-29364

Women do not become victims by virtue of who
they are, or as the result of nature or fate. Women are
particularly susceptible to becoming victims of violence
in conflict most especially because we are already
victims of discrimination during peaceful times.
In conclusion, allow me to refer briefly to sexual
violence in conflicts and to the autonomous nature,
specificity and separate nature of sexual crimes, and
how they should be viewed differently from other
crimes such as torture or cruelty.
It is apposite, because as we have seen in recent
conflicts, specific and systematic forms of sexual
violence are carried out against women, young women
and girls. In that connection, I would like to share with
the Council the testimony of a social activist who, for
the simple act of thinking and saying that the world
is unjust and unequal, was disappeared, tortured and
raped during the recent civilian military dictatorship
in my country.
“During torture, one discovered that we had
resources to withstand very high thresholds of pain,
somehow to survive and to live. However, rape is
something else. It affects other elements — and
they know it because, in addition to the evident,
there is an immeasurable amount of inner pain that
is not seen like the bruises left by the blows or the
burns from the electric shocks, but it is there. It is
as if one’s body freezes or becomes that of another
person, not only at the time but for ever, for life.”
We have made progress in jurisprudence. We have
made progress in recognizing rights. We must now
bring about real equality and the effective eradication
of all forms of violence against women.
I think that remembering, truth, justice and
reparation — I say that to you, Madam President, in
particular — is the only way to put an end to impunity.
Certainly, Rwanda, Argentina and all countries that
have suffered extreme violence know that remembering
is the basis for moving forward in order to prevent the
repetition of such events today, tomorrow, yesterday
and forever.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Rwanda
for convening this open debate on women and peace
and security. Your presence here, Madam President,
shows your country’s strong commitment to addressing
the scourge of sexual violence in wars and in situations

15

S/PV.6948

of armed conflict. We welcome Vice-Minister Cho
Tae-yul’s attendance at the Council debate today.

sensitization a mandatory part of the training of our
peacekeepers.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing to the Council. The SecretaryGeneral has placed women’s protection issues high on
his agenda and has put the power of the United Nations
behind the efforts to combat heinous acts of violence
against women.

Over the years, the Security Council has paid
close attention to the cause of protecting the human
rights of vulnerable groups in situations of armed
conflict. The issue of women and peace and security
has been integrated into the Council’s country-specific
resolutions. That increased emphasis has resulted in
a normative framework that is reflected in a series
of resolutions on women and children, as well as the
creation of the posts of special representatives of the
Secretary-General to deal with the issues of children
and sexual violence. The Secretary-General has
reflected those concerns in various reports. Over time,
communication among the field offices, the Secretariat
and the Council has also improved.

Women bear the brunt of wars and armed conflicts.
Today, 90 per cent of the casualties in conflicts and
wars are non-combatants, of whom 70 per cent are
women and children. Moreover, women are left out
of peacemaking, stabilization and reconstruction
processes.
Women and girls are targeted deliberately. Sexual
and gender-based violence in situations of armed
conflict affects the dignity not only of victims and
survivors but also of families, communities and
societies. It causes moral and psychosocial injury and
is used as a tactic of war to force the displacement of
populations and to illegally acquire natural resources.
Resolution
1325
(2000)
recognized
that
disproportionate impact on women and introduced
remedial measures. Member States have resolved
to collectively oppose and fight the unconscionable
practices of rape, sexual slavery, commercial sexual
exploitation, forced pregnancies, enforced sterilization
and other forms of sexual violence.
We welcome Special Representative Zainab Hawa
Bangura’s exhaustive briefing today. We pay tribute to
her for her solid work and for the passion with which she
pursues her mission. We appreciate the presence and
testimony of the representative of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security. Civil society
has a crucial role in protecting the rights of women in
conflict situations.
The United Nations does much to deal with the
protection of women in situations of armed conflict.
We all know that that is not enough. Much more needs
to be done. It is imperative to continue to mainstream
the gender perspective into peacekeeping operations.
As the largest troop-contributing country, we can
testify to the fact that the appointment of gender
advisers in the field has served a useful purpose.
That practice must be strengthened. We are proud of
our women peacekeepers, who have served as police
officers, doctors and nurses in peacekeeping operations
in Asia, Africa and the Balkans. We have made gender
16

Such mechanisms and measures have provided
relief and justice to the affected populations, but
it is a long haul. In that context, we support Special
Representative Bangura’s call to all parties to conflicts
to immediately put an end to violence against women
and make specific, time-bound commitments to ensure
the non-recurrence of such acts, under the appropriate
monitoring mechanisms.
The six-point priority agenda of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General is a good way
to address impunity, empower women to seek redress,
strengthen the international political response and foster
national ownership. Moreover, the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) will meaningfully address
the plight of women and will elevate their status to
equal partners in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, post-conflict reconstruction, peace and
security. Women should participate in recovery and
peacebuilding, as well as transitional justice systems.
The Council has set a good example by sending
strong signals that sexual and gender-based violence is
unacceptable. We should give due credit to the Security
Council for transforming the protection of women in
armed conflict situations from a soft to a hard issue.
Full compliance with international humanitarian law, an
end to impunity, and accountability for the perpetrators
of crimes against women, including in transitional
justice mechanisms, are now widely accepted norms of
international law.
In order to give more credence to its actions, the
Council must be ready to take targeted and graduated
measures, through the relevant Sanctions Committees,

13-29364

S/PV.6948

against perpetrators of sexual violence. We endorse
the Secretary-General’s recommendation of applying
specific sanctions against parties to armed conflict that
use sexual violence as a tactic of war.
We believe that the Member States concerned
bear the primary legal and moral responsibility for
preventing and addressing sexual violence. We urge the
Special Representative to continue to work closely with
Member States and regional organizations to ensure
that such concerns are addressed.
The continued appointment of trained gender
and women protection advisers and the provision
of multisectoral assistance and services for victims
have proved beneficial. Adequate resources must be
allocated for that purpose.
We support the Special Representative’s call to
strengthen national institutions in order to provide
sustainable assistance to victims of sexual violence.
Technical assistance may be provided, on request,
to concerned States for reforming and rebuilding the
judicial, legislative and electoral sectors, as well as
for the economic, social and political empowerment of
women.
In conclusion, I would say that punitive measures
do not provide all the answers. We must invest in
consciousness-raising, dialogue and engagement.
Societies in conflict must address the root causes,
resolve their differences and avoid hurting their own
communities and nations or fellow human beings
across borders. Humanity and humanitarianism, not
primordial barbarism, must prevail.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank you, Madam President, for having convened
this debate. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura;
and Ms. Saran Keïta Diakité, representative of civil
society of Mali.
Sexual violence has been a part of all wars in
history but, as the Group of Eight recalled in its
ministerial statement of 11 April, it has long been seen
as an unimportant and secondary issue that does not
merit the international community’s attention. Sexual
violence was never taken into account in the context
of conflict resolution or after conflicts. In adopting
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), the Security
Council resisted that fate. It took up the issue and broke
the silence that hung over that abominable crime.
13-29364

Since then, significant progress has been
made — political progress, first and foremost, thanks
to the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. I
welcome her commitment, which has made it possible
to increase the international visibility of the issue.
There has also been institutional progress, with
the monitoring and reporting mechanism on sexual
violence, upon which the annual reports of the
Secretary-General are based. Those reports provide the
Council with valuable tools for following up on those
crimes. In particular, the “list of shame” of parties
committing systematic and orchestrated acts of sexual
violence gives United Nations missions a solid basis for
engaging a dialogue with those groups.
Finally, with regard to legal progress, the ad
hoc tribunals created by the Council, and then the
International Criminal Court (ICC), have included
acts of sexual violence among the crimes within their
jurisdiction. They have been recognized as war crimes,
crimes against humanity and acts of genocide.
That progress was recently confirmed by the Arms
Trade Treaty, adopted by the General Assembly on
2 April, which contains provisions against genderbased violence. France vigorously supported that part
of the Treaty.
France also welcomes the zero-tolerance policy
for United Nations personnel implemented by the
Secretary-General, a policy that should be tirelessly
pursued. Similarly, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s due diligence policy, his policy of screening
peacekeeping and political mission staff with regard
to respect for human rights, as well as his policy on
restricting contact with persons being sought by the
ICC. The Secretary-General has thereby confirmed his
commitment to the accountability of the Organization.
Despite that progress, we have no other choice
but to deplore the scope and frequency of sexual
violence in conflicts, which is continually being used
as a weapon to terrorize civilian populations. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in spite of the
mobilization of the international community, sexual
violence remains omnipresent. Committed by all
parties, sexual violence is also perpetuated within the
Congolese army, particularly because of shortcomings
in the screening, selection and training processes for
ex-militia integrated into the Congolese forces. The
response to the Minova tragedy should stand as an

17

S/PV.6948

example. The Congolese authorities must do more, and
more quickly, to punish the guilty. They must also take
a determined and convincing stand for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and
security sector reform programmes.
Brave men and women are fighting to end the
violence and help the survivors. In that regard, we must
pay tribute to the tireless work of Dr. Mukwege and his
teams, who have risked their own lives to treat victims
of sexual violence in the Congo. They must be heard,
supported and protected.
Furthermore, we expect that the Intervention
Brigade established under resolution 2098 (2013)
will help strengthen the work of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to protect civilians by helping to
neutralize and disarm the militias that are threatening
populations, and that it will work effectively with the
Congolese authorities to arrest the criminals.
In Syria, the regime and its supporters are
systematically using sexual violence to intimidate
civilians and to get them to flee. Those crimes may be
added to the long list of those committed by the Syrian
armed forces against their own people. France believes
that the referral of the matter to the ICC is amply
justified.
After the defeat of the armed groups in northern
Mali, justice must follow its course for the victims of
sexual violence. The matter has been referred to the
ICC. Legal and psychological assistance will need to be
provided to victims and survivors. With the assistance
of the United Nations, the Malian authorities cannot
choose to overlook the issue.
We are concerned by the teterioration of the security
situation in the Central African Republic, where armed
groups are guilty of kidnapping and sexual exploitation.
Those crimes must stop, and the guilty parties must be
pursued.
To deal with sexual violence, a number of
challenges need to be addressed. Protection, sanctions
and prevention must be our watchwords.
Protection is first. On the ground, women’s
protection advisers are bringing greater awareness of
sexual violence issues to the daily work of the Blue
Helmets. Their role is crucial, and France hopes that
their deployment within peacekeeping missions and
political missions will be expanded. Above all, when

18

they have the mandate to do so, missions should
provide the resources necessary to help the work of
these advisers.
With respect to sanctions, in order for victims to no
longer be stigmatized for the crimes they have suffered,
we must do away with impunity for sexual violence.
National Governments have the primary responsibility
to prosecute and punish perpetrators of such crimes.
When States fail to uphold their responsibilities, the
International Criminal Court should play its role in full.
France welcomes the exemplary cooperation between
the Court and the countries concerned that led to the
transfer to The Hague of Mr. Bosco Ntganda.
To protect, to sanction and, finally, to prevent — for
that, the participation of women in the resolution of
conflicts represents a basic element. It will, for example,
be a significant dimension for reconciliation in Mali,
which France took into account in the draft resolution
currently being discussed.
France, within the framework of its national action
plan for implementing resolution 1325 (2000), on
women, peace and security, is financing anti-violence
programmes in six countries in Africa and the Arab
world being implemented by UN-Women. The staff
we are sending abroad from our country are trained in
issues of sexual violence, and we support the integration
of gender issues in peacekeeping schools in Africa.
The Council can be assured of our commitment
and determination in promoting and defending the
rights of women and girls throughout the world, as well
as in implementing resolutions on women, peace and
security.
Mr. Kandangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French):
Madam President, I want to thank your country, the
Republic of Rwanda, for having organized today’s
debate on the issue of women and peace and security,
as well as to welcome your presence here among us
to lead this work. I would also like to welcome the
Secretary-General, whose presence indicates the
level of concern of the United Nations with regard to
violence against women. We also welcome the presence
of the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Korea. We congratulate Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
dealing with sexual violence committed in times of
armed conflict, for her commitment to consolidating the
progress made in the programme of action established
by her predecessor. We reiterate to her our full support.

13-29364

S/PV.6948

Similarly, I would like to thank Ms. Keïta Diakité, who
gave us a clear briefing on the situation with regard to
women in West Africa, and particularly in Mali.

girls to report the facts to the authorities because of
their fear of reprisals, stigmatization or being punished
or rejected by their spouses or their communities.

Sexual violence today has reached an intolerable
level. In fact, women and girls are victims of all
kinds of violence, particularly rape, sexual slavery,
forced prostitution, pregnancy or forced sterilization,
forced marriage, kidnappings and many other form of
violence. The number of victims of sexual violence has
increased, particularly in Africa with the appearance of
new armed groups, such as the Mouvement du 23 Mars,
the Mai-Mai Morgan, the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda and the rebel Séléka coalition.

It appears to us, then, that one of the reasons has to
do with the fact that the parties to the conflict do not
respect their obligations under the relevant international
legal instruments in the area of humanitarian law and
human rights in times of armed conflict, in particular
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their 1977
Protocol. It has also been seen that States parties to a
number of conventions, such as the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women and its optional protocol and the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its optional protocol, lack
the political will to implement the relevant provisions.
Moreover, a number of Security Council resolutions
and presidential statements are not being applied by
States, especially not by the belligerents. They are
simply ignored by the parties involved despite the fact
that they have full responsibility to implement them.

Sometimes, the Government forces of countries
in conflict have themselves also committed the same
violations. Rape has become a war strategy aimed at
humiliating the enemy and establishing domination.
The figures relating to violence against women and
girls are considerable, particularly in the Central
African Republic, where the rebels of the Séléka
coalition and the Lords Resistance Army operate. In
Mali, for example, we have also seen an increase in the
number of crimes of sexual violence at a time when the
northern region of the country was occupied by rebel
groups. Several dozen cases of sexual violence have
been reported.
We cannot fail to mention the situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where for several years women and children
have been the favourite targets of armed groups. The
atrocities committed are sometimes impossible to
describe — simply horrific. Given those unimaginable
atrocities, we must ask ourselves why this is happening.
Looking for the underlying causes for the violence leads
us to deduce that it is basically linked to economic and
social considerations. Because of economic factors,
armed groups have resorted to organized sexual
violence so as to force the displacement of populations
in order to pillage the natural resources of the regions
where they operate. Likewise, they engage in violence
against entire communities, often on the basis of race,
ethnicity or religion, with the aim of establishing the
domination of their own ethnic group in order to satisfy
their political ambitions.
Another question that we ask ourselves pertains to
the reasons for the persistence of these serious violations
of human rights and the exponential increase in the
number of victims. There are sociological reasons, first
of all, which are linked to the refusal of women and
13-29364

Finally — and this is not an exhaustive list — the
early-warning mechanisms established in peacekeeping
operations show that they are limited in their ability to
effectively protect women and girls in times of armed
conflict. For all of those reasons, it is important that
the measures already undertaken by the United Nations
be strengthened in order to ensure respect for all the
relevant instruments and resolutions through, among
other things, the firm commitment on the part of States
to shoulder their responsibilities and deal with those
involved in serious violations of human rights.
Impunity cannot be the rule. In that regard, the
United Nations must help States to establish appropriate
cooperation mechanisms, particularly through bilateral
or regional extradition agreements to deal with
perpetrators. Effective mechanisms must also be put
into place that take into account the needs of women
who have been victims of sexual violence, who are
often abandoned to their fate.
The international community, above all the United
Nations, must become more involved on a legal level in
the search for solutions to the problems raised by the
commission of these horrific sexual crimes, particularly
rape. That means that they must encourage recourse to
national courts or international courts competent in
that area to apprehend the perpetrators and thus fight
against impunity. Unfortunately, in this area, the justice
system itself has many problems for various reasons,
including the fact that the judicial system is often slow
19

S/PV.6948

and not independent. The international investigation
commissions do not always have sufficient funds to
adequately establish the facts. There is also a lack
of cooperation between States and international
jurisdictions with regard to the implementation of the
international arrest warrants and other decisions.
Despite all of those difficulties and obstacles, we
can say that courageous action has been carried out by
the United Nations, particularly by UN-Women, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and a number
of international and non-governmental organizations.
Togo commends all of those efforts undertaken
to fight against this scourge and welcomes the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2013/149).
Togo also believes that the international community
should become mobilized to an even greater extent to
put an end to the scourge, as it has done in the case of
the fight against major diseases. In that regard, several
measures should be taken.
First, we should seek to promote a change in the
sociocultural behaviour of men towards women. We
should eradicate preconceptions, customs and traditions
and all other practices based on the idea that women are
inferior, which have led to their being used as objects
during periods of armed conflict.
Secondly, we should encourage all members
of society, particularly men and boys, to actively
contribute to the prevention of all forms of violence
during times of peace.
Thirdly, we should promote or regularly conduct, at
all levels, campaigns and programmes to increase the
awareness and understanding among the public at large
of the different forms and consequences of the various
forms of violence against women, especially sexual
violence, which has serious consequences for women,
society and development.
Fourthly, we should promote cooperation between
international jurisdictions and national courts in
order to track down, arrest and bring to justice the
perpetrators of violence in order to put an end to the
culture of impunity.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to once again welcome you,
Madam Minister, as you preside over this meeting,
which we thank you for organizing. We would also like
to express our gratitude to the Special Representative of

20

the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflicts,
Ms. Bangura. As we can see, thanks to her persistence
and commitment to the goal of eradicating sexual
violence, the Special Representative has managed, in
less than a year, to do quite a bit.
The consideration of the issues relating to
women and peace and security should be based on a
comprehensive approach, as set forth in the Council’s
baseline resolution on the matter, namely, resolution
1325 (2000). The varied nature of the violence that
occurs during armed conflict requires that attention be
paid to all its manifestations. Unquestionably, sexual
violence must be roundly condemned and severely
punished. We believe this problem is very real,
particularly in specific conflict situations where such
crimes are becoming increasingly widespread.
However, as we know, not all such situations
pose a threat to international peace and security
requiring intervention on the part of the Security
Council. Because of that, we feel that issues relating
to preventing and combating sexual violence at every
stage of armed conflict or post-conflict situations are
primarily the responsibility of national Governments.
Moreover, questions concerning combating sexual
violence, depending on the context and within the
framework of existing mandates, are handled not only
by the Council but by other United Nations organs,
particularly the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council and the Commission on the Status of Women.
Artificially linking every issue of sexual violence to
the work of the Security Council would lead not only
to an imbalance from the standpoint of system-wide
coordination but would have a negative impact on the
effectiveness of work in that area. We believe that
priority attention should be given to those situations on
the Security Council’s agenda where sexual violence is
one of the primary issues in terms of the protection of
civilians.
Combating sexual violence is also an important
component of the range of measures needed in peace
processes and post-conflict restoration. This type
of crime is not a root cause of armed conflict, but
rather a result of prevailing impunity. We believe that
crimes committed require mandatory punishment,
whether they be acts of sexual violence, terrorism or
indiscriminate or disproportionate force. After all, the
victims of all such acts are totally innocent people.
We have studied with interest the report of the
Secretary-General for this meeting (S/2013/149). The
13-29364

S/PV.6948

first thing that strikes us is the document’s thoroughness
and the scale of the work done by the Special
Representative. However, the contents of the document
raises some questions. As we see it, in order to set up a
genuinely credible discussion of such a sensitive issue,
it is essential to act dispassionately, based on objective
and reliable information. For instance, responsibility
for sexual crimes in Syria is laid at the door only of
the Government forces and their supporters. Analogous
crimes committed by representatives of the opposition
are touched on only in passing, despite the numerous
assertions that have been made about them.
The principle behind the selection of the countries
mentioned in various sections of the report is unclear.
For instance, in the section on current and emerging
concerns regarding sexual violence as it relates to
international peace and security, besides countries that
are on the Council’s agenda, situations in a number of
other States are also highlighted. It is striking that, in
a significant number of the cases cited in the report of
sexual violence in various parts of the world, the issue
at times is not one of trends or systematic practices
of sexual violence but of isolated incidents. Further
investigation of many such incidents reveals that
they are more likely to be criminally punishable acts
committed by criminal groups, rather than war crimes.
The scope of the work done under Security
Council auspices in this area was agreed to based on
an intergovernmental process and enshrined in the
relevant Council resolutions. We therefore feel that it
involves the onsideration of issues relating to sexual
violence in armed conflict. We appeal to the Special
Representative to adhere to the Council’s mandate
in carrying out her work. We do not see a need for
establishing a special procedure or body for monitoring
the compliance of parties to a conflict with obligations
to combat sexual violence. As we see it, the current
mechanisms in this area are sufficient. First among
those is the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, while the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict also plays a significant role. As I stated
previously, we believe issues of sexual violence must be
considered in the Security Council only in the context
of the agenda item on women and peace and security,
and in connection with the subject of the maintenance
of peace and security.
In conclusion, we would again like to emphasize
that the efforts of the international community will be

13-29364

in vain without the consent and active participation
of national Governments, which bear the primary
responsibility for dealing with the whole range of
problems surrounding the protection of peoples in
armed conflict.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for presiding over
this meeting and for enabling us to discuss important
aspects of the issue of preventing conflict twice in
three days. These two debates (see S/PV.6946) are
inextricably connected, given the fact that the problem
of sexual violence is deeply rooted in conflict and not
merely an incidental symptom of it. The short period
during which these discussions have taken place has
served to sow the seeds of the success of your presidency
for the month of April. By the same token, I would
like to acknowledge the efforts of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon in achieving this lofty and noble goal.
I would also like to thank Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well as Ms. Saran
Keïta Diakité of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, for their exhaustive briefings and
complete and concrete efforts in this area.
We have carefully studied the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2013/149) in the context of today’s discussion.
In that connection, we would like to express our
appreciation for the information it contains, as well as
for its conclusions, which should give powerful impetus
to and pave the way for efforts aimed at curbing sexual
violence against women, children and the elderly in
armed conflict. The report describes the achievements
of the States concerned in complying with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, as well as in taking
measures to prevent sexual violence. It also mentions
a number of legal and institutional obstacles that stand
in the way of achieving the ideal of full protection for
women and children in conflict, as well as incorporating
and integrating them into the fabric of society.
The Kingdom of Morocco commends the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
particularly in the area of fostering and preserving the
progress that has been made, as well as for affirming
the shared responsibility of society for combating
sexual violence. By the same token, we commend the
United Nations initiative on combating sexual violence
so as to help those working in peacekeeping operations,
as well as to create partnerships between the United
Nations and interested parties for strengthening

21

S/PV.6948

national competence and skills in order to help curb
sexual violence committed by parties to a conflict and
to protect and support survivors. Implementing such
partnerships, and the provision of adequate resources
for their effective use, will contribute to achieving
these humanitarian goals. By the same token, we
would also like to emphasize the importance of taking
into consideration the various views and standpoints,
and of consulting with the relevant States concerning
the establishment of early detection mechanisms for
preventing sexual violence.
With regard to the implementation of reporting
and oversight mechanisms — and in accordance with
resolution 1960 (2010), as mentioned in the report of
the Secretary-General — we hope that such measures
will serve as the basis for evidence-based actions.
Such measures should be objective and meticulous in
monitoring sexual violence in conflict and should be
carried out in an atmosphere of complete objectivity
and independence. They should also primarily relate
to Security Council resolutions, aim at supporting
international efforts to protect women and girls in
conflict and underscore the importance of preventing
such crimes.
With regard to prevention, the report of the
Secretary-General states that the establishment of
refugee camps near conflict areas and the difficulty
of gaining access to them, in addition to the lack of
registration records for refugees, impede efforts to
safeguard refugees and to alleviate their daily suffering.
The protection of refugees is the responsibility of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and of host countries. The
protection of refugees constitutes a significant part
of UNHCR functions, in addition to identifying and
registering them. The needs of refugees must be met
and services must be provided to them to guarantee
their freedom of movement and expression. They should
not be subjected to humanitarian or political blackmail.
Rape and conflict-related sexual violence have
deep repercussions for victims, survivors and families.
The psychological, social and economic effects increase
the marginalization of those groups from society with
regard to their access to social and medical services. The
signing of peace agreements and ceasefires by parties
to a conflict should lead to developing programmes that
result in an immediate cessation of sexual violence.
Addressing that phenomenon is a main peacebuilding
pillar agreed to by the parties.
22

Committing to combating impunity, implementing
cooperation programmes with the judiciary to try
perpetrators, and providing reparations to victims of
sexual violence constitute the necessary safeguards to
ensure that such crimes will not recur. Commitments in
that regard must be implemented on the ground; that is
a fundamental element in preventing the crimes.
In many countries, developing codes of conduct for
security and police forces is very important to providing
comprehensive protection from sexual violence. In that
connection, I wish to acknowledge the efforts made by
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict while taking into consideration
factors related to national expertise and experience,
with a view to reforming the judiciary and facilitating
access to it for victims.
Achieving the desired objectives in curbing sexual
violence requires the involvement of all parties and
the efforts of public authorities, national human rights
organizations and every component of civil society,
including women’s associations, so as to mobilize the
necessary efforts to put an end to that scourge. To that
end, there must be sufficient technical support and
financing from donors.
Sexual violence against women and children in
conflict is a crime against the dignity, innocence and
humanity of those vulnerable groups. We should not
remain silent or condone such crimes or diminish their
serious consequences.
Furthermore, sexual violence in conflict threatens
social stability and hampers national reconciliation and
the unity of a society in the post-conflict stage. We
have a long way to go, but that should not dissuade the
international community from tackling this scourge on
all levels and with all the means available.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
want to thank you, Madam President, for organizing
this important open debate on the issue of sexual
violence in conflict, an issue to which my delegation
attaches great importance and which, unfortunately,
remains very topical. I thank the Secretary-General
for the presentation of his second annual report on
sexual violence in conflict (S/2013/149). I also thank
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura for her very committed
statement and the remarkable work she has carried out
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
with the support of the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. Finally,

13-29364

S/PV.6948

I would like to thank Ms. Saran Keïta Diakité of
Mali, who delivered a strong message on behalf of
non-governmental organizations on the need to combat
sexual violence, in particular in crisis areas in Africa.
With resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and
1960 (2010), we have given ourselves the means to act
in the fight against the scourge of sexual violence in
conflict. Today’s open debate is an opportunity to take
stock of the implementation of those resolutions and the
challenges that lie ahead.
I fully align myself with the statement soon to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
The evidence is clear: sexual violence in conflict
spares no one. It affects adults and children, men as
well as women, as evidenced by the increasingly
frequent acts of sexual violence against men and boys
as a tactic of war or in the context of incarceration
or interrogation. The violence documented in Syria,
Mali and the Democratic Republic of Congo is the sad
illustration of those facts.
The situations of sexual violence in conflict are
varied and widespread. That is why it is important for
the Security Council to choose, from the arsenal at its
disposal, the tools most suited to the different situations.
The Council’s actions set an example, and its
responsibility in this area is essential. That is clear in
the explicit references to the agenda on women and
peace and security in the agreed conclusions recently
adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women,
whose main theme, as I recall, was the elimination and
prevention of all forms of violence against women.
Less than a week ago, I am pleased to say, the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Group of Eight
in London adopted a declaration on preventing sexual
violence in conflict, which explicitly seeks to carry
forward resolution 1325 (2000) and its successors, and
contributes to the normative framework of resolutions
on children and armed conflict. That declaration rightly
recalls once again that the promotion and protection of
the human rights and fundamental freedoms of women
and children are at the foundation of our fight against
sexual violence in conflict.
The Council must be fully informed before acting,
which is why it is so important to establish follow-up,
analysis and information-exchange mechanisms within
peacekeeping operations and political missions and to
provide for the deployment of sufficient numbers of

13-29364

women protection advisers, who have a crucial role
to play in the coordination of the implementation of
Security Council resolutions on conflict-related sexual
violence. Luxemburg will remain committed to ensuring
that future mandates, as well as the renewal of existing
mandates, take into consideration this important aspect.
As the Secretary-General underscored this morning, it
is important to constantly incorporate that aspect into
mission planning and budgeting.
Once the perpetrators of sexual violence have
been identified, the Council can and must, through the
adoption of targeted measures, step up pressure on those
responsible so that they are brought to justice before
a competent court and judged. The Council should be
able to draw on such an instrument systematically, in
our view, following the practices established by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for the inclusion on Sanctions Committee lists of
those suspected of acts of sexual violence. Information
provided by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral would be highly useful in that regard.
It is under national jurisdictions that perpetrators
should primarily be tried, and we must therefore
support national Governments in their fight against
impunity. Based on the principle of complementarity,
international criminal justice still has an important
role to play, and we very much welcome the efforts
undertaken in that regard by the International Criminal
Court.
In that context, it is noteworthy that a second
arrest warrant has been issued against General Bosco
Ntaganda, incorporating the major accusations of
crimes against humanity, rape and sexual slavery.
Today, Bosco Ntaganda is in The Hague to be judged
for his crimes. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank all Member States that contributed to his transfer
to the Court.
Every victory against impunity is a victory against
sexual violence, for only the certainty that a crime will
not go unpunished is a real deterrent. The fight against
impunity is also the first step in reinstating the rights
of victims. It is not the only step: it is also necessary to
take measures such as granting compensation to repair,
as far as possible, the consequences of the damage
caused.
We know the extent to which crisis resolution and
post-conflict situations are volatile and precarious.

23

S/PV.6948

That is why it is important once again to ensure the
involvement of women in peace processes so that peace
and ceasefire agreements fully and systematically take
into account the issue of sexual violence.
The fight against sexual violence must also be
integrated into all security sector and justice reform
processes worthy of the name. In that regard, Luxemburg
has supported a number of workshops, including in
South Sudan and Liberia, aimed at strengthening
the contribution of United Nations peacekeeping
operations to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). In particular, they sought to ensure that women
were better represented at all decision-making levels
in national, regional and international institutions
and mechanisms for the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts.
Conflict-related sexual violence is not inevitable.
But to bring it to an end, we must take into account
the magnitude of this scourge. The alarming report
before us today makes it cleat that sexual violence in
conflict, although it varies with context, is systematic
and universally widespread. It is up to us all to take on
our responsibility to bring it to an end.
In conclusion, we hope that today’s debate, the
Special Representative’s briefings to the Council on
specific situations, such as that on Syria tomorrow, as
well as the discussions the Council will hold over the
coming months on this topic will enable real results
to be achieved. In terms of follow-up, it would be
particularly worthwhile to establish, as proposed by the
Secretary-General, a system that would better enable us
to monitor the fulfilment of commitments undertaken
to fight sexual violence by the parties to a conflict in
implementation of resolution 1960 (2010).
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): We very much welcome
and, indeed, need this open debate on sexual violence
on conflict.
I express my thanks to the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2013/149) and his personal leadership, and
to Special Representative Bangura for her forthright
commitment and achievements, the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security for its impressive
work and to Ms. Saran Keïta Diakité for her own
exemplary efforts.
In so much of the Council’s work, including in
Mali, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of Congo and Syria, we have heard repeatedly
over the past few weeks about the widespread use of
24

sexual violence in conflict. It is a brutal, unacceptable
but pervasive dimension of conflict today. We
must constantly think about how we can prevent it
from occurring, and, when it does, we must ensure
that survivors are supported and perpetrators held
relentlessly to account.
The Secretary-General’s report is stark. It
highlights too much of concern: sexual slavery, forced
marriage by armed groups, increasing abuse of boys
and men, the plight of children born of rape, the nexus
between sexual violence and the illicit extraction of
natural resources, and, as we have seen in Syria, the
threat and use of sexual violence to forcibly displace
entire communities. That must catalyze even stronger
action by us.
Ending impunity is critical to driving change. As
a deterrent, it is a critical part of a prevention strategy.
We must make the best use of the tools at the Council’s
disposal to target perpetrators of sexual violence in
conflict, whether individuals, armed groups or States,
and whether they commit, command or condone
violations. Under many Sanctions Committees,
persistent perpetrators fit within existing listing
criteria, and we support the more rigorous application
of those. We also support the inclusion of such criteria
where the situation demands it.
At the national and international levels, criminal
justice mechanisms must develop dedicated sexual
violence expertise to ensure that crimes are effectively
prosecuted, survivors get the support they need, and
perpetrators are convicted. In that context, we would
like to single out and welcome the United Kingdom’s
Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict Initiative, its
efforts through the Group of Eight and the exemplary
focus and resourcing that the United Kingdom itself has
brought to the investigation and prosecution of sexual
violence.
We also agree with the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that sexual violence should be
included in the definition of acts prohibited under
ceasefires agreements, and support the introduction of
a systematic procedure to monitor parties’ compliance
with their commitments.
Security sector reform, and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, are
essential to rebuilding communities. Measures against
sexual violence must be integral to them. Too often,
perpetrators of sexual violence are themselves allowed

13-29364

S/PV.6948

to assume positions of power in post-conflict settings.
We must strengthen efforts to ensure appropriate levels
of preventive vetting.
We strongly support the systematic deployment
of gender expertise in all Council-mandated missions,
including women protection advisers, whose
deployment must be prioritised in mission planning
processes. We also support the deployment of the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Supporting women’s leadership and participation
is essential to addressing, responding to, and indeed
ending sexual violence. Women are powerful agents of
change, and we must harness that capacity by promoting
their far greater participation in conflict resolution and
post-conflict transitions.
Ms. Keïta Diakité reminded us this morning of
the nexus between arms and conflict-related sexual
violence. In that connection we welcome the adoption
of the Arms Trade Treaty, including the requirement
that States parties consider, in making their export
assessments, the risks of arms being used to commit
or facilitate serious acts of gender-based violence. We
must now focus on the Treaty’s entry into force and its
effective implementation.
It is essential that survivors’ needs be addressed,
including through access to multisectoral services.
Often, the vast majority of survivors are children, and
services must be very specifically tailored to their
needs. We must take specific steps to also address
the risks faced by women’s human rights defenders
operating on the front lines, so as to ensure that they
are able to carry out their work and do not themselves
become victims of sexual violence.
Action to address sexual violence in conflict
cannot occur without adequate and predictable
resourcing. Priority should be given to ensuring that
key actors, including national institutions, United
Nations agencies and civil society groups, have the
resources and capacity needed to tackle such issues,
ranging from prevention and service provision for
survivors to longer-term measures to end impunity. My
own Government announced last year an additional
$320 million for activities in our own immediate region
to focus on those kinds of needs.
In conclusion, sexual violence touches upon the full
breadth of the Council’s work. While success is very
obviously difficult to achieve, it requires of us vigilant
13-29364

and consistent commitment if we are ever to end this
devastating, immoral and criminal practice.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for holding this debate today
and for coming to New York to give added impetus to
this important issue. The huge number of those wanting
to speak in this debate is a visible demonstration of its
importance and topicality. I join others in thanking
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
Zainab Hawa Bangura for their valuable briefings today.
I also thank Ms. Keïta Diakité for her moving words on
behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security.
The United Kingdom is deeply committed to
addressing sexual violence in conflict, which is one of
the most persistent and neglected injustices in the world
today. Last week, the Group of Eight (G-8) Foreign
Ministers, under the presidency of the United Kingdom,
agreed a historic declaration on preventing sexual
violence in conflict. They pledged to work together and
with others in a concerted and comprehensive campaign
to address that crime. The G-8 declared for the first
time that rape and serious sexual violence in conflict
were grave breaches of the Geneva Convention, as
well as being war crimes. That decision recognizes our
responsibility to actively search for, prosecute or hand
over for trial anyone accused of those crimes, regardless
of nationality, wherever they are in the world.
Today’s debate is an opportunity to reinforce that
message and to send a strong, shared message that there
is no safe haven for perpetrators of rape and sexual
violence. The statements we have heard thus far in this
debate are very encouraging on that point.
The United Kingdom welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s timely report (S/2013/149). A key objective
of the United Kingdom’s Preventing Sexual Violence
Initiative is to strengthen United Nations and other
international efforts to eradicate that scourge.
We wholeheartedly support the work and mandate
of Ms. Bangura, especially her efforts to build coherence
and coordination in the United Nations response and
her focus on national ownership and responsibility.
The report provides an important opportunity to assess
progress and to consider what more needs to be done.
It is clear that there is a huge amount still to be done.
I would like to highlight the following three critical
areas that we must address.

25

S/PV.6948

First, the United Kingdom would like to commend
the Secretary-General for recommending that all
country resolutions and mandate renewals for United
Nations peacekeeping and special political missions
systematically address sexual violence and include the
specific language of resolution 1960 (2010). We agree
that peacekeeping mandates should include language
on the cessation of sexual violence, on dialogue with
parties to conflict to seek protection commitments
and on the deployment of women protection advisors,
and that we should ensure, in particular, that they are
funded from peacekeeping mission budgets. We must
be rigorous and consistent in our approach on this issue.
Secondly, we recognize that a focus on the difficult
issues surrounding security sector and justice reform is
critical: providing training for national security forces;
ensuring the principles of no amnesty for perpetrators
of grave human rights violations, including sexual
violence; and ensuring that the security sector is
accessible and responsive to all. In the justice sector,
work to train the police, magistrates and judges and
more training for female lawyers will result in more
effective investigations and prosecutions. That is also
very welcome.
Thirdly, we welcome calls to ensure that the Security
Council, mediators, envoys and Member States actively
engage in dialogue with parties to conflict on conflictrelated sexual violence. That is central to ensuring that
the issue of sexual violence as a method or tactic of
conflict is explicitly recognized in subsequent peace
processes and ceasefire agreements. As my Foreign
Secretary said on 11 April, we need such commitments
to end the treatment of rape and sexual violence as a
secondary issue and to put women and women’s rights
front and centre in conflict resolution.
Finally, as the representatives of China and
Luxembourg, among others, have highlighted, let us
not forget that women’s full and equal participation
is fundamental to combating sexual violence. Women
must not be seen merely as passive victims, but as active
participants who are central to all efforts to combat that
horrific phenomenon.
Let me end as I began, by thanking you, Madam,
for holding this debate and reinforcing the Council’s
continued commitment to tackling this issue. As you
know, my Foreign Secretary is personally committed
to this issue. Together, we absolutely must deliver on
our promises to those devastated by those appalling

26

and life-shattering crimes, wherever they take place.
A strong resolution that demonstrates this shared
commitment is both timely and critical, and we intend
to use a further debate in June, during our presidency
of the Council, to keep attention focused on the need to
end these crimes.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
open debate on women and peace and security. I also
thank the Secretary-General, his Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the representative
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security for their statements and presentations. We
take note of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/149) on sexual violence in conflict and of the
recommendations contained therein.
Azerbaijan welcomes the increasing attention being
paid by the Security Council and the wider international
community to this topic, which has contributed to
developing a solid normative framework and to raising
awareness on the impact that sexual violence has on
victims, families and societies. The appointment of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the establishment
of a system-wide entity on women’s equality and
empowerment — UN-Women — has added a new
dimension to the global efforts.
It is imperative that all parties to armed conflict
strictly abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law. Azerbaijan
reiterates its strong condemnation of all acts of sexual
violence in conflict. There can be no tolerance for such
acts, and all the necessary measures must be taken to
bring perpetrators to justice and put an end to impunity.
As the Secretary-General noted in his report,
national courts remain the principal venue for holding
individuals accountable for crimes of sexual violence.
At the same time, the lack of adequate national capacity
and expertise to investigate and prosecute acts of
sexual violence remains one of the main impediments
to ensuring accountability.
We note, in that regard, the efforts of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, which was established pursuant to resolution
1888 (2009), aimed at strengthening the capacity of
national rule-of-law and justice actors.

13-29364

S/PV.6948

The Secretary-General also noted in his report that
“The focus of international criminal justice and
mixed tribunals on combating acts of sexual
violence, including rape, in the context of crimes
against humanity, war crimes and genocide,
represents an important complement to national
efforts.” (S/2013/149, para. 112)
Indeed, where national authorities fail to take action, the
international community should play a more proactive
role in ensuring an appropriate response.
Unfortunately, not all grave violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law,
including acts of sexual violence, have received due
attention and response at the international and regional
levels. Measures that are more resolute and targeted
are required to end impunity in such situations.
Commitments to protection efforts must be free of
selectivity and politically motivated approaches and
preferences. In that regard, Azerbaijan notes the role
played by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict pursuant to her
mandate.
The establishment of truth with respect to gross
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, including sexual violence in conflict, and
the provision of adequate and effective reparations
are measures that aim, inter alia, to repair or redress
the immediate and long-term harm experienced by
victims of such violations. It is therefore important to
ensure that reparations are established through judicial
or administrative mechanisms and made available to
victims.
Furthermore, past wrongs left unpunished or
unrecognized often impede progress in achieving
long-awaited peace and reconciliation and can even
play a key role in the eruption of new conflicts and the
commission of new crimes.
It is therefore important that the Security Council,
Member States and regional organizations ensure
that mediators and envoys in mediation, peace and
preventive diplomacy processes can contribute to
ensuring accountability, including by encouraging the
parties concerned to envisage transitional justice and
reparation clauses in peace agreements.
We also support the call of the Secretary-General
for the use of the United Nations Guidance for Mediators

13-29364

on Addressing Conflict-Related Sexual Violence in
Ceasefire and Peace Agreements.
It is also essential to employ all other available
means to address sexual violence in conflict,
including mandating international commissions of
inquiry and fact-finding missions and supporting the
implementation of their recommendations. We concur
with the Secretary-General that those responsible for
sexual violence and other human rights violations must
be excluded from all branches of Government and that
the principle of no amnesty for perpetrators of such
offenses must be applied and implemented.
It is important that the Security Council consistently
maintain its focus on protection efforts, including
sexual violence in conflict. Azerbaijan will support
more systematic and frequent discussion on the topic.
In conclusion I would like once again to commend
Rwanda for convening this open debate.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Rwanda.
It is a great honour for me to be here today and
to preside over this important open debate on women
and peace and security, and sexual violence in conflict.
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict for joining us today.
I also welcome the presence of the Vice-Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, the First
Lady and Ministerial Secretary for Social Inclusion
of El Salvador, as well as Ms. Saran Keïta Diakité,
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security.
Rwanda commends the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
for bringing renewed focus to the fight for the protection
of women.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s recent report
on sexual violence (S/2013/149), as well as the efforts
undertaken by the Special Representative, notably
during her visits to the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia, to
engage leaders and other stakeholders on that most
important subject.

27

S/PV.6948

We hope that the Secretary-General’s report will
enhance the coordination and effectiveness of the global
response to the problem of sexual violence. Besides
addressing specific challenges facing women and girls
in conflict zones, such an approach must incorporate
broader peace and security imperatives. Critically, we
envisage that it will lead to more effective monitoring
of the commitments made by Member States to prevent
sexual violence, where possible, and to address its
consequences, where necessary.
In conflict settings and, more specifically, those
driven by genocide ideology, as my country experienced
in 1994, rape and sexual assault are used to punish,
humiliate and dehumanize victims, their families and
communities. Far from being random acts of brutality,
the systematic sexual victimization of women and girls
in conflict settings is now well understood as a crime
against humanity that demands the urgent attention of
the world.
Let me touch on the experience of my country with
the intent to offer hope to women victimized by conflict.
My country’s strong stand on violence against women
emanates from the high value it places on women and
girls, as well as our national resolution to never again
see the cruelty directed to Rwandan women during
the 1994 genocide. On a national level and beyond our
borders, we take this issue extremely seriously.
Just 19 years ago, Rwandan women were forced to
endure inhuman and degrading atrocities. Many were
raped and left for dead. Among those who survived,
many were infected with incurable diseases; some
were made pregnant; many suffered the humiliation of
having been abused in front of their families. And yet,
the women of Rwanda refused to be defined or defeated
by their ordeals. They raised their heads, declining to
become permanent victims or objects of pity. They
sought justice. They demanded dignity. Inasmuch as
Rwanda has been able to reconcile and recover from the
events of 1994, it is because of that unshakeable spirit
of defiance, found foremost among its women and girls.
The use of sexual violence in that fashion was
exported from Rwanda to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo when genocidal forces escaped into the
eastern part of that country, after July 1994. Tragically,
that behaviour has been adopted by a plethora of armed
groups that operate in the region. As a result, the
incidence of such crimes has grown rapidly in recent
years. But we must not accept such atrocities as a fact

28

of life. The international community must redouble
its efforts to combat the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda, along with those who fund and
support them, wherever they are.
It is a broken society that fails to protect its
most vulnerable citizens from sexual violence. The
proliferation of such violence is a sure sign of State
failure. As such, any society hoping to move beyond
crisis and conflict cannot hope to do so until it has
corrected its course with respect to the treatment
and prevention of sexual violence. Indeed, Rwanda’s
experience leads us to believe that healing and
reconciliation are possible only when women claim
their rightful place at the heart of our communities.
The Government of Rwanda therefore welcomes this
opportunity to express our unequivocal condemnation
of all forms of violence against women and girls,
particularly in conflict situations.
Impunity breeds and rewards criminality and
violence. Only by insisting on justice and by fighting
impunity has Rwanda been able to achieve meaningful
reconciliation within our borders. The eradication
of sexual violence in conflict will not be possible as
long as perpetrators are able to escape accountability
for their actions. We have come to understand firsthand the importance of strengthening internal justice
mechanisms and of building institutions that enhance
the accessibility of justice. Rwanda therefore calls
upon all Member States to enforce accountability,
as well as to desist from harbouring the perpetrators
of humanitarian and human rights violations, which
shields them from the consequences of their crimes.
Rwanda has adopted a range of policies to prevent
and respond to violence against women and girls,
and I will touch on only some of those in a moment.
First, however, it is important to stress that, as we
recoiled from the horrors visited upon our women,
the Government and people of Rwanda have worked
assiduously to instil a culture of respect within the
military and the police force, among boys and girls in
the classroom and within families and communities.
That has prompted a profound shift in attitude among
Rwandans of all ages and walks of life.
Specific policy responses to the problem of sexual
violence include the establishment of one-stop centres,
which offer a wide range of services for the victims of
gender-based violence. Those centres bring together the
relevant Government agencies, as well as community

13-29364

S/PV.6948

leaders and civil society, to provide integrated support
for victims. That approach of offering comprehensive
medical, psychosocial, evidence-gathering and judicial
services in one place has been met with such success in
the past three years since it began that my Government
has committed to a significant expansion of the
programme over the next seven years.
In response to the Secretary-General’s UNiTE
to End Violence against Women and Girls campaign,
initiated in 2010, Rwanda hosted an international
conference on the role of security organs in ending
violence against women and girls. The conference
endorsed a declaration and subsequently formed a
secretariat to monitor its implementation. With a
current membership of 16 countries and a permanent
secretariat, based in Kigali, members have developed
a standardized training manual to implement an allAfrica command post exercise, code-named Africa
UNiTE.
In addition, Rwanda is the leading contributor
from Africa of female police and correctional officers
to United Nations peace support and peacekeeping
missions. Among other duties, those officers actively
contribute to combating and raising awareness about
violence against women. They also serve as advisers
on gender-based violence and share best practices with
officers and local authorities. All our peacekeepers
undergo specific training on respect for gender and
human rights prior to deployment.

through chains of command, via codes of conduct and
military field manuals and in constant training. We
further call upon those parties to ensure that alleged
abuses are investigated swiftly and perpetrators held
accountable.
Rwanda reminds civilian and military leaders
with command responsibilities that they, too, are
accountable for acts of sexual violence committed on
their watch. Rwanda will, on a case-by-case basis,
support the adoption or extension of targeted sanctions
against persistent perpetrators of rape and other forms
of sexual violence.
Rwanda supports calls to include provisions in all
peacekeeping mandates that specifically address the
prevention of and response to sexual violence. That
should include, where appropriate, the identification of
women’s protection advisers, as the Secretary-General
urged earlier in his statement, alongside gender advisers
and human rights protection units.

Time does not permit me to outline all the initiatives
undertaken by my Government, but I note that Rwanda
adopted a national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000)
in 2010 and is a party to the Kampala Declaration of the
First Ladies on Sexual and Gender-Based Violence of
the 2011 International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region.

Rwanda recommends that the problem of sexual
violence be addressed directly as part of any postconflict or peacebuilding process. That should
include United Nations-sponsored peace negotiations
and security sector reform processes or be part of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
Whether through legislative reforms, awareness-raising
campaigns and the training of police, prosecutors,
judges and magistrates or the recruitment of more
women to such positions, we must insist that national
authorities take proactive steps to protect women and
girls. Due consideration should also be given to the
prosecution of sexual violence through transitional
justice arrangements. In Rwanda, the destigmatization
of sexual violence, which empowered victims and gave
them a voice, was a central element of the post-genocide
justice.

As expressed during the discussion on the
prevention of conflict in Africa earlier this week (see
S/PV.6946), Rwanda takes the firm view that lasting
peace and security, and therefore the safety of women
and girls, are possible only when nations, supported
by regional and international bodies, address the root
causes of conflict. The degradation of women and girls
as part of conflict is unacceptable in any form under
any circumstances. Its eradication must be a first-order
priority of the Council.

I cannot end without calling upon the international
community, non-governmental organizations, civil
society, faith-based organizations and other non-State
actors operating in affected areas to support the
genuine reporting and investigation of sexual crimes.
That is important to ensure that justice is served and
that survivors are able to begin the process of healing.
Above all, we call upon all parties to conflict that are
responsible for acts of sexual violence to cease such
violations.

Rwanda urges all parties to armed conflict to
enforce a clear prohibition on sexual violence, expressed

It is time, in our view, for the world to move beyond
expressions of outrage and, instead, to make concrete

13-29364

29

S/PV.6948

and measurable progress towards a world where the
bodies of women are no longer considered a battlefield.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber. I
wish to inform all concerned that we will continue the
debate through the lunch hour, as we have a very large
number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representataive of
Norway.
Mr. Eide (Norway): I have the honour to address
the Council on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely,
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and Norway.
Security threats against women are often dismissed
as belonging to the private sphere or are written off
as cultural issues. But let us be clear, conflict-related
sexual violence can constitute a war crime, a crime
against humanity, and, in the most extreme cases, an
act of genocide. We must respond with the same sense
of urgency as we do to other threats against peace
and security. We must recognize the need for the
participation of both women and men in preventing and
solving conflict and, not least, in building sustainable
peace.
The report before us (S/2013/149) is a catalogue
of violence, rape, atrocities and torture. The Nordic
countries welcome the comprehensive approach it
takes, covering both protracted crises and emerging
concerns. Its attention to sexual violence against men
and boys, the practice of forced marriage and the plight
of children born as a result of wartime rape is valid
and timely. The Nordic countries commend the work
of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, and particularly
welcome her efforts to foster national leadership, build
capacity and hold Governments accountable. During
conflict it is national Governments that have the main
responsibility to protect civilians, whether from more
conventional methods of warfare or from conflictrelated sexual violence. All too often they fail to do so.
One glaring example is Syria, where the
Government continues to demonstrate its utter failure to

30

protect its own citizens. The use of sexual violence and
rape by warring parties in Syria has been reported by
the independent international commission of inquiry,
as well as by numerous human rights organizations. As
thousands of civilians flee from war-torn Syria every
day, the world is watching in horror as history repeats
itself.
As long as the permanent members of the Security
Council remain divided, gross human rights violations
are allowed to continue with impunity. In his report,
the Secretary-General makes a number of important
recommendations to the Security Council on combating
impunity. In that connection, the Nordic countries urge
Council members, first, to include the women and
peace and security agenda in all the relevant Council
resolutions and mandates and to put the issue on the
agenda of visits to missions.
Secondly, we must ensure that the resolutions on
women and peace and security are not only part of
Security Council’s debates but also have real impact on
the ground and that commitments are followed up.
Thirdly, we call on the Security Council to continue
to combat impunity for crimes of sexual violence and
to use its unique power to increase the pressure through
targeted sanctions against perpetrators of sexual
violence.
The Nordic countries warmly welcome the
Secretary-General’s call for emergency contraception
and safe abortion to be included in the responses and
services to survivors. The agreed conclusions of the
Commission on the Status of Women also call for the
provision of such life-saving services. Girls and women
who have been raped during war should not be forced
to continue unwanted pregnancies. For some victims
of rape, undergoing a dangerous abortion is the only
alternative to a life of shame, isolation and hardship, or
even honour killings.
The rehabilitation of victims will not be possible
unless they have access to comprehensive services.
That includes access to health, justice and reparations.
As long as survivors have little or nothing to gain from
reporting sexual violence and coming forward, underreporting will continue and impunity will prevail.
Sexual violence, including threats of sexual violence,
can have far-reaching effects, not only for those affected
and their families but also for the wider communities
and future prospects for peace and reconciliation.

13-29364

S/PV.6948

Sustainable peace cannot be achieved without
inclusive processes in which women’s agency and
contributions are fully recognized. We strongly
commend the tireless work of civil society organizations
in continuing to advance women’s participation and
bringing their voices from the ground to the fore
of international peace and security. Promoting and
supporting the broad women and peace and security
agenda is a priority for the Nordic Governments. It is
part of our joint efforts to foster gender equality and
international peace and security. We are convinced that
the two are closely linked.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Ms. Vanda Pignato (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): I should like to thank you, Sir, for giving
me this opportunity to tell the Council, very briefly,
about the situation in El Salvador with regard to sexual
violence and gender-based violence in general, 21 years
after the signing of the peace agreements that brought
our past armed conflict to an end.
As is well known and has been repeated here on
many occasions, post-conflict societies also face
significant challenges in combating and eliminating
sexual violence. That is an extensive phenomenon;
it is deeply rooted in our societies and predates the
conditions that have led to armed conflict.
After the end of the civil war, El Salvador lived
through two decades in which gender policies and
attention to human rights violations were not high on the
Government’s agenda. To be honest, little, if anything,
was done to ensure access to justice by victims and to
fight impunity, and even less to establish measures that
would lead to reparations for victims.
We all know very well that, after the chaos of armed
conflict, the fundamental institutions of a country are
left in a general state of weakness and dependency, with
limited and low levels of economic and human resources.
Such countries usually take a long time to achieve the
strengthening of their institutions to a degree that would
allow them to be functional at an acceptable level. That
is the situation in which El Salvador finds itself only
four years after political change came about. At that
time, a new democratic force came to power that was
committed to defending human rights and promoting
policies of social inclusion. Among those policies are
gender equality and fighting sexual violence.

13-29364

In fact, the Government of President Mauricio
Funes Cartagena is fighting against those conservative
sectors that in the past were responsible for establishing
virtually feudal systems of power between the politically
and economically wealthy, on the one hand, and the
majority of the impoverished population, deprived of
their rights and guarantees, on the other.
In recent years, with the invaluable help of the
international community and multilateral organizations,
El Salvador has witnessed visible changes. For the first
time in our history, a policy defending and guaranteeing
human rights and social rights was established and we
began to wage a battle to eradicate violence in all its
forms. In the area of public safety, El Salvador is now
experiencing an unprecedented era in which crime has
drastically dropped, especially the number of murders.
In just one year, statistical data shows, violent deaths
have dropped by 52 per cent — whereas we used to
have a rate of 70 deaths per 100,000, it is now 30 per
100,000. Cases of femicide have also dropped, with a
clear downward trend, and last year the rate of femicide
was down by 50 per cent.
Parallel to those efforts, the Salvadoran
Government has strongly promoted a campaign against
gender-based violence and sexual violence in general
on different fronts. We have strengthened legislation
with the approval of the comprehensive special act on
violence-free lives for women. The entry into force
of that new piece of legislation has been fundamental
in enabling the State to exercise its responsibilities in
defending, protecting and guaranteeing the rights of
women.
In 2011, the programme entitled Ciudad Mujer
was launched, an unprecedented experiment in Latin
America of gender-equality policies. It makes invisible
people visible in public policy. It provides comprehensive
care to women, particularly from poorer backgrounds.
It gives them support in gender violence — particularly
sexual violence — training, entrepreneurship education
and training to enter the work force, as well as in sexual
and reproductive health.
Ciudad Mujer started in March 2011 with the
opening of its first centre. There are now another three
centres. More than 140,000 women have participated
in the programme, with more than 260,000 services
having been provided to date. That policy has been
recognized by eminent persons throughout the world as
being an outstanding gender equality policy.

31

S/PV.6948

Finally, the President, through the secretariat
for social inclusion and the Salvadoran Institute for
Women’s Development, is currently promoting a
large-scale awareness-raising campaign to combat
violence against women, which is having a huge social
impact. For the first time in El Salvador, we now have
a clear policy to combat sexual- and gender-based
violence, with particular concern for the principles
enshrined by the United Nations on this matter. We
now need the ongoing support of the international
community.
We particularly need the assistance of the United
Nations, given the paramount role it played as
mediator in our 1992 peace agreements, so that the
accomplishments of the past few years do not lose
momentum and so that there is no possibility of a return
to the past in those areas.
The Government of El Salvador is thus strongly
committed to combating impunity and to providing
access to redress for victims, as can be seen on a daily
basis in the Ciudad Mujer programme. For that reason,
it is important that the international community follow
that process in El Salvador and that political support
and cooperation be provided, so that, in the short term,
the positive results of the current compensation policies
can be seen on a large scale.
The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head of Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: On behalf of the European Union
and its member States, the acceding country Croatia;
the candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as the Republic of
Moldova, Georgia and Ukraine, align themselves with
this statement.
I thank the delegation of Rwanda for organizing
and hosting this important debate today, as well as
the Secretary-General, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
Zainab Hawa Bangura, and the representative of the
NGO Working Group for their statements.
The latest report of the Secretary-General to the
Council (S/2013/149) reaffirms the pervasiveness of
sexual violence and its interconnection with various

32

aspects of the maintenance of peace and security. We
note, in that regard, the attention drawn to the nexus
between sexual violence and the illicit extraction of
natural resources, the forcible displacement of civilian
populations and the inadequacy of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform efforts.
The recently adopted United Nations Arms Trade
Treaty states that the risk of conventional arms being
used to commit or facilitate serious acts of genderbased violence needs to be taken into account by its
State parties. That reaffirms that sexual violence needs,
from the start, to be considered as part of all actions
to ensure international peace and security in order for
them to be effective.
Sexual violence has, in addition to its devastating
impact on survivors, a broad and long-lasting effect on
communities and on States as a whole for generations,
not least through the plight of the children born as a result
of rape. Sexual violence continues to be perpetrated as
a tactic of war, including against men and boys and in
the context of detention and interrogation, on which
further information is needed.
Sexual violence in conflict remains prevalent, yet
universally under-reported. That is, inter alia, the result
of threats faced by those who come forward to report
such crimes. We underline the need to take all measures
necessary to protect survivors, witnesses, humanitarian
workers, medical personnel, human rights defenders
and journalists who contribute to aiding survivors and
collect information on sexual violence. The European
Union’s guidelines on human rights defenders devote
particular attention to vulnerable human rights
defenders, including women human rights defenders
and those working on conflict issues.
We welcome the call of the United Nations
Commission on the Status of Women, in its most
recent conclusions from its March session, to ensure
that, in armed conflict and post-conflict situations,
the prevention of and response to all forms of violence
against women and girls, including sexual and genderbased violence, are effectively addressed, including
through the investigation, prosecution and punishment
of perpetrators, so as to end impunity, lift barriers to
women’s access to justice, establish complaint and
reporting mechanisms and provide support to victims
and survivors and affordable and accessible healthcare services, including sexual and reproductive

13-29364

S/PV.6948

health as well as reintegration measures. We support
the availability of reparations as a form of transitional
gender justice. We underline the need for national
ownership, leadership and responsibility in addressing
sexual violence.
The prosecution of crimes of sexual violence is
an important deterrent to future crimes. Ensuring
accountability and punishing the perpetrators of the
most serious crimes against women and girls under
national and international law, as well as holding
alleged perpetrators of those crimes accountable under
national or international justice, remain essential. We
note the significant advancement in international law
made by the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), which includes sexual violence in the
definition of crimes within its mandate, in particular
as a crime against humanity. The ICC continues to be
an important mechanism in combating sexual violence
in conflict.
We support the continued application of targeted
and graduated measures by the relevant Security
Council Sanctions Committees aimed at perpetrators of
sexual violence in conflict, as well as other measures
at the Council’s disposal, including referrals to the
ICC, mandating commissions of inquiry and further
steps towards ensuring systematic monitoring of
commitments by parties to conflict under its resolution
1960 (2010).
We welcome the report (S/2012/732) of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Council’s resolutions on women and peace and security
and the recommendations contained therein. We note
positively the further establishment of the monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict-related
sexual violence. We also welcome the continued and
systematic deployment of women’s protection advisers.
The European Union supports the swift deployment of
human rights observers in Mali by the African Union
and the United Nations and provides financial support
for the deployment of independent human rights
observers. The European Union training mission in
Mali will include training on gender and human rights.
We strongly condemn the systematic and
widespread use of sexual violence, referred to in
the report, which is used to punish, intimidate and
subjugate women and girls in Mali, as well as the use
of rape as a tactic of war in rebel-controlled zones. The
report also refers to two distinct trends regarding sexual

13-29364

violence identified by the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic in
its reports: the occurrence of sexual violence during
house searches and at checkpoints and the perpetration
of rape and torture in the context of detention. We also
note the two major patterns of sexual violence detected
by the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic
of Congo — systematic targeting by armed groups of
civilians so as to control areas rich in natural resources,
and retaliation against communities, often on the basis
of the real or perceived ethnicity of the survivors, for
supposed political and economic gain.
The European Union continues to implement its
dedicated policy on women, peace and security adopted
in 2008. The European Union support to various
initiatives related to women, peace and security amounts
to approximately €200 million a year. The European
Union is envisaging increased funding for prevention
and response efforts, such as programming to combat
gender-based violence, including sexual violence,
from the first phase of conflict and in humanitarian
emergencies.
The European Union now has gender advisors
and/or human rights focal points in each of its crisis
management missions and operations throughout the
world. We continue our work on specific training
modules on human rights and gender in crisis
management, while ensuring a focus on sexual violence
in armed conflicts. We continue to work closely with
UN-Women and support initiatives to ensure greater
participation by women in peacebuilding and postconflict planning.
The European Union and its member States highly
appreciate the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, including
its coordination with other international entities such
as Justice Rapid Response and the Preventing Sexual
Violence Initiative, as well as the recent commitments
of the Group of Eight to do more to address impunity for
sexual violence in conflict, including the endorsement
of the development of an international protocol on the
investigation and documentation of sexual violence in
conflict. We continue to support its efforts, as well as
those of the United Nations system, Member States
and all actors involved in preventing and responding to
conflict-related sexual violence.

33

S/PV.6948

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Marn (Slovenia): It is my great honour to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Human Security Network, a cross-regional network that
consists of Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland,
Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama, Switzerland, Thailand,
the Republic of South Africa as an observer, and my
own country, Slovenia. Let me thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, his Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, and
Ms. Saran Keïta Diakité of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security for their comprehensive
statements. On behalf of the members of the Network,
I should also like to express our great appreciation
to the presidency of Rwanda for convening this very
important open debate. The Human Security Network
has traditionally been engaged in these debates, since
women’s full enjoyment of all human rights has been at
the core of our group’s agenda from its inception.
I should like to commend the regular interaction
among the Security Council, UN-Women and the Office
of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict. We deem that interaction to be of paramount
importance. We also strongly encourage more direct
information sharing between the Special Representative
and the relevant Sanctions Committees and associated
expert groups, similar to the practice that has been
developed on children and armed conflict.
Our group remains greatly concerned about certain
facts provided in the Secretary-General’s report on
sexual violence in conflict (S/2013/149) that indicate
systematic and widespread sexual violence used to
punish, intimidate and subjugate women, men and
children. In addition, the report highlights the increased
use of sexual violence as a means of displacing
populations, which represents a worrying trend.
The report also refers to two highly problematic
trends that were noticed by the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
namely, the occurrence of sexual violence during house
searches and at checkpoints and the perpetration of
rape and torture in the context of detention. We call
on all parties to cease such violations and any other
sexual-violence-related violations and, in accordance
with resolution 1960 (2010), to make specific and
time-bound protection commitments in that regard.
We also call upon the members of the Security Council

34

to consider using all the other means at its disposal to
address sexual violence in conflict, including making
referrals to the International Criminal Court and other
relevant actions.
All the necessary steps, including targeted
measures, must be taken to protect individuals, hold
perpetrators accountable and provide remedy for
victims. It is essential that amnesty provisions not be
applicable to crimes of sexual violence in the context
of conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction.
Ending impunity for perpetrators and those responsible
in chains of command is also imperative, including
personnel within the United Nations. At the same
time, the Network believes that we have to place
equal importance on addressing the root causes and
the enablers of sexual violence in conflict, as well as
on strengthening grass-roots women’s organizations
and additional networks that can provide assistance to
victims of sexual violence in conflict. Only when those
victims are treated with dignity and respect and given
the necessary tools, treatment and care to enable them
to protect themselves can they become real agents of
change.
In that regard, the Network believes that applying
a more people- or victim-centred lens to the issue
would help. Moreover, we support the availability of
reparations as a form of transitional gender justice.
Reparations can deliver redress and acknowledgement
of crimes suffered, and can contribute to the fight
against impunity and to post-conflict reconstruction
and the reintegration of survivors of sexual violence.
The Human Security Network notes the report’s
recommendation regarding the adoption of sanctions
and other targeted measures against individuals
and entities by the relevant Sanctions Committees.
In that regard, the exchange of information among
United Nations peacekeeping missions, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Security Council’s Sanctions Committees will
be of great importance.
Let me briefly touch upon the already mentioned
United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse for United Nations personnel.
The Network takes note of the failure to include such
a policy in the relevant resolutions, and therefore

13-29364

S/PV.6948

calls upon all the relevant actors to make more use of
references to the zero-tolerance policy.
Noting the Council’s creation of several tools with
considerable potential for having an impact on the
women and peace and security agenda on the ground,
we remain concerned over its lack of implementation in
some of the already mentioned areas.
In conclusion, even though it is not at the forefront
of our discussion today, I should like to reiterate our
group’s commitment to promoting and enhancing the
role of women in peace processes. While it is crucial to
today’s agenda that we maintain momentum in the fight
against sexual violence, we would again like to underline
the importance of women’s empowerment as part of
the solution. We need to see, and enable, women more
and more as agents of change. Women’s participation
at decision-making levels in conflict resolution and
peace processes cannot be overemphasized. Women’s
participation in establishing effective prevention and
protection strategies can contribute to combating
sexual violence in conflict and promoting gender
equality. We also remain strong supporters of women
protection advisers, who can positively contribute
to facilitating and coordinating the implementation
of Security Council resolutions on sexual violence
in conflict within United Nations peacekeeping and
political missions.
We also avail ourselves of this opportunity to
highlight the importance of the recent adoption of
the agreed conclusions on the prevention of sexual
violence at the fifty-seventh session of the Commission
on the Status of Women, which, among other goals,
seek to ensure that in armed conflict and post-conflict
situations the prevention of and response to all forms
of violence against women and girls, including sexual
and gender-based violence, are effectively addressed.
We must all strive towards enabling more protection for
women and girls in conflict situations and encourage
the empowerment of women and their systematic
inclusion and meaningful participation at all levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Holy See.
Archbishop Chullikatt (Holy See): My delegation
wishes to congratulate the President on Rwanda’s
presidency of the Security Council this month and on
convening the present open debate on sexual violence
in conflict. We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on sexual violence in conflict

13-29364

(S/2013/149). I also take this opportunity to thank
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for her very useful briefing.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
international community has followed closely the role
of women in the context of war or post-war situations,
not only as victims but, more important, as agents and
important contributors to the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and in peacebuilding, while stressing the
need to increase their role in decision-making with
regard to conflict prevention and resolution.
My delegation commends those efforts and is
convinced that there is ample room for the greater
involvement of women, especially in the prevention
of war, in the reconciliation, rehabilitation and
reconstruction of societies in post-war situations, and
in avoiding relapses into armed conflict. Women can
and should play greater roles as allies of peace.
In that context, the continued episodes of sexual
violence, as the report describes, including, inter
alia, rape, forced sterilization, abduction for sexual
purposes and sexual slavery, to name just a few of the
egregious acts of violence against women, are even
more frustrating and saddening. As is recognized,
women and girls are those predominantly affected
by sexual violence, although men and boys are also
victims of such heinous acts. The underlying reasons
are varied; in some cases, it is done as a strategy to
displace populations in order to gain access to natural
resources or to facilitate drug trafficking, while in
other cases it becomes a way to vent hatred for a certain
race or ethnicity, or as political or economic retaliation.
In that regard, it is disappointing that the report fails
to highlight the targeted attacks against victims based
on their religious beliefs, despite the persistence of
such acts in nearly every region of the world. Also,
the perpetrators, too, are varied and can be found in
both legitimate State actors, such as those in a position
of trust — members of armed or security forces, for
example, or even United Nations peacekeepers — and
in non-State actors.
The violent domination of a human being
constitutes an egregious form of degradation of his
or her dignity, but also of the aggressor, who, in so
doing, disfigures himself or herself as a human person.
Such heinous crimes are yet another consequence
of the destructive power of war. All States and the

35

S/PV.6948

international community as a whole must therefore do
their utmost to stop those barbarous acts, which have
been properly labelled an outrage to the conscience of
humankind.
My delegation wishes to focus its remarks on the
following three aspects, namely, prevention, criminal
responsibility and assistance to victims.
With regard to prevention, it seems not unfitting to
recall how one of the first forms of prevention used in
connection with crimes of sexual violence was our own
intense and timely intervention in crises using various
peaceful means for which the international community
is well equipped, such as mediation, international
measures and a commitment to tackling the underlying
social and economic causes of conflicts. Alongside
those broader protection efforts there should be specific
prevention measures, for example, educating members
of armed forces in the areas of discipline and moral
fibre and undertaking awareness campaigns to promote
values that offer a proper view of women in society.
Secondly, with respect to the notion of criminal
responsibility, the report is at pains to address the
duty to prosecute those culpable for the commission of
crimes of sexual violence. In that regard, my delegation
expresses the importance of adopting and implementing
action plans and legislation aimed at protecting victims
from violence and holding perpetrators accountable.
In cases where the Security Council is called upon
to intervene, appropriate measures should be taken
to reaffirm the outright interdiction of those crimes
and the criminal liability of those responsible for
their commission. It is imperative that the work of
monitoring and prosecuting crimes of sexual violence
be characterized by justice and equity and not political
interests, which could undermine noble motivations
and efforts to combat such crimes.
The third issue — assisting victims — seems to
receive less emphasis in the report. Indeed, in order to
ensure that reprisals or retribution undertaken in the
pursuit of justice do not become an end in themselves, it
is necessary to keep the focus on reparation for victims.
It is essential that victims be afforded every assistance,
whereas, on the contrary, all too frequently victims of
sexual assault become ostracized by their communities,
especially those who report sexual violence or those who
have become pregnant as a result of rape. Particularly
disturbing in that context is the revictimization of a

36

woman or girl who has been raped when she is forced
to live with her aggressor as a so-called wife.
Obviously, sexual violence leads to devastating
physical and psychological consequences, sometimes
even fatal ones. Of concern to my delegation in that
regard is the euphemistic reference in the report to
“access to services that would allow [girls or women]
to safely terminate a pregnancy” (S/2013/149, para. 12).
In that sentence, concealed behind a veil of words, lies
the stark reality of the suppression of human life — the
death of an innocent unborn child — which only visits
further violence upon a woman already in difficulty.
Rather, the woman with child should be offered care,
support, education, counselling and assistance to meet
her material, social and spiritual needs during and after
her pregnancy, including, if necessary, the possibility
of finding a family to adopt her child.
In the final analysis, peace is more about people
than it is about particular structures. People who foster
peace first of all in their own hearts give rise in turn to
innumerable gestures of peace and advance respect for
the right to life and security of all persons, especially
women and children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): We welcome the
second report of the Secretary-General entitled “Sexual
violence in conflict” (S/2013/149), which updates us on
the widespread use of sexual violence as a method of
warfare in various situations. Let me also commend
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, and her office, for their great dedication in
operationalizing and implementing important mandates
deriving from resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and
1960 (2010).
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Canada, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, in particular with its call for
increased accountability for acts of conflict-related
sexual violence, which is best done by enhancing
support for the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in establishing the monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict-related
sexual violence mandated in resolution 1960 (2010). We
also support the Secretary-General’s recommendation
to put in place an appropriate Security Council

13-29364

S/PV.6948

mechanism or procedure for systematically monitoring
commitments by parties listed in the annex of its report.

for the first time fulfil the promise of reparative justice
contained in the Rome Statute.

There is a clear and obvious link between the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
gender-based violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations. There is ample evidence that small arms
facilitate a vast spectrum of human rights violations,
including rape and other forms of sexual violence.
Liechtenstein therefore welcomes the fact that the Arms
Trade Treaty includes the risk of gender-based violence
and violence against women and children as one of the
criteria that exporting States need to consider before
authorizing an arms export. We are particularly pleased
that the risk assessment provided for in the Treaty not
only covers small arms and light weapons, but also
ammunition, munitions, parts and components.

My delegation is a long-standing supporter of the
consistent mainstreaming of the Council’s thematic
agenda into its country-specific work. In partnership
with Switzerland, we have supported the publication
of the 2010 Women, Peace and Security Handbook by
PeaceWomen, which has just been released in a second
edition. To increase its usability, we made the handbook
available as a mobile application. The handbook
makes the complex women, peace and security agenda
accessible by breaking it down into specific topics. In
addition, an overview of the Council’s most relevant
previously agreed language has been included so as to
ensure that the Council integrates its own decisions on
women, peace and security into its country-specific
work. It could thereby serve as a practical tool for the
drafters of Council resolutions. We hope that Council
members will continue making good use of it.

We agree with the Secretary-General’s statement
that States are primarily responsible for holding
individuals to account for sexual and gender-based
violence. However, when national jurisdictions are
unwilling or unable to fulfil their responsibilities in
that regard, the International Criminal Court (ICC) in
particular has a complementary role to play. Bringing
to justice the perpetrators of sexual violence is an
important step for victims seeking to move on with their
lives. We are therefore pleased that the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, has
made the fight against sexual violence a focus of her
work. The fact that crimes of sexual violence play a role
in nearly every case under investigation and prosecution
by the Court speaks both to the startling prevalence of
sexual violence in armed conflicts today and to the
emphasis placed by the ICC on holding perpetrators of
those crimes accountable. The voluntary surrender to
the ICC by Bosco Ntanganda, whose name has been
associated with sexual and gender-based crimes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for many years, is
an important message for victims — in the end, justice
will be done.
Delivering justice for victims of sexual violence
also includes reparative justice. Liechtenstein is a proud
donor to the ICC’s Trust Fund for Victims, which adopts
a gender perspective in all its activities and conducts
programmes specifically aimed at assisting victims of
sexual and gender-based violence. Having been ordered
to provide reparations for the victims of Thomas
Lubanga Dyilo, in the light of the sexual violence
those victims have suffered, the Trust Fund will now

13-29364

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): First,
let me say a few words on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security, an informal network of
more than 40 interested States Members of the United
Nations that is chaired by Canada.
(spoke in English)
The 45 members of the Group of Friends, which
represent all five regional groups at the United Nations,
reaffirm their support, in the strongest terms, for the
work of the Security Council aimed at preventing and
responding to conflict-related sexual violence. The
Group of Friends welcomes the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/149) on this issue and calls
on the Security Council and the United Nations system
to act systematically and comprehensively to address
gaps and challenges to, and accelerate progress in, its
work on women, peace and security, and to monitor
commitments by parties to conflict to prevent and
address conflict-related sexual violence. We further
urge the Security Council to ensure that its mandated
missions consistently evaluate the level of protection
and promotion of women’s human rights.
The Group of Friends welcomes the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, and strongly supports her efforts aimed at

37

S/PV.6948

preventing and addressing conflict-related sexual
violence, while underlining women’s empowerment
and equal participation as prerequisites for tackling
the underlying causes of sexual violence in conflict.
The Group of Friends also welcomes the adoption by
the Commission on the Status of Women during its
fifty-seventh session, from 4 to 15 March, of its agreed
conclusions entitled “The elimination of violence
against women and girls”.
As mandated by the Security Council in resolution
1888 (2009), the Group of Friends urges the further
and timely deployment of women protection advisers
to Security Council-mandated missions. Missions
must plan and budget for women’s protection advisers
in all the relevant situations of concern. The Group of
Friends also recognizes that women’s human rights
defenders face particular risks in conflict situations
in the course of their work, as that work can include
frontline protection, service provision, monitoring,
fact-finding and documenting cases of sexual violence
and empowering survivors of sexual violence in conflict
to pursue judicial and other remedies. The Group of
Friends strongly encourages Member States to take
steps to ensure that women’s human rights defenders
are afforded greater protection to carry out their work
without risk.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I wish to
thank the Rwandan presidency for convening this open
debate on conflict-related sexual violence.
(spoke in French)
Canada welcomes the Secretary-General’s recent
report and thanks the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict for their
briefings. Canada supports the Special Representative’s
activities to ensure the prevention of and response
to conflict-related sexual violence and to ensure the
health, security and dignity of survivors and their
access to justice. Conflict-related sexual violence is of
great concern to Canada. Canada places high priority
on advancing women’s full participation at all levels of
society — a condition that is essential for maintaining
the health, justice and prosperity of communities.
Because of its devastating and enduring effects on the
women and girls who are subjected to such crimes, as
well as on their families and communities, rape and
other forms of sexual violence in conflict remain a huge
barrier to peace, security and development.

38

(spoke in English)
Following the harrowing accounts of sexual
violence in Mali reported by the Secretary-General,
Canada urges the Council to ensure that the Mali
mission mandate specifically addresses sexual
violence. The Council should ensure that preventing and
addressing conflict-related sexual violence is included
in all mission mandates. Perpetrators of sexual violence
must be held to account. We support the prosecution of
those who have perpetrated or who have a command
responsibility for such crimes. We call on the Council
to adopt a systematic approach to addressing reports
of conflict-related sexual violence and to ensure that
Sanctions Committees include criteria pertaining to
acts of rape and other forms of sexual violence.
We welcome the recent agreement between
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations to strengthen efforts
to tackle conflict-related sexual violence. We urge
its implementation and look forward to seeing
improvements on the ground very soon.
(spoke in French)
Canada’s contribution to the prevention of sexual
violence in conflict situations includes $18.5 million
over the next five years to support victims, as well
as to contribute to investigations and prosecutions
of perpetrators in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where rape has been used as
a weapon of war. Canada has also supported special
training investigators of sexual violence, who can be
rapidly deployed to post-conflict areas around the world.
On 11 April, Canada’s Minister for Foreign Affairs,
John Baird, announced an additional contribution of
$5 million towards tackling sexual violence against
women and girls.
We welcome the Government of Afghanistan’s
efforts to implement a law on the elimination of
violence against women. However, more must be done
to increase understanding and awareness of the law
and its application and to end practices that imprison
victims of sexual violence while allowing perpetrators
to go free.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that Canada
is committed to working with the international
community on preventing and responding to conflictrelated sexual violence in all of its forms, including

13-29364

S/PV.6948

rape as a weapon of war and early and forced marriage,
in order to advance human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, including women and girls. We call on
the Security Council to strengthen its response in that
regard as well.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): Allow me to join
everyone here in congratulating you and your country,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April. In the
same vein, I would like to extend our gratitude for all
the information that we have received during the open
thematic debates on these very important topics.
I wish to begin by reaffirming the importance that
Botswana attaches to the protection and promotion of
the rights of women and children, as well as the need to
address all forms of violence against women, including
sexual violence in the context of armed conflict.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2013/149), which highlights actions
taken and challenges faced by States in conflict and
post-conflict situations to protect women and children
from sexual violence. My delegation further takes note
of the analysis that the report provides, as well as the
recommendations contained therein.
Sexual violence in armed conflict represents one
of the most serious forms of the violation or abuse
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. The prevention of sexual violence in
armed conflict is therefore both a matter of upholding
universal human rights and of maintaining international
peace and security, in keeping with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
In that regard, Botswana welcomes the continued
focus by the Council on this thematic area and wishes
to emphasize the need for increased and more systemic
attention to the agenda women and peace and security
in the Council’s work. We believe that efforts to address
sexual violence in armed conflict should be consistent
with and complementary to wider efforts to promote
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
other relevant resolutions on women and peace and
security. To that end, my delegation also welcomes the
work of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict in building coherence and coordination
in the United Nations response to sexual violence in

13-29364

armed conflict. In that regard, Botswana supports the
Special Representative’s focus on national ownership
and responsibility, by engaging with Governments
and armed groups to establish their commitment to
accountability for sexual violence, so as to create
procedures that will allow such commitments to be
systematically monitored. I would also like to emphasize
that greater coordination and collaboration with other
relevant stakeholders is important to improving global
efforts to address sexual violence.
The current report highlights several emerging
concerns, including sexual violence against men and
boys, particularly in the context of detention, as well as
the plight of children born out of rape, sexual slavery
and forced marriages by armed groups, as has been
documented in countries such as Mali, the Central
African Republic, Somalia and others. We also take note
of the parties named in the report, which includes the
following significant additions: the Syrian Government
forces and their allied militia, the Shabbiha; the Séléka
rebels in the Central African Republic; and several
armed groups in Mali. Additions to the existing listings
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, such as the
Police nationale congolaise, the Mouvement du 23 Mars
and several more Mai-Mai groups in the Kivus, have
also been noted.
Despite the international community’s repeated
condemnation of sexual violence in armed conflict,
we remain deeply concerned about the fact that such
acts continue to occur and in some situations have even
become systematic and widespread. Impunity for sexual
violence by armed groups is unacceptable and cannot
be tolerated. In that regard, my delegation wishes to
stress the urgency and importance of demonstrating
commitment and political will through efforts to
prevent sexual violence and enforce accountability by
prosecuting those responsible for perpetrating crimes
against civilians. We therefore call on the Security
Council to continue its efforts to fight impunity and
uphold accountability. Through its relevant Sanctions
Committees, the Council should also consider the
possible effectiveness of existing sanctions regimes on
parties named in the report.
Botswana strongly supports the involvement
of women in peace negotiations, peacebuilding and
conflict prevention. We are also supportive of calls for
addressing concerns about sexual violence in mediation
and peace processes, particularly in the context
of security arrangements and transitional justice

39

S/PV.6948

mechanisms. However, we believe that such efforts
should take into consideration the needs and rights
of women and children. I also wish to emphasize the
importance of enhancing efforts to eliminate obstacles
to women’s access to justice, as well as of assisting
States in conflict and post-conflict situations in their
efforts to address sexual violence.
Ending violations of women’s human rights is a
moral imperative and one we must collectively commit
to if we are to achieve it. In that regard, Botswana
strongly supports all efforts aimed at preventing and
eliminating violence against women and children,
including sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations. In conclusion, we remain optimistic that,
given our collective will, especially in the Security
Council, we can bring an end to such heinous crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): First of all, Japan welcomes
the Secretary-General’s recent report (S/2013/149). We
reiterate our full support for the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, and
for her priorities of fostering political leadership and
action and deepening national ownership, leadership
and responsibility. We welcome the work of the Team
of Experts and strongly support their efforts, especially
those aimed at strengthening the capacity of national
rule-of-law and justice institutions. We would also like
to underline the important role played by United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, the network
of 13 United Nations entities, including UN-Women,
chaired by Special Representative Bangura. Greater
coordination is vital to improving global efforts to meet
this challenge.
I would like to touch on Japan’s primary policy.
Conflict-related sexual violence should be tackled by
the international community as a whole. Japan places
great emphasis on this issue. As our Foreign Minister
stated in a recent speech on foreign policy, Japan will
continue to address this issue, and will participate
actively in international initiatives on human rights
issues, including the protection of women’s rights.
Last month, Japan announced a new contribution of
$4.5 million for programmes aimed at preventing
sexual violence and supporting victims in countries
such as Libya, Somalia, the Central African Republic
and Mali.

40

Japan condemns attacks on women’s human rights
defenders and emphasizes that Member States should
take steps to ensure the protection of such defenders.
We also recognize the importance of multisectoral
services for victims of sexual violence. In that regard,
our recent contribution addresses various needs of
victims, including, for example, the establishment
of relief and recovery systems for legal support and
mental-health care in camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons.
Japan strongly supports the idea of shifting the
stigma attached to crimes of sexual violence off the
victims and onto the perpetrators. We also support
efforts to comprehensively address cultures of
impunity. In that regard, Japan has, for instance, been
supporting Afghanistan’s Ministry of Women’s Affairs
in implementing its law on the eIimination of violence
against women.
As was pointed out in the Secretary-General’s report,
addressing sexual violence in the context of security
sector reform processes is of key importance. Over the
past five years, Japan has provided $900 million to help
support the Afghanistan National Police, part of which
has been used for employing and training female police
officers. So far, more than 1,400 female police officers
have been hired. And in Africa, for example, Japan
has been supporting capacity-building and training for
Somalia’s security officers in the areas of sexual and
gender-based violence and the abuse and exploitation
of children.
Before concluding, I am very pleased to announce
that Japan has begun to develop a national action plan
based on resolution 1325 (2000). We are hard at work
on the plan, which includes our commitment to further
strengthening our efforts to help protect women’s rights
in humanitarian settings. We are in close consultation
with United Nations organizations such as UN-Women,
and hope to complete the plan as soon as possible.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would first like to congratulate my colleague
Ambassador Eugène-Richard Gasana on his leadership
of the Security Council for this month. I also welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Rwanda to preside over today’s important meeting.
I also welcome Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special

13-29364

S/PV.6948

Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflicts.
My country has examined the Secretary-General’s
report on sexual violence in armed conflict (S/2013/149)
and the information it contains, submitted by the Special
Representative. We support all efforts aimed at putting
an end to all forms of the crime of sexual violence in
conflict, ending impunity and punishing perpetrators
and those who incite such violence. However, we also
call for extreme care and objectivity in addressing this
grave humanitarian issue, which has reached serious
levels in more than one place. Perpetrators must be held
accountable and brought to justice, whether for crimes
committed in the jails of Abu Ghraib in Iraq or in any
other place.
The report of the Secretary-General includes seven
paragraphs concerning my country. The allegations
contained in the report were based on reports by the
independent international commission of inquiry in
2012 and 2013. My country would like to stress that
the work of that commission since its inception was
not professional; rather, it was primarily politically
motivated. The commission rejected hundreds of
compelling documents and evidence submitted by the
Government of Syria regarding crimes committed
by armed terrorist groups. It conveniently selected
inaccurate claims, as the Special Representative
herself admitted, and chose to use inaccurate sources
implicated in terrorism and the bloodletting of Syrian
citizens. In its conclusions, the commission relied on
unofficial, inaccurate reports submitted by opposition
parties and sources hostile to the Syrian State and the
Syrian people. For the Council’s information, I would
like to mention that the commission has to date not
visited Syria.
The Government of Syria has outlined those serious
lapses to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, as well as to the commission of inquiry in an
official and documented manner. But the commission
has ignored all that, for unknown reasons. My
delegation addressed several official letters to Special
Representative Zainab Hawa Bangura that included
documented information on the responsibility of armed
terrorist groups for committing acts of rape, sexual
assault and killing of Syrian women and girls. Those
armed groups have become proficient at kidnapping
Syrian women and girls and exploiting them as sexual
handmaidens for the entertainment of terrorists.

13-29364

At the same time, the advocates of those armed
terrorist groups, the jihadi thugs and perverts in
some Gulf sheikhdoms, issue open religious edicts on
satellite television channels sanctioning their crimes
under the guise of what they call sexual religious
warfare or sexual intercourse religious campaigns.
That morally and socially perverse behaviour has been
met by unwarranted responses by many United Nations
specialized agencies. It is no longer acceptable for this
suspicious silence to continue.
In that regard, I would like to raise some questions.
Why did the Special Representative choose to ignore the
statement she issued on 15 February under the headline
“Syria, release kidnapped women and children and
protect them from sexual violence”. In the statement,
she documented an incident involving the kidnapping
of a bus carrying no fewer than 40 civilians, most of
them women and children, by armed groups in northwestern Syria. Why did the Special Representative
choose to ignore the hundreds of reports that have been
issued in the course of the two years of the crisis by
Western media sources that document violations by
terrorist groups of the rights of Syrian women and girls?
Why did the Special Representative choose to disregard
the admissions by armed groups themselves of having
committing sexual assaults and rapes — contained in
documented videos posted on the Internet — in which
those crimes were part of the Takfiri fundamentalist
ideology they seek to promote? Why did the Special
Representative avoid shining a light on the violations
committed by the countries hosting displaced Syrians
and Syrian refugees of their obligations under
international conventions related to the protection of
the rights of women, children and refugees?
We had sincerely hoped that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General would have
publicly presented the violations of the rights of Syrian
women and girls in refugee camps in neighbouring
countries. For example, there were more than 250
documented cases in which Syrian women in a Turkish
refugee camp had been impregnated by Turkish
supervisors and their terrorist associates. We had hoped
that there would have been references to violations
against Syrian girls in Jordanian refugee camps, of
the serious violations by means of systematic acts of
rape by false religious groups wearing religious garb,
and of Syrian women being forced to enter into forced
marriages, in some cases involving girls under the age of
14. That is in addition to the inappropriate exploitation

41

S/PV.6948

of the suffering of Syrian families in another Arab
State where documented reports have referred to the
marriage of more than 12,000 underage Syrian girls in
the course of one year — on the basis of false edicts
and pernicious calls by clerics in certain mosques who
are followers of Salafi and Wahhabi movements. It is
as if the only way to provide humanitarian assistance
by those demagogic religious idiots is through religious
sexual warfare.
In conclusion, my homeland, Syria, would like to
seriously deal with those horrendous and egregious
violations of human rights. Syria would like to
cooperate with the United Nations, especially with
Ms. Zainab Bangura, in order to expose the true events
unfolding in Syria in a manner free of sensationalism
and politicization and divorced from the agenda of
influential Powers in this international Organization.
We therefore look forward to her forthcoming visit to
Syria as the beginning of an optimal way of cooperating
and ascertaining correct information on the sexual
violence committed by armed terrorist groups against
the Syrian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): First of all, I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda for having
presided over this very important open debate. I thank
also Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his report on
sexual violence in conflict (S/2013/149), as well as his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, for her briefing.
I would like to highlight some key proposals and
strategies to minimize the prevalence of sexual violence
in conflict. Sexual violence is a global phenomenon in
times of peace and war and in post-conflict phases.
It also affects my region and demands our urgent
attention.
Promoting the rights of women is at the core of my
country’s human rights policy. Kazakhstan, as a member
of the Executive Board of UN-Women, has repeatedly
voiced the need to accelerate the implementation of
global gender commitments. Those include the outcome
of the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly (see A/S-23/10/Rev.1), the Millennium
Development Goals, the Beijing Platform for Action,
the 2013 Commission on the Status of Women followup process, and resolutions 1325 (2000), 1888 (2009),
1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010) — all of which touch

42

upon sexual violence in conflict. To implement them,
Member States must live up to their commitments and
actions. Closer interaction is needed among the Council
and the Special Representative, UN-Women, the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, as well as country teams on the ground.
The Council is taking a positive step by expanding
its work at the level of Sanctions Committees by
considering sexual violence and rape as designation
criteria in various sanctions regimes, as a tool to
enhance accountability. It is therefore obligatory on
such committees to reinforce those criteria. To succeed,
there has to be better information sharing among the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
the Sanctions Committees and their associated expert
groups. The submission of names of perpetrators should
be followed up on without delay, and without impunity
being granted to State or non-State actors.
It would help to have at least one gender expert on
every Sanctions Committee and peacekeeping mission
or political office in the field. Resources must be
allocated to that end. Likewise, the women and peace
and security agenda should be incorporated into the
terms of reference of Security Council visiting missions
when interacting with interlocutors and stakeholders.
It is noteworthy that provisions for protection
against gender-based violence and violence against
women and children were incorporated into article 7,
paragraph 4, of the Arms Trade Treaty, which regulates
the transfer of major types of weapons and which the
General Assembly adopted earlier this month. The
2001 Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons must also begin to reflect a gender-sensitive
perspective, like the Arms Trade Treaty, because
armed sexual violence in armed conflict totally
devastates women and children. For significant results
to accrue, each tool should not to be implemented
piecemeal but taken as part of a unified, consolidated
and comprehensive approach. United Nations systemwide coherence on gender-based violence in conflict,
combining synergy with regional organizations,
intergovernmental bodies and key stakeholders, would
result in strengthened mechanisms for monitoring,
reporting and implementation.
At the same time, we need to facilitate and reinforce
women’s participation, through their local networks
and groups, by assessing and overcoming factors that
impede their effective involvement. Hurdles created by

13-29364

S/PV.6948

a lack of resources, access to information and security
itself can be counteracted through the inclusion of
women’s groups in strategies for conflict prevention,
resolution and recovery, especially in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, through
training and capacity-building.
In conclusion, we commend the Security Council’s
continuing attention to the urgent and crucial issue of
women and peace and security and strengthening it on
its ongoing agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Govender (South Africa): We congratulate
Rwanda on assuming the presidency of the Council and
express our appreciation to Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, for
joining us today. We join others in commending the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, for the contributions she
has made in such a short space of time since taking up
her position.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/149)
underscores the reality that sexual violence in armed
conflict and post-conflict settings remains systemic
and widespread, where women and girls continue to
bear the greater burden of the consequences of conflict.
It is with that in mind that my delegation reaffirms our
commitment to the full and effective implementation
of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009),
1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010) as the building blocks for
advancing the women, peace and security agenda.
My delegation notes with concern the emerging
challenges highlighted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral. They include, among others, increasing
incidents of sexual violence committed against men
and boys, particularly in the context of detention, the
practice of forced marriage by armed groups, and the
linkages between sexual violence and illicit natural
resource extraction.
My delegation is pleased at the progress made on
the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements
and on their potential to serve as an early-warning and
conflict-prevention tool. A continuous review of the
impact that women protection advisers make in the
field would be instructive for closing the protection
gaps in the context of sexual violence in conflict. It is

13-29364

also our view that women protection advisers could add
value to peacekeeping mission assessment visits.
My delegation supports the recommendation by the
Secretary-General that sexual violence in conflict be
reflected in all the relevant country resolutions, as well
as in authorizations and renewals of the mandates of
peacekeeping and special political missions. Equally,
we will continue to advocate for the inclusion of
sexual violence in the definition of acts prohibited by
ceasefires and that it be monitored as part of ceasefire
monitoring mechanisms. In that regard, we also
highlight the important contribution that women can
and must make in all processes of conflict resolution
and in post-conflict settings.
We also reaffirm our commitment to support efforts
by the Secretary-General towards the implementation
of the policy of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Justice for the victims of serious violations
of international human rights law is an essential
requirement for the sustainable peace, security and
development of States emerging from armed conflict,
where the rule of law must enjoy primacy and be
scrupulously upheld. Therefore, my delegation supports
efforts by the Council to continue fighting impunity for
the most serious crimes committed against women and
children through the work of the International Criminal
Court, ad hoc and mixed tribunals and specialized
chambers in national tribunals.
We recognize the importance of women’s access
to justice in conflict and post-conflict settings,
including through gender-responsive legal, judicial and
security sector reform and other mechanisms. In that
regard, my delegation appreciates the commendable
work undertaken by the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. However,
we believe that significantly more needs to be done
by all the relevant actors in supporting countries
to increase women’s participation, leadership and
expertise in transitional justice, as well as in advancing
accountability measures for serious offences committed
against women and children.
We support efforts undertaken by the Council
towards ensuring that more systematic attention be
given to the implementation of women, peace and
security commitments in its own work. The integration
of appropriate gender perspectives into the mandates of
the relevant peacekeeping missions, as well as in other

43

S/PV.6948

thematic areas of peace and security, would positively
advance that objective.

campaigns to break taboos and misperceptions around
the issue is also important.

Much work needs to be done to narrow the
substantive implementation deficits that still remain.
The burden of responsibility rests on the stakeholder
community, including the Council, to ensure measurable
progress on the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions in the broader context of the women,
peace and security agenda and the laudable objectives it
aspires to achieve.

Prevention also involves tackling the disturbing
relationship between the widespread availability of
illicit small arms and light weapons and conflictrelated sexual violence. We acknowledge the progress
achieved by the adoption of the landmark Arms Trade
Treaty, which establishes that conventional arms should
not be exported when they might be used to commit or
facilitate gender-based violence. We regret, however,
that it was not possible to include in the Treaty a clear
prohibition of transfers to unauthorized non-State
actors, as such a provision would greatly contribute to
the objective of preventing the commission of sexual
violence in conflict.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Fernandes (Brazil): I thank the Rwandan
presidency for convening this debate on such an
important issue for international peace and security.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his remarks
and his comprehensive report (S/2013/149) on sexual
violence in armed conflict. We are grateful to Special
Representative Bangura for her presentation and her
dedication to this cause. We would also like to express
our appreciation to the representative of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security for her
statement.
The Security Council’s engagement with the
issue of women and peace and security has greatly
contributed to our common efforts to improve the lives
of women in conflict situations around the world. The
resolutions adopted by the Council have not only created
a comprehensive body of norms and tools, but have also
stimulated discussion, self-criticism and progress on
the protection and promotion of women’s rights.
Today we focus our attention on one of the most
appalling aspects of the women and peace and security
agenda: the problem of sexual violence in conflict. The
challenge when discussing this scourge is to translate
our sorrow and outrage into practical action capable of
bringing about real change. Only an integrated approach
that combines a sharper focus on prevention, the fight
against impunity and better support to victims can help
us fight sexual violence in conflict in an effective and
decisive manner.
Prevention is always the best remedy. It
involves, in the first place, strengthening national
capacities, addressing the needs of States in terms of
institution-building, training personnel, supporting
victims and promoting the rule of law. Developing
national awareness-raising activities and information

44

Peacekeeping operations are another important
pillar contributing to the prevention of conflict-related
sexual violence. Local populations and international
public opinion have high expectations concerning the
role of United Nations peacekeepers in preventing
sexual violence. In that regard, adequate training
remains key, not only to ensure that peacekeepers
acquire a proper understanding of how to address cases
of sexual violence, but also to enable them to apply
concrete prevention strategies.
That preventive role requires resources compatible
with the magnitude of the tasks involved. Brazil has
taken some meaningful steps. We have signed a letter
of intent with UN-Women to deepen our cooperation
regarding the training of peacekeepers on gender issues
and the promotion of South-South cooperation on
gender issues involving peacekeeping training centres
in Latin America and Africa. Furthermore, Brazil has
been involved in cooperation activities with a number
of countries emerging from conflict in areas related to
sexual violence. The Brazilian Cooperation Agency
has, for instance, been working with the United Nations
Population Fund in Haiti and Guinea-Bissau to build
institutional capacity to deal with victims of genderbased violence in areas such as health, justice and
security.
As an important element in efforts to achieve
justice, the fight against impunity is essential as a
means to put an end to sexual violence in conflict. It
acts as a deterrent for perpetrators and contributes to
righting the wrongs done to victims. Brazil appreciates
the work that Ms. Bangura’s Office carries out in
support of the strengthening of national capacities

13-29364

S/PV.6948

aimed at bringing perpetrators to justice. The Security
Council can assist in fighting impunity by addressing
such violence in its subsidiary bodies as appropriate.
More discussion is needed, however, on the idea of
adopting targeted and gradual measures in contexts
where no sanctions regimes are in place, as that could
amount to applying restrictive measures in situations
that have not been determined by the Security Council
to constitute threats to international peace and security.
Dealing with sexual violence requires that we
act on many fronts simultaneously. Over the past few
years, the international community has made important
normative progress, which has allowed us to reframe
the issue of sexual violence in different terms. We must
now work more effectively to implement those norms.
Brazil is committed to this cause and is ready to work
in line with Security Council provisions with the goal
of effectively addressing sexual violence in conflict
situations in all its aspects.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Papua New Guinea.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): Papua New Guinea
appreciates the opportunity to participate in today’s
important meeting on women and peace and security
and thanks you, Mr. President, and your delegation, for
organizing it. This meeting follows on from others that
we have participated in since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), including the open debate on women and
peace and security held on 30 November 2012 (see
S/PV.6877), which also commemorated the twelfth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
The focus of this debate is to address the obstacles
to women’s participation in conflict mediation, peace
talks, national dialogue and donor conferences. We
believe that it is important to sustain the momentum
to consolidate efforts at all levels so as to effectively
mainstream women as equal development partners
and agents of change in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, peacebuilding, peacekeeping
and nation-building for safer and more prosperous
communities and a safer and more prosperous world.
A clear case in point is the excellent contributions
by women to last month’s successful conclusion and
adoption of the first-ever global Arms Trade Treaty.
We also agree with the Secretary-General’s
conclusions in his 2010 report on women’s participation
in peacebuilding (S/2010/466) that their participation is
not only a matter of women’s and girls’ rights but of

13-29364

their status as core partners in strengthening the three
pillars of durable peace, namely, economic recovery,
social cohesion and political legitimacy.
We note the important, albeit slow, strides made
internationally over the past decade in addressing the
disproportionate and unique impacts of armed conflict,
violence and tensions, which continue to affect women
and girls worldwide.
Women’s and girls’ protection and empowerment,
particularly in fragile, conflict and post-conflict
situations — and even in so-called stable
societies — remain a major concern and an overriding
challenge for all of us. Noble initiatives such as
resolution 1325 (2000), the 2010 United Nations sevenpoint action plan on gender-responsive peacebuilding
and other international, regional and national peace and
security frameworks that place women and girls at the
centre of peace and security continue to remain largely
unfulfilled.
The unfortunate and sobering reality today is that
women are still part of the battleground. They are
marginalized, harassed, raped, abducted, humiliated,
killed and forced to endure unwanted pregnancies,
sexual abuse and slavery. Women are also still largely
excluded from formal decision-making processes
concerning peace and security.
The challenge for all of us today going forward is to
work diligently with renewed commitment to heighten
efforts to, among other actions, better institutionalize
all the various processes so that they become integral
parts of national and regional actions.
In the context of my own country, Papua New
Guinea, I would like to share our experience with regard
to women and peace and security in the framework of
the civil conflict we experienced in Bougainville, which
ended more than a decade ago. With the election of the
first President and members of the Parliament of the
Autonomous Bougainville Government, the Council,
on 6 July 2005, successfully concluded the mandate it
had initiated to resolve the decade-long bloody conflict
on Bougainville Island in Papua New Guinea.
It is worth mentioning that the Bougainville
Peace Agreement, despite some challenges, is being
implemented with full commitment at the highest
political levels by the Government of Papua New
Guinea and the Autonomous Bougainville Government.
We are equally pleased with the continuing interest and

45

S/PV.6948

engagement of the United Nations with the Government
of Papua New Guinea and the Autonomous Bougainville
Government to address outstanding issues, including
arms disposal, reconstruction and the holding of a
referendum.
Importantly, it is worth recalling that the efforts of
the women of Bougainville in pushing for peace during
the conflict, which culminated in the Bougainville
Peace Agreement, attest to and confirm the notion
that women are agents of change, including in peace
and security. Fortunately, there is growing recognition
of that fact, but, as always, more needs to be done to
maintain the momentum.
I would also commend the support and cooperation
that Papua New Guinea continues to receive from our
bilateral development partners, including Australia, the
United States, New Zealand, the European Union and
others, on mainstreaming gender issues that contribute
to peace, security and national development. Likewise,
we value similar support from regional multilateral
development partners, such as the Pacific Islands
Forum and the Melanesian Spearhead Group.
At the regional level, the launch of the 2012-2015
Pacific Regional Action Plan on Women, Peace and
Security, in 2012, has provided a strong framework
from which national and regional actions can be better
and more effectively developed and coordinated. The
Action Plan was developed jointly by representatives
of the member countries of the Pacific Islands
Forum, representatives of the Council of Regional
Organizations of the Pacific and, importantly, civil
society organizations. In essence, the Action Plan
replicates the basic, but important, tenets of resolution
1325 (2000) as elaborated by the United Nations.
In that regard, we acknowledge the leadership of
Ms. Bachelet and the work of UN-Women in Papua New
Guinea and the Pacific, as reflected in her attendance
at our Pacific Leaders’ Summit — to represent the
Secretary-General — held in the Cooks Islands last
year. Such proactive participation has yielded positive
dividends, which include the increasing involvement of
women as partners in consolidating peace and security
in our region.
Apart from the United Nations, we continue
to have strong support from our development
partners — Australia and New Zealand, along with
other partners such as the European Union — which
are prioritizing gender empowerment and equality

46

by providing capacity-building programmes for our
women and girls in the area of peace and security. The
challenge will be the effective coordination of all the
valuable resources, so that all the efforts to implement
the full intent of resolution 1325 (2000) are properly
realized.
Insofar as civil society efforts to promote issues
relating to women, peace and security in Papua New
Guinea and the Pacific islands region are concerned,
they are increasing as a result of the groundswell
of advocacy work on fostering women’s and girls’
development issues, including the important role they
play in fostering peace and security in our communities
and country.
An exemplary group that I wish to acknowledge here
is the Leitana Nehan Women’s Development Agency,
which is based in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea, as
well as the FemLINKPACIFIC organization based in
Fiji, along with many other women’s committees whose
collective membership contributes to that important
work. At the end of the day, their respective collective
contributions will enhance the work we must all
continue to do to consolidate the vision of resolution
1325 (2000).
Allow me to conclude by acknowledging the
presence of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the representative of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security here today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Solomon Islands.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): Let me, first of
all acknowledge your country’s leadership, Sir, in
convening this open debate on women and peace and
security, with special emphasis on sexual violence in
conflict zones. Solomon Islands is contributing to the
debate as a country emerging from conflict. While
stamping out sexual violence from any conflict is our
global responsibility, the primary responsibility, as
rightly pointed out by the Secretary-General, rests with
States. Solomon Islands continues to tackle the issue
of sexual violence in the context of its gender-based
violence national framework.
Solomon Islands is a culturally diverse country of
more than half a million people who speak 87 different
languages. We have also established the Ministry of
National Unity, Reconciliation and Peace, as well as
the Ministry of Women, Youth and Children’s Affairs.

13-29364

S/PV.6948

As Council members may be aware, Solomon
Islands continues to work in partnership with the
Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands
(RAMSI), which is led by Australia, one of the sitting
members of the Council. The Regional Assistance
Mission is also supported by New Zealand and all of the
neighbouring Pacific small island developing States.
The Regional Assistance Mission is provided for under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. My
country extends its sincere gratitude to all its Pacific
neighbours.
The success of the Solomon Islands/RAMSI
partnership in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
peacemaking speaks for itself. My country’s economy
has been growing over the years. After 10 years
of operations, the Regional Assistance Mission is
undergoing a transitional phase. The military component
will be withdrawing from the country, while the police
and civilian components will remain.
The Solomon Islands Police Force has a new look,
thanks to special outreach efforts to women in terms of
recruitment. Today, the acting head of our Police Force
is a woman, a first for Solomon Islands. It is a small step,
but an important one. Even more, it is fulfilling one of
the six goals of UN-Women, that is,k strengthening the
leadership of women in peace and security.
That also speaks of the rich experience that the
women of my country have gained during the height of
our ethnic conflict. They appealed for peace, as women
in parts of the country suffered from sexual violence.
We just completed the fifty-seventh session of the
Commission on the Status of Women last month, whose
agreed conclusions speak of how violent the world has
become. Seven out of 10 women suffer from gender
violence. Sexual violence, unfortunately, has gone viral.
Two out of three women in Solomon Islands suffer from
gender-based violence. Solomon Islands has responded
by establishing a specific policy on the elimination of
gender violence as a subsidiary of our gender equality
and women’s development policy.
The elimination of gender-based violence is a
shared responsibility. We are tackling the issues,
working with all stakeholders to address the issue of
rape and sexual violence with a strong campaign to
prevent it, protect victims and deal with perpetrators.
Solomon Islands has institutionalized Governmentwide structures to deal with the issue nationally,
working with all the relevant stakeholders. We have

13-29364

in place a national steering committee to monitor the
progress in the implementation of the policy, which
reports to the national task force.
Solomon Islands is also a member of the g7+
countries promoting the New Deal agreed to in Busan.
We hope that that framework will address the root
causes of conflicts.
Let me conclude by highlighting one of the
challenges facing our world today, namely, climate
change. Climate change cuts across all three pillars of
the multilateral system and is serving to disempower
women, especially as land is being swallowed up by the
rise in sea-levels. To date, the Organization’s response to
disaster-risk management has been directed to suddenonset events, rather than to the slow-onset events such
as climate change. We hope to see a change of approach
in that area. Finally, Solomon Islands would like to
say that we join others in condemning sexual violence,
wherever it may occur.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): It gives me great
honour and pleasure to speak on behalf of the 10 member
States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand and my own country, Viet Nam.
At the outset, we would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate on the
important issue of women, peace and security. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2013/149), which provides a
useful basis for our deliberations. We extend our sincere
appreciation to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for their comprehensive briefings.
Sexual violence in armed conflict is not a new
phenomenon and has occurred in several corners of the
world. Sexual violence in armed conflict has harmful
and lasting economic, social, cultural and health
consequences for victims, families and communities,
even after the conflict stage has ended. We are deeply
concerned about the dire plight of women and girls in
situations of armed conflict. We condemn all violence
against women in armed conflicts, including sexual
violence. We recognize the urgent need to address their
plight.

47

S/PV.6948

ASEAN member States wish to reiterate their
strong commitment to working closely with the
international community and the United Nations in
ending sexual violence, wherever it occurs. Our States
have been supportive of efforts to eliminate and prevent
all acts of violence against women. ASEAN attaches
great importance to the implementation of landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010).
ASEAN supports the continued efforts of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the
relevant United Nations bodies to advance the women,
peace and security agenda in accordance with their
respective mandates.
At the national and regional levels, ASEAN
member States have been establishing legal and policy
frameworks and implementing mechanisms to further
enhance the status and welfare of women and girls
and to eliminate all forms of violence against women,
including sexual violence. Those efforts have been
strengthened by the adoption of various declarations,
including the Declaration on the Advancement of
Women in ASEAN, in 1988; the Declaration on the
Elimination of Violence against Women in the ASEAN
Region, in 2004; and the ASEAN Human Rights
Declaration, in 2012.
Also, the Association established the ASEAN
Committee on Women, in 2002, and the ASEAN
Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights
and the ASEAN Commission on the Promotion and
Protection of the Rights of Women and Children, in
2009. All those bodies aim to uphold, promote, protect
and ensure respect for and the fulfilment of the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of women and
children in the ASEAN area. In that context, ASEAN
member States would like to underline the following.
First, the fundamental causes of sexual violence
in armed conflict should be tackled at their root. A
preventive mechanism that addresses the root causes
of armed conflict should be implemented. ASEAN’s
Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia,
which aims to promote perpetual peace, everlasting
amity and cooperation among its people, is a regional
framework that we have put in place to that end. Such
root causes should be addressed, inter alia, by promoting
the rule of law, good governance, democracy, poverty
eradication, sustainable development and respect
for and the protection of human rights, as well as by

48

providing multisectoral assistance and services for the
specific needs of women and girls.
Secondly, preventing and eradicating sexual
violence against women are closely linked to women’s
empowerment and to gender equality. ASEAN views
women as agents of change, who should participate,
in a full and equal part, in peace, conflict resolution,
peacebuilding and post-conflict processes. In that
regard, the continued efforts of the international
community to address sexual violence in armed conflict
must be supported.
Most recently, the fifty-seventh session of the
Commission on the Status of Women adopted the
agreed conclusions on the elimination and prevention
of all forms of violence against women and girls. That
document was widely hailed by Governments, United
Nations officials and civil society as a huge step forward
and a historic global agreement in the ongoing efforts
to protect women and girls from violence.
Thirdly, ASEAN member countries are of the
view that States must bear responsibility and do their
utmost to prevent and address sexual violence in armed
conflict. The United Nations and the international
community can play a supporting role by providing
assistance, by sharing best practices and by helping
States to exercise that responsibility.
Let me conclude by stressing ASEAN’s readiness
and commitment to join efforts with the international
community to ensure the elimination of sexual violence
in armed conflict and to implement effective measures
of accountability and redress in the field of women and
peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland would like to congratulate and thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well as her entire team,
for the work that provided the basis for the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2013/149).
We welcome the Special Representative’s
commitment to continuing the work started by her
predecessor. We think that recognizing sexual violence
as a tactic and a consequence of war remains vital
to undertaking the real preventive action that is so
urgently needed.

13-29364

S/PV.6948

The Human Security Report Project, in its report
entitled “Sexual violence, education and war: beyond
the mainstream narrative”, provides a valuable
recommendation in that regard. It highlights the need
to better understand what causes the differences in
wartime sexual violence rates from one conflict to
another.
We furthermore welcome the fact that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has added
to her priorities the fostering of national ownership,
leadership and responsibility in combating sexual
violence.
We note with interest the important link that the
report makes between sexual violence and active
population displacement. It brings to light the link
between sexual violence and forced displacement and
the exploitation of natural resources. The SecretaryGeneral makes useful recommendations. Allow me to
highlight three of those.
First, we strongly welcome the fact that the
Secretary-General expresses the need for the women
and girls who have been victims of rape to have access
to emergency contraception and safe abortion services.
They should not be forced to continue a pregnancy as
a result of a serious crime against them. All too often,
they receive no reparation or any kind of support
from their own communities or from the international
community. At the same time, where women and girls
who have decided to continue their pregnancies cannot
look after their children, steps to protect the rights
of those children, including providing for national
adoption, must be taken.
That leads me to my second point, on reparations.
They can have a transformative effect and should be
an integral part of post-conflict transition initiatives.
As UN-Women explained in a recent document,
reparations are the most victim-centred transitional
justice measures. In that connection, we are obliged to
think beyond the traditional approach. Humanitarian
aid, peacebuilding and development must be effectively
linked in order to achieve a real impact, namely, the
empowerment of women.
Thirdly, and finally, Switzerland heeds the
Secretary-General’s call for the recruitment of
women’s protection advisers as members of United
Nations assessment teams. We draw attention
to the Justice Rapid Response initiative. It is an
intergovernmental support mechanism that can provide

13-29364

the international community and the Security Council
with rapidly deployable expertise. In cooperation with
UN-Women and the Institute for International Criminal
Investigations, the initiative has set up a roster of
sexual and gender-based violence experts from various
backgrounds. Switzerland is one of the countries that
initiated the Justice Rapid Response initiative, which
can contribute to the implementation of obligations
arising from resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010).
In conclusion, I would like to recall the significant
thematic connection between the discussions on
sexual violence in armed conflict and the protection
of civilians. We commend the fact that the Security
Council takes into account the link between those two
topics through a consistent approach.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I am grateful for the opportunity to participate
in this debate on specific measures to prevent, punish
and eradicate sexual violence in conflicts. It is an issue
of great concern that affects sensitive areas, such as the
protection of civilians in all kinds of armed conflict,
the displacement of populations and peacebuilding
processes, without forgetting its undeniable connection
with other scourges, such as trafficking in persons.
Spain welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/149) and supports its recommendations.
Similarly, Spain commends the commitment of the new
Special Representative, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
to the priorities developed by her predecessor,
Ms. Wahlström. Spain also shares the new goal set by
Ms. Bangura of promoting national ownership in the
fight against sexual violence in conflict, which is key
to obtaining lasting results. Ms. Bangura can count on
my country’s full support for her work.
Combating sexual violence in conflict requires the
adoption of measures for the prevention, protection
and prosecution of the perpetrators. In all those areas,
the victims’ cooperation is essential. However, as
the Secretary-General’s report points out, the lack of
adequate information and fear of reporting for cultural
and social reasons, which tend to increase in times of
conflict, are serious obstacles to such collaboration. We
must therefore, to the greatest extent possible, reinforce
mechanisms designed to help victims, raise awareness
about their surroundings and strengthen the capacity of
national courts.

49

S/PV.6948

Spain also shares the conclusions of the report
regarding the role of the International Criminal Court.
While the primary responsibility for the trial of
suspects for acts of sexual violence lies with national
courts, the Court plays a crucial complementary role at
the international level.
As I already mentioned, Spain fully supports
the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General, but would like to highlight those that
relate to the need to define a mechanism to monitor the
obligations of parties to conflict as set forth in resolution
1960 (2010) — including the possibility of referring cases
to the International Criminal Court — and in particular
to those pertaining to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes and security sector reform.
I also wish to stress the importance of the role of the
International Criminal Court, as acknowledged in the
recent conclusions agreed to in the fifty-seventh session
of the Commission on the Status of Women.
In the open debate on women, peace and security
held last fall at the Security Council (see S/PV.6877),
we referred to the numerous initiatives that Spain
had been leading in its foreign policy, development
cooperation and defence policy with a view to achieving
two goals — first, to promote the role of women in
peacebuilding in conflict and post-conflict situations,
and, secondly, to eliminate sexual violence in conflicts,
including the outrageous practice of using systematic
rape as a war tactic.
Focusing now on the second goal, Spain believes
that it is a priority to implement specific programmes
to eradicate all forms of violence and discrimination
against women and girls, while giving special attention
to extreme situations such as trafficking, sexual
exploitation and female genital mutilation. I would also
like to highlight our unconditional support for the work
of UN-Women in its campaign against sexual violence
in armed conflict.
Spain has generously contributed to the Millennium
Development Goals Achievement Fund, which has
provided $94 million for 20 conflict prevention and
peacebuilding programmes in as many countries
around the world.
In the area of training, I would emphasize the
specific seminar on the gender perspective in peace
operations that is being jointly organized by the
Ministries for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Spain
and the Netherlands. The fifth edition of the seminar

50

will be held soon and will have a specific module on
sexual violence in conflict.
I would conclude by referring to a particularly
vulnerable group in the area of sexual violence, namely,
people with disabilities, who are even more vulnerable
in a context of conflict. On 23 September, a high-level
meeting will be held on achieving the Millennium
Development Goals for persons with disabilities.
Spain, together with the Philippines, has the honour
of having been appointed to co-facilitate the outcome
document of that meeting. It will undoubtedly be the
best opportunity to discuss a new development agenda
that takes into account the imperative of combating
discrimination against persons with disabilities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): At the outset, Mr. President,
allow me to express our appreciation for your initiative
to convene today’s meeting. Our appreciation also goes
to Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and Ms. Saran Keïta Diakité, representative of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.
Our meeting today is very timely in that it comes
nearly one month after the adoption of the agreed
conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women,
which reflects the international community’s firm
stance against all forms and manifestations of violence
against women and girls in all contexts, settings and
circumstances, including crimes of sexual violence in
conflict.
The report of the Secretary-General, entitled
“Sexual violence in conflict” (S/2013/149), which was
been presented by his Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, highlights several concerns
emerging this year, including the perpetration of sexual
violence against men and boys as a tactic of war or in
the context of detention or interrogation, children born
as a result of rape in wartime, and the practice of forced
marriages by armed groups. It also draws attention
to the nexus between sexual violence and the illicit
extraction of natural resources, the displacement of
civilian populations, the inadequacy of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform efforts, and the challenge of sexual violence
being universally underreported for reasons that
include the risk of reprisal.

13-29364

S/PV.6948

The report responds to those emerging concerns
through a set of important recommendations that
include ensuring the deployment of women’s protection
advisers in United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions, thereby systematically
responding to sexual violence in conflict in all the
relevant situations. In that regard, my delegation would
like to express its appreciation for the efforts exerted by
Ms. Bangura and her team in the preparation of the first
report since she assumed her responsibilities, which
took into account the concerns expressed by Members
States last year regarding the mandate of the Special
Representative.
Sexual violence in conflict represents one of
the most serious forms of violation of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Such violations cause a lifetime of pain that cannot be
healed. In that regard, Egypt stresses the importance
of implementing policies of zero-tolerance for sexual
violence, ensuring that all perpetrators be held
accountable, whether they be the ones who committed,
ordered or condoned such crimes, and that all
perpetrators be pursued by any and all possible means.
Despite the Security Council’s unique ability to impose
targeted sanctions on perpetrators as an important
part of deterrence, Egypt emphasizes the importance
of adopting preventive measures to address the spread
of sexual violence in conflict as a priority. There is an
urgent need to support the Member States concerned in
preventing sexual violence, in ensuring zero tolerance
for it and in prosecuting its perpetrators.
Egypt also believes that it is of importance to
address sexual violence issues in the early phases of
peace processes, in mediation efforts and in ceasefire
and peace agreements, particularly in provisions
on security arrangements, transitional justice and
reparations. Increased attention must be paid to the
survivors of sexual violence in conflict situations as
an integral part of States’ obligations towards them,
including by setting up mechanisms aimed at preventing
the recurrence of such crimes and by providing them
with all the services and assistance they need, including
rehabilitation and reintegration support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): My delegation
welcomes today’s debate. While we align ourselves
with the statement made earlier by the observer of the

13-29364

European Union (EU), we would like to make some
remarks in our national capacity that complement those
made by the observer of the EU and other speakers
underlining the importance of the topic of women,
peace and security.
The Netherlands has for decades put gender equality
at the heart of all its policies. Internationally, we
support female leadership, the follow-up of resolution
1325 (2000), women’s economic empowerment and
the elimination of sexual violence against women.
Equal rights and opportunities for women and their
full participation in society and decision-making are
important not just for the security of women; women
are powerful agents for peace, stability and prosperity
in any society.
Violence against women, especially sexual
violence, has an enormous impact on many aspects of
family and society. For example, it is used to this day as
a weapon of war to break down societies.
The Netherlands welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General entitled “Sexual violence in
conflict” (S/2013/149) and in particular supports its
recommendations in four areas.
First, we support enhancing monitoring, research
and reporting, as well as putting in place an appropriate
mechanism or procedure by the Security Council to
systematically monitor commitments by parties to
conflict so as to prevent and address conflict-related
sexual violence.
Secondly, we advocate involving civil society
organizations and effective cooperation with the
signatories of national action plans.
Thirdly, we support the recommendations on
increasing attention given to the role of small arms, as
was successfully done in the negotiations on the Arms
Trade Treaty.
Fourthly, we favour strengthening the role of the
International Criminal Court as the ultimate resort in
fighting impunity against the most serious crimes.
Because of the important role of women, since
2007 the Netherlands has invested in national action
plans, together with civil society organizations,
research
institutions
and
other
Government
institutions — altogether more than 40 partners.
The objective of those partnerships is to create an
enabling environment in which women are better able

51

S/PV.6948

to take a leading role and to participate in political
decision-making processes. Within the United Nations,
the Netherlands wants to continue its proactive role
within the United Nations Human Rights Council, the
General Assembly and the Commission on the Status
of Women. We are also committed, and a long-term
supporter of, the United Nations Trust Fund to End
Violence against Women.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, let me thank
the Secretary-General; the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura; and Ms. Saran Keïta Diakité,
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security for their briefings.
Estonia aligns itself with the statements delivered
on behalf of the European Union and the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Estonia is dedicated to protecting and promoting
human rights and fundamental freedoms, both
nationally and internationally. As a member of the
Human Rights Council, Estonia’s particular focus is on
the rights of women and children, gender perspective in
conflict settlement and the fight against impunity.
Estonia is proud of having been a sponsor of
resolution 1820 (2008), on women and peace and
security, wherein for the first time in a Security Council
resolution sexual violence was recognized as a tactic
of war and where it is noted that rape and other forms
of sexual violence can constitute a war crime, a crime
against humanity or a constitutive act with respect to
genocide. We welcome the numerous steps taken in this
field within the framework of the United Nations and
commend, among other things, the work of UN-Women
and the Secretary-General’s Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Concerning the latest developments in the
United Nations, we welcome the adoption of the
agreed conclusions of the fifty-seventh session of the
Commission on the Status of Women, in which the
Commission urged States to strongly condemn violence
against women and girls committed in armed conflict
and post-conflict situations and called for effective
measures of accountability and redress, as well as
effective remedies.

52

Estonia is also very satisfied that the Arms Trade
Treaty, recently adopted by the General Assembly,
includes strong human rights and international
humanitarian law criteria. In assessing the export of
conventional arms, each country has to take into account
the risk of those arms being used to commit or facilitate
serious acts of gender-based violence or serious acts of
violence against women and children. We believe that
the effective implementation of the Treaty will make
a difference in the world. We urge States to apply the
relevant articles that are provisionally pending prior to
the Treaty’s entry into force.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/149) on which today’s discussion is based.
The report gives a shiver-raising overview of how
widespread the terrible scourge of sexual violence still
is. It also pointedly highlights emerging concerns such
as the plight of children born out of rape, the practice
of forced marriages by armed groups, sexual violence
against men and boys, the displacement of civilian
populations and the inadequacy of disarmament efforts.
We note with serious concern that, as reported, sexual
violence has been used to force internal and crossborder displacement in many places of the world and
that women and children are also targeted both inside
and outside refugee and internally displaced persons
camps and settlements.
We share the assessment of Special Representative
that fostering national ownership, leadership and
responsibility in addressing sexual violence are some
of the most important aspects in the fight against sexual
violence. It is essential that local communities consider
sexual violence as a crime. Regrettably, as noted in the
report, often, as a consequence of being raped in conflict,
there are reports of coerced marriages of survivors to
either the perpetrator or their family members. It is
certain, as the report also notes, that compelling rape
survivors to marry the perpetrators re-victimizes them.
That results in impunity for perpetrators and sends the
message that sexual violence is socially acceptable.
There is a wide range of tools available for
preventing crimes of sexual violence, as well as for
holding perpetrators accountable. The use of targeted
sanctions by the Security Council, with a focus on
specific individuals or entities suspected of bearing
the greatest responsibility for such crimes, is an
important aspect of deterrence. We welcome the fact
that the Council has expanded its designation criteria
to explicitly address sexual and gender-based violence.

13-29364

S/PV.6948

We look forward to the consistent application of that
tool.
Estonia would welcome having all the Security
Council Sanctions Committees consider focusing on
crimes of sexual violence. In that context, it might be
necessary to harmonize designation criteria for listed
individuals and entities by including any relevant
charges from the international justice mechanisms and,
importantly, from the International Criminal Court
(ICC).
The International Criminal Court itself has a unique
role in setting a new tone in the fight against impunity
for sexual and gender-based violence. The Rome Statute
of the ICC prohibits an unprecedented number of
gender crimes, including rape, sexual slavery, enforced
prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization
and other forms of sexual violence as war crimes,
crimes against humanity or genocide.
The Security Council has an important role with
regard to the ICC, especially in the field of State
cooperation with the Court. We strongly support the
Council’s calls for State cooperation and its commitment
to an effective follow-up to its decisions in that regard.
Resolution 2085 (2012), on Mali, and resolution 2098
(2013), on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which called for the establishment of the African-led
International Support Mission to Mali and authorized
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, respectively,
to support the ICC’s efforts, are important examples of
the Council’s commitment. We hope that the Council
will continue to find ways and means to further support
international criminal justice within the scope of its
mandate.
Allow me to note that Estonia confirms its
commitment to ending impunity and fighting sexual
violence through its financial contributions in the field
as well. In 2013, Estonia contributed financially to a
UNICEF project in the Central African Republic for
the prevention and response to gender-based violence.
Also this year, Estonia will be contributing financially
to the activities of the Office of the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and to the ICC Trust Fund for Victims.
In our view, the next important step for the United
Nations would be to further implement monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements on conflictrelated sexual violence. We would also urge the further

13-29364

deployment of female protection advisers to Security
Council-mandated missions. We must support the
non-governmental organizations working in the field
and protection for women’s human rights defenders. It
should also be noted that the overall goal of achieving
women’s empowerment and participation in society is
inextricably linked to the fight against gender-based
violence.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
commend the Council’s work on the issue of women
and peace and security, including in the area of sexual
violence in conflict, and to confirm my country’s strong
support for an even more systematic and comprehensive
approach to that important issue.
Finally, I would like to remind the Council of
something Ms. Bangura said recently: “I am sure there
will come a time where the only place we can read
about sexual violence in conflict is in the textbooks.”
Estonia will be there to support that aim.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Rwanda on its presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on the
important issue of women and peace and security. And
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his remarks and the other invited speakers for their
valuable briefings on the subject.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Malaysia joins other Member States in strongly
condemning acts of sexual violence against women and
girls. We feel there is an urgent need to address the
factors and underlying reasons that such acts continue.
More energy should be put into integration efforts, with
no groups excluded from participation in disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and security-sector
reform. We also agree that policymakers and private
entities must do more to help reduce acts of sexual
violence related to the extraction of natural resources.
At the same time, Malaysia is also deeply concerned
about the emerging incidence of sexual violence
perpetrated against men and boys, as well as the plight
of children born as a result of rape and the practice of
forced marriages by armed groups.

53

S/PV.6948

It is a worrying trend that sexual violence in those
contexts remains universally under-reported, for which
a lack of adequate national capacity and expertise for
investigating and prosecuting acts of sexual violence
remains one of the main causes. Malaysia therefore
welcomes the ongoing work of the United Nations
and other stakeholders, as well as that of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, which focuses its efforts on strengthening the
capacity of national rule-of-law and justice institutions.
We feel that engaging with the relevant Governments
would strengthen the Team’s capacity to effectively
address sexual violence against women and girls.
With regard to accountability for crimes related to
sexual violence, we feel that accountability requires not
only careful investigations and prosecutions of those
responsible, but a broader acceptance of political, legal
and moral responsibility by individuals and institutions
for past violations. Malaysia views accountability as
a duty under both domestic and international law. In
that regard, national systems should be pushed to meet
international standards for ensuring accountability and
justice so that perpetrators of such crimes will never go
unpunished.
My delegation believes that women’s equal, full
and active participation is key to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. In that regard, while we acknowledge
the existing normative frameworks as represented by
the Security Council resolutions pertaining to women
and peace and security, we hope we will see a greater
impetus towards actual realization of those resolutions,
including the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), in order
to increase women’s participation in the field of peace
and security.
In that context, my delegation welcomes the various
initiatives and actions undertaken by Member States,
United Nations entities, including UN-Women, civil
society organizations and other relevant actors that are
focused on supporting and increasing the representation
of women in peace negotiations and mainstreaming
gender perspectives into peace agreements. In
recognition of that crucial element, in October 2011 the
Malaysian Ministry of Defence and the United Nations
Development Programme jointly organized a seminar
on promoting peace through mainstreaming the gender
perspective in peacekeeping operations. For Malaysia, a
country firmly committed to contributing peacekeeping
troops to United Nations missions, that seminar on
gender and peacekeeping represents our commitment

54

to supporting both the global agenda for gender and
peacekeeping as well as policies that support women’s
development. Additionally, in September, Malaysia,
along with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
will jointly host a regional seminar on child protection
at the Malaysian Peacekeeping Training Centre in Port
Dickson. The seminar, which will include participation
by 30 Member States in the Asian region, will officially
validate the training module for civilian and military
personnel on peacekeeping missions dealing with the
protection of children involved in armed conflict.
My delegation is deeply concerned that forced
marriage, rape and sexual slavery have been documented
in several States in conflict and have occurred under
the pretext of Islamic sharia law. Malaysia wishes
to emphasize that Islam does not condone forced
marriage, rape or sexual slavery in any way. We believe
that education is key to reducing the incidence of sexual
violence. In the area of education, Malaysia has been
working through the Malaysia Australia Education
Project for Afghanistan, which aims to enable Afghan
women teachers to master English and Islamic
teachings. The trainers are playing a critical role in
developing the skills of a new generation of female
Afghan teachers, who will be role models and mentors
for girls in years to come.
In conclusion, Malaysia reaffirms its strong
commitment to efforts to address sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations, and strongly
believes that the issue of women and peace and security
deserves the Security Council’s sustained attention.
In that regard, we will continue to work with others
who share a similar interest in advancing that agenda
and ensuring the full mainstreaming of women into
activities aimed at achieving peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): Allow me to begin by
commending the President’s work on convening today’s
debate on the issue of sexual violence in conflict. This
timely debate highlights the urgent need to address the
various forms of violence perpetrated against women
and girls. Despite all the achievements and progress
that have been made in promoting the protection and
rights of women, such violence persists all over the
world. Indonesia also wishes to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on sexual violence in conflict
(S/2013/149), which is a valuable starting point for our

13-29364

S/PV.6948

deliberations today on improving ways to eliminate
and prevent violence against women, particularly in
conflict situations.
At the outset, Indonesia associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Viet Nam
on behalf of the member countries of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.
Indonesia notes with deep concern the use of
sexual violence as a tactic of war and one that worsens
its consequences, as highlighted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. Against that backdrop, Indonesia
condemns all forms of violence against women and
girls in armed conflicts, particularly sexual violence,
which, as the report states, predominantly affects
women and girls but can also affect men and boys.
We wish to reaffirm our support for resolution 1325
(2000), the first to specifically address the impact of
war on women and women’s contributions to conflict
resolution and sustainable peace. The follow-up Security
Council resolutions on women, peace and security also
constitute a milestone for protection and empowerment
measures for women in the special situation of conflict.
Indonesia commends the adoption of the agreed
conclusions of the fifty-seventh session of the
Commission on the Status of Women (CSW), last month,
as a manifestation of the intergovernmental efforts
that have been made by countries under the United
Nations framework. The agreement reached on the
agreed conclusions is a step forward in strengthening
countries’ commitment to tackling violence against
women and girls.
The CSW conclusions send a clear and strong
message: violence against women and girls committed
in armed conflict and post-conflict situations is strongly
condemned; sexual and gender-based violence, which
affects victims, families, communities and societies,
is recognized; and effective accountability and redress
measures, as well remedies, are required.
At the national level, Indonesia’s national action
plan on human rights serves as a strong platform for our
commitment to eliminate and prevent violence against
women. The process of drafting a presidential decree is
ongoing, as a legal basis to formulate a national action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
When completed, the action plan, among things, will
cover all phases of the peace process — from prevention
to ending conflict to recovery from social conflict.

13-29364

Indonesia wishes to highlight some of the main
challenges in our efforts to eliminate and further
prevent violence against women, including sexual
violence: first, insufficient gender-sensitive policies;
secondly, inadequate implementation of legal and
policy frameworks; thirdly, inadequate data collection,
analysis and research; fourthly, the lack of financial
and human resources and insufficient allocation of
such resources; and, fifthly, the lack of comprehensive,
consistent, sustained, transparent and adequately
monitored and evaluated efforts.
Those gaps have yet to be bridged by States as the
bearers of the primary responsibility in addressing the
issue of violence against women and its impact, in order
to translate commitments into practical approaches and
actions on the ground, to fashion more compassionate
responses for victims, to pursue more aggressive
prosecutions of perpetrators and to create more secure
communities and environments.
With its multifold economic, social and cultural
consequences, sexual violence in conflict hampers not
only women and men victims, but also their families
and communities. Therefore, Indonesia supports the
six-point priority agenda established by the former
and current Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
To conclude, Indonesia would like to reiterate the
importance of the international community, including
the United Nations, as the key stakeholder, joining
hands and providing support for States to address the
remaining gaps and tackle the gravity of the situation.
Indonesia also urges all parties to conflict to comply
with international humanitarian and human rights law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Kyaw Tin (Myanmar): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to express our appreciation to the
Rwandan presidency for organizing this open debate on
the important issue of women and peace and security.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict Zainab Hawa Bangura,
and the representative of the NGO Working Group on

55

S/PV.6948

Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Keïta Diakité, for
their informative briefings this morning.
My delegation takes the floor to add its voice in
condemning all form of violence against women and
girls in armed conflicts. Since the adoption of the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000), 13 years ago, there
has been a growing recognition that gender equality
plays an integral part in advancing development and
peace and security, and that women can make valuable
contributions to conflict resolution and in rebuilding
their communities.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/149) not only highlights several concerns on
violence against women, but also refers to the practice
of forced marriage by certain armed forces and to the
links between sexual violence and the illicit extraction
of natural resources.
We thank the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for its consultations with our
Mission in the process of preparing the annual report.
However, my delegation regrets that the report still refers
to our country, along with parties to armed conflict
credibly suspected of committing or being responsible
for such acts of violence, although Myanmar is making
substantial progress in national reconciliation and
bringing an end to conflicts with virtually all ethnic
armed groups. The report does, however, acknowledge
the fact that the allegations that have been received have
not been independently verified due to limited access.
Armed conflicts could naturally breed violence,
especially against vulnerable groups. At the same
time, such situations could also be exploited to make
up or inflate stories of violence by either side of a
conflict for its own agenda. Objectivity and accuracy
are of the utmost importance in the reporting exercise,
especially when dealing with sensitive issues. A few
isolated incidents committed by certain individuals
cannot always be construed as the policy of a certain
Government or institution. The most important issue
in this connection is to have proper legal action taken
against any perpetrator.
Women in Myanmar are protected by culture,
religion and laws. Myanmar’s tradition and culture,
which abhor the sexual exploitation of women, strongly
contribute to our national efforts to promote gender
equality and to reduce sexual violence against women
and girls. Gender-based violence is being addressed
through legal action against all perpetrators, regardless

56

of whoever commits the crime. Members of the armed
forces have to observe not only the penal code but also
the military’s code of conduct. We fully support a zerotolerance policy with regard to violence against women
and girls.
The best way to ensure the protection of women
and children in armed conflicts is to put a speedy
end to such conflicts. The new Government has
made unprecedented strides in its efforts at national
reconciliation, resulting in establishing ceasefire
agreements with all but one ethnic group. Peace talks
with the remaining group are also gaining momentum.
We are confident that lasting peace will soon prevail in
every corner of our country. Such developments will do
away with the alleged violence against women in the
dwindling areas of conflict.
As Myanmar moves towards to an open society,
the press and media are enjoying greater freedom.
The newfound media freedom is helping our efforts
in addressing violence against women through
independent monitoring and reporting. In addition, a
complaint mechanism to report such abuses is also being
put in place by our national human rights commission.
As a member of the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women, Myanmar is also
implementing a 10-year national strategic plan for the
advancement of women and is in the process of drafting
a law on violence against women.
I would like to voice our support for the SecretaryGeneral’s assertion that Members States bear the
primary legal and moral responsibility for preventing
and addressing conflict-related violence. My delegation
would like to conclude by reaffirming its commitment
to enhance its efforts for the prevention and elimination
of violence against women in conflict areas through
strong legal action and national reconciliation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Bernardini (Italy): Allow me to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate of the Security Council and by complimenting
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the representative of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
on their important statements. I also wish to assure the
Special Representative of the Italian Government’s full
support for the fulfillment of her mandate.

13-29364

S/PV.6948

Italy aligns itself with the statements delivered on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security. I wish to make the
following remarks in a national capacity.
The Secretary-General’s report on sexual violence
in conflict (S/2013/149) gives us a comprehensive
picture of a daunting challenge for the international
community. In far too many conflict-related situations,
women, men and children are not protected from such
international crimes. We are particularly concerned
about the serious human rights violations in northern
Mali, including rape; the heightened risk of rape
for refugees and internally displaced persons; the
perpetration of rape and sexual violence in detention
centres in Syria; and the alarming number of incidents
of sexual violence in Somalia. We also note with
concern emerging trends such as the perpetration of
sexual violence against men and boys, the plight of
children born as a result of a rape, and the practice of
forced marriages by armed groups.
There are key early-warning and conflictprevention tools that the international community can
use to prevent such heinous acts. For example, timely
briefings to the Security Council by the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative and by UN-Women;
the roll-out of United Nations system monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements; and the inclusion
of women’s protection advisers in peacekeeping
missions and political missions.
At the same time, we need a powerful response.
Again, the Security Council needs to step up pressure
on perpetrators of sexual violence in armed conflicts
through the adoption of targeted measures by the
relevant Sanctions Committees. When there is no ad
hoc committee, the Council should close any protection
or impunity gaps. The Council should incorporate
measures on sexual violence in all the relevant country
resolutions and in the authorization and renewal of
the mandates of peacekeeping and special political
missions.
The commitments of the parties to a conflict should
be monitored and followed up, and a zero-tolerance
policy should be taken towards sexual misconduct by
peacekeeping, political and peacebuilding personnel.
International justice has placed a welcome emphasis
on combating sexual violence as a complement to
national efforts, in particular under the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. Comprehensive

13-29364

justice strategies are essential, including accountability
and reparation, following a victim-centered approach.
The Security Council should also contribute to ensuring
that there no safe havens for the perpetrators of sexual
violence in armed conflict.
Cooperation with civil society organizations,
particularly women-led civil society organizations,
should accompany those actions. Governments must
ensure the protection of women’s human rights
defenders, who face particular risks in conflict
situations.
In March, the Commission on the Status of
Women approved agreed conclusions with a strong
condemnation of all forms of violence against women
and girls, including sexual and gender-based violence.
The Arms Trade Treaty, adopted by the General
Assembly just this month, obliges States parties to
take into account the risk of conventional arms being
used to commit or facilitate serious acts of genderbased violence. The Group of Eight made a strong
commitment to addressing impunity and preventing
sexual violence in conflict. Italy has always supported
all such commitments, which must now be followed by
concrete actions.
As a supporter of the landmark resolution 1820
(2009), Italy is convinced of the evident connection
between ending sexual violence and promoting peace
and security. That is why the Italian national action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
includes specific provisions to address sexual violence
in conflict. The 2013 Italian development cooperation
strategy includes capacity-building activities and the
provision of assistance to survivors in Democratic
Republic of Congo, Lebanon, Libya, Palestine, the
Sudan and Syria. The Centre of Excellence for Stability
Police Units, the Vicenza-based training centre, created
by the Italian Government in 2005, systematically
includes the prevention of sexual violence in their
courses for peacekeepers.
Let me conclude by urging everyone not to forget
that the primary responsibility for addressing sexual
violence still lies with States, as the Secretary-General
indicated in his call for national ownership and
leadership. As responsible Governments, we owe that
to the survivors of sexual violence and to the families
of victims. Italy stands ready to assist and support such
efforts.

57

S/PV.6948

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.

coordination and implementation of prevention
processes in conflict and post-conflict situations.

Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
thanks the Rwandan presidency for having convened
this important open debate on women, peace and
security focused on the issue of sexual violence in
armed conflict.

In that context, we have promoted the inclusion
of the gender perspective and leadership functions in
the context of our armed forces. There has also been
an increasing awareness of gender among the armed
forces and the equitable participation of women in
peacebuilding and decision-making processes, as well
as in international security.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Canada
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security, as well as that delivered by the representative
of Slovenia on behalf of the Human Security Network.
We also welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral on sexual violence in armed conflict
(S/2013/149), in particular with regard to the actions
taken and challenges faced by States in protecting
women, men and children from sexual violence in the
context of conflict and post-conflict situations.
We underscore the role of the Security Council
when it comes to women, peace and security through
the adoption of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010) and 2086 (2013).
We welcome the work of the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict Situations, Ms. Bangura, whom
we assure of our full cooperation.
Chile is firmly committed to the fight against
violence against women and girls, which we view
as an atrocious crime that must be addressed in a
comprehensive way. Violence, in all forms, goes
against human rights and, as such, addressing it must
be priority for States, and not an optional extra.
The policy of Chile in this area has been strengthened
through our participation in a number of international
instruments that have allowed us to consolidate our
democratic principles and make progress in this
direction. In August 2009, Chile published its national
action plan pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000), which
it structured around the gender perspective, human
rights, participation and coordination. This year, Chile
will begin updating the plan in line with the guidelines
set out by the United Nations so as to incorporate
dissemination, follow-up and awareness-raising
mechanisms on gender and security. We aim to achieve
the comprehensive and cross-cutting implementation
of actions seeking to promote targets for peace and
women’s participation and leadership in the planning,

58

We have achieved that goal with the active
participation of a number of national bodies. In
March, Chile organized a parallel event devoted to
this topic in the context of the fifty-seventh session
of the Commission on the Status of Women, entitled
“Chile global network of women peacebuilders:
implementation of the women, peace and security
agenda — experiences from Latin America”. As part of
that event, the Deputy Minister of the National Service
for Women of Chile, Ms. Viviana Paredes, reaffirmed
Chile’s commitment to the Security Council resolutions
on this issue and to the national action plan and its
adaptation to the new requirements that my country has
proposed.
We believe it is equally important to continue to
promote the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
in our region through the exchange of experiences and
international cooperation, both at the bilateral level and
in the regional mechanisms for peacekeeping operations
of which Chile is a part. That is the case with the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, for which Chile
has provided female military contingents and in which
it has followed the United Nations zero-tolerance policy
for the sexual abuse and misconduct cases in which
certain members of the Mission have been involved.
We believe that the zero-tolerance policy should be a
general standard that is strictly and zealously enforced
in all peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.
A key element in making progress on these issues
has been the guidelines established in the Security
Council resolutions that followed historic resolution
1325 (2000), which reinforce its principles and the
undeniable progress that has been made on the issue
of gender-based violence within the United Nations
system. In that respect, it is worth highlighting the
conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women
at its fifty-seventh session. We promoted the inclusion,
in those conclusions, of the relationship between
the trafficking and illicit use of small arms and light

13-29364

S/PV.6948

weapons and the resurgence of violence against women
and children, as we did in the text of the Arms Trade
Treaty, which also deals with this issue.
We agree with the Secretary-General when he states
in his report that national tribunals continue to bear the
primary responsibilty for the fight against impunity
for cases of sexual violence and are an important
complement to the efforts of the International Criminal
Court, fundamentally in terms of restoring victims’
dignity and holding perpetrators legally accountable.
One of the founding principles of Chile’s foreign
policy is the promotion of fundamental and universal
human rights. In that respect, we will continue to
support the efforts aimed at preventing violence against
women in conflict and promoting mediation in conflict
situations. We will continue to advocate for women’s
inclusion and participation in efforts at peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and mediation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): The progress
achieved in addressing the issue of sexual violence
in conflict since the International Criminal Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda placed sexual
aggression on the agenda of post-conflict justice is
undeniable. The relevant Security Council resolutions
have created an extensive toolkit for tackling conflictrelated sexual violence.
As horrendous assault on individual bodies and
human dignity, sexual violence in conflict goes far
beyond common banditry and has been repeatedly
used in the imposition of wider political agendas, the
destruction of opponents, ethnic cleansing, forced
displacement and clearing of access to resources and
territory.
My delegation therefore congratulates the Rwandan
presidency of the Security Council for holding this
important debate. We welcome the recommendations
by the Secretary-General contained in his most recent
report (S/2013/149). We also commend the work and
personal dedication of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura.
Speaking elsewhere earlier this year, Ms. Bangura
insisted that sexual violence as a tactic of war was as
effective as any bomb and as destructive as any mine,
and that it needed to be addressed with the same

13-29364

determination as any other deadly weapon used in
war. Indeed, we cannot stem conflict-related sexual
aggression unless we are determined to prevent,
protect and prosecute. For as long as the perpetrators
know they can get away with it, that barbaric tactic
of warfare will continue, with inevitable peace and
security implications.
While we associate ourselves with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union, I shall
limit myself to the following points at this stage.
When it comes to conflict-related sexual crimes,
my delegation urges the Security Council to use the
full range of means at its disposal to tackle impunity,
including systematic referrals to the International
Criminal Court, mandating commissions of inquiry
and explicitly and vocally condemning such crimes.
Lithuania supports the full implementation of
the provisions of resolution 1960 (2010) on rape and
other forms of sexual violence as designation criteria
when adopting or renewing targeted sanctions in
situations of armed conflict. We expect such criteria
to be consistently applied in sanctioning entities and
individuals identified in the Secretary-General’s
reports and those named by the Special Representative.
My delegation would welcome enhanced interaction
between the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the relevant
Security Council Sanctions Committees and expert
groups, as well as between the Special Representative
and the Council as a whole. Furthermore, we call for
the inclusion of provisions regarding conflict-related
sexual violence in all the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping and special political missions.
Tackling impunity is hard to imagine without a
robust monitoring and reporting system. That may
be easier said than done, however, especially where
technical capacities are inadequate or where a critical
lack of confidence in transitional justice create serious
impediments. If the perpetrators of sexual violence are
free to return and establish themselves among those they
have abused, victims will continue to live in fear and
countless abuses will remain unreported. Developing
the requisite capabilities and restoring victims’ trust
in justice are essential for the purposes of prevention
and deterrence. Providing better support for victims,
including through women’s protection advisers,
reparation mechanisms and women’s systematic
inclusion in all aspects of conflict resolution, post-

59

S/PV.6948

conflict reconciliation and transitional justice, is key
to restoring victims’ trust and ensuring that crimes will
not go unpunished.
The Council and individual Member States have an
important role to play in those matters. My delegation
welcomes the recent declaration by the Group of Eight,
including the provisions on improved investigation
and documentation of sexual violence in conflict. The
Council in particular should see to it that security
sector reforms and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes are fully responsive to
the sensitivities arising from conflict-related sexual
violence and provide rigorous vetting and training
of national security institutions. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that blanket
amnesties should not be applied where conflict-related
sexual violence is in question.
With respect to a zero-tolerance policy, my
delegation firmly supports the inclusion of provisions on
a zero-tolerance policy vis-à-vis sexual misconduct by
United Nations personnel in all the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding
missions. For the time being, that is not the case, and
we hope that the gap will be redressed as mandates are
renewed.
On a broader scale, however, we as the international
community should be using all means and opportunities
available for stemming sexual violence as a tool of war.
The combined power of women’s full participation;
consistent support and protection to victims, human
rights defenders, activists and journalists who expose
the crimes; education and global awareness-raising
campaigns; and the personal engagement of world
leaders, spiritual authorities and community leaders
are essential in fostering a global zero-tolerance
environment for those heinous crimes. We expect no
less from the Council, as the most authoritative body
on peace and security matters, but to take the lead
in raising the stakes for all those who think they can
engage, unchallenged, in rape or sexual abuse to a
prohibitive degree.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Rwandan presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this timely and important
debate.

60

Kyrgyzstan welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/732), which contains a comprehensive
analysis of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and the progress achieved over the past year.
My delegation also welcomes his report on sexual
violence in conflict (S/2013/149) and supports the
recommendations contained therein. However, we
believe that current situations in the Middle East and
in some countries in the African region require further
consolidated efforts by Member States and by global
and regional security structures.
Kyrgyzstan believes it is necessary to take
additional measures to effectively address impunity
for perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict and to
ensure the equal participation of women in mediation,
humanitarian assistance and post-conflict recovery
processes.
We support the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral on increased attention to women’s empowerment
in terms of developing policies and strategies with
regard to peacebuilding and in considering the renewal
of the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
missions.
Kyrgyzstan welcomes the efforts of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations in preventing violence
against women in armed conflict. In that respect,
important measures aim to strengthen the operational
capacity of the United Nations, including through the
United Nations International Network of Female Police
Peacekeepers, established for those taking part in
peacekeeping operations.
Kyrgyzstan appreciates the efforts of UN-Women to
ensure gender mainstreaming within the United Nations
system. We underline the importance of the outcome
of the fifty-seventh session of the Commission on the
Status of Women, held in March, which considered in
detail the problems of preventing and eliminating all
forms of violence against women.
In the current difficult circumstances, my
delegation continues to call on UN-Women to strengthen
cooperation with other agencies in providing support to
Member States in the preparation and implementation
of national plans to implement Security Council
resolutions on preventing violence against women and
enhancing their role in ensuring peace and security.
Kyrgyzstan attaches the greatest importance to the
participation of women in political and peacebuilding

13-29364

S/PV.6948

processes and takes concrete measures to maintain
peace and stability in our country and in the region as
a whole.
In order to effectively implement the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000), on 18 February, the Government
approved its national plan of action. The plan provides for
a set of measures aimed at establishing an institutional
system on the protection of women’s rights and creating
favourable conditions for increasing women’s role and
participation in efforts towards peace, security and
conflict prevention.
In addition, on 10 April, the President of the
Kyrgyz Republic approved a concept on strengthening
the unity of the people and inter-ethnic relations in the
Kyrgyz Republic, which will undoubtedly contribute
to strengthening peace, stability and post-conflict
reconstruction.
The role of the Peacebuilding Fund is of great
importance. The Fund has supported Kyrgyzstan in
its implementation of national reconciliation and postconflict reconstruction projects. Today, projects aimed
at completing that process are being planned.
We would also like to note the activities of
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, in cooperation with the
United Nations Development Programme and United
Nations agencies, in promoting conflict prevention
initiatives and strengthened inter-ethnic harmony.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Kyrgyzstan’s
commitment to further contribute to United Nations
efforts in ensuring women’s rights and eradicating
conflict-related violence.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mr. Seruhere (United Republic of Tanzania): We
welcome this open debate of the Security Council on
women and peace and security. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing and for his annual report
entitled “Sexual violence in conflict” ( S/2013/149).
We also thank Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for her presentation, as well as
Ms. Saran Keïta Diakité.
The international community has made considerable
strides since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
Through it and subsequent resolutions adopted by this

13-29364

body, the international community has committed itself
to ending the pain and distress affecting women and
girls who are subjected to sexual violence in conflict
and post-conflict situations.
It is a matter of concern that, despite our determined
efforts, women and girls continue to suffer from the
abhorrent crimes perpetrated by armed groups and by
national authorities whose duty is to shield civilians
from harm.
Instead of diminishing, conflict-related sexual
violence is on the rise, and it increasingly involves men
and boys as perpetrators employ sexual violence as a
tactic of war and as a punishment and interrogation
technique.
Impunity of that nature is a great challenge to
our collective resolve. It is in clear contempt of the
values we have committed to uphold. We must do more
at national, regional and international levels to end
impunity, by demonstrating to perpetrators that such
crimes will not go unpunished.
Perpetrators of sexual-based violence must be
prosecuted and tried by competent national courts or
tribunals. Where that is not feasible — as is often the
case in conflict and most post-conflict situations — the
States concerned should be willing to surrender suspects
to international criminal courts and tribunals to face
trial.
The international criminal justice system, despite its
shortcomings, has had its merits, including offering an
elaboration of sexual violence as capable of constituting
a crime against humanity, a war crime and an act of
genocide. The indictment of leaders of armed groups
by the International Criminal Court (ICC) — such
as those of Joseph Kony, Bosco Ntaganda, Sylvestre
Mudacumura and others — is a step towards ending
impunity, however moderate it is.
We encourage supporting and strengthening
the ICC, with the view to broadening its reach and
acceptability, for it has been of immense value to the
international community. Needless to say, it is the
only international criminal justice mechanism that we
have at our disposal for fighting pervasive impunity. It
deserves to be commended, not to be maligned.
While prosecution is critical in ending impunity,
we must also continue to address its root causes. We
must resolve conflicts by reconciling warring parties
and encouraging dialogue, rather than by employing

61

S/PV.6948

military solutions. If necessary, negative forces must be
neutralized, demobilized and reintegrated into society.
The reconstruction of post-conflict countries must
be undertaken in an inclusive manner so that the process
is owned by all parties to a conflict. We have witnessed
the consequences of excluding some armed groups
from disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and security sector reform programmes.
We must do more to empower women and girls
to participate in peace and security processes, as well
as decision-making roles in conflict prevention and
conflict resolution. We are encouraged by the increasing
number of female military and police peacekeepers.
The United Republic of Tanzania contributes more than
200 such courageous women to such missions. It is our
goal to contribute more in the future, in the spirit of
resolution 1325 (2000).
We must find effective ways to respond to the needs
of the survivors of sexual violence. The United Nations
Action multi-partner trust fund is pivotal in that regard.
We encourage Member States and other partners to
contribute to the fund.
Let me conclude by underscoring the unswerving
commitment of the United Republic of Tanzania to
ending violence against women, men and children
wherever and by whosoever committed. We renew
our commitment to the regional and international
instruments to which we are parties in order to achieve
that noble objective. We will continue to support the
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Ms. Anderson (Ireland): Conflict-related sexual
violence is an issue that, in recent years, has continued
to rise on the international agenda. Such attention has
been driven by several factors, including the sustained
leadership shown by the Council; the work of the
Secretary-General and the authoritative and passionate
voice of his Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict; and the efforts of Member States and those
of civil society organizations, which do so much to
amplify the voices of marginalized women and men.
Last week’s forthright Group of Eight declaration is
clear evidence of how high-profile the issue has become.
I would like to commend the United Kingdom on the
leadership that it has demonstrated with its Preventing

62

Sexual Violence Initiative. We look forward to that
momentum being maintained with a further Security
Council debate in June.
Such high-profile action and momentum — and
even more of both — are desperately needed. The recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/149) sets out
the brutal realities facing women in conflict situations
today. It does not shirk from going into exhaustive
and difficult detail. That includes the 1,700 rape cases
registered in and around Mogadishu last year, almost one
third of which involved child victims; the use of sexual
violence in Syria during house searches, at checkpoints
and in detention; and the scale, savagery and systematic
nature of conflict-related sexual violence in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Despite its range and specificity, the SecretaryGeneral’s report is far from comprehensive. As the
report points out, sexual violence is almost universally
underreported. The information it presents is therefore
only indicative of the scope and character of sexual
violence being committed against women, children and
men.
The report needs to be updated almost as soon
as it is written. As an example, the latest information
reaching us about the Central African Republic
suggests a situation out of control, with sexual violence
employed on all sides as an instrument of conflict.
Faced with such horrors, how can we translate the
concern voiced around this table into meaningful action
on the ground? I would like to focus on just three points,
following on from the European Union statement and
from the statement by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security, both of which Ireland has aligned itself with.
The first issue relates to ending impunity, which
is absolutely critical to ensuring both accountability
and effective deterrence. That requires a multi-pronged
approach: building national capacity to investigate
and prosecute acts of sexual violence; further steps to
ensure that international criminal justice deals with
sexual violence in a more systematic and consistent
manner; and further consideration of how the Security
Council can act more effectively in applying targeted
sanctions.
The steps already taken by the Security Council
in relation to targeted sanctions are welcome and
significant, but there is more to be done. As the

13-29364

S/PV.6948

non-profit organization Security Council Report
identified in its recent cross-cutting report, political
caution in the Council has precluded a more ambitious
use of sanctions in the women, peace and security
context. To achieve more traction and to deliver more
results, the Council needs to be more consistent and
comprehensive in its approach.
One of the core recommendations contained in
the Secretary-General’s report is that all the Security
Council Sanctions Committees include a focus on
crimes of sexual violence and that the Council expand
its institutional capacity so as to develop ways to apply
sanctions where no such committees are in place.
Ireland strongly endorses that recommendation, and
we hope at our next open debate, in June, to hear of
progress being made towards its fulfilment.
The second issue concerns the deployment of
women’s protection advisers. One particular innovation
that has made a real difference and has had a catalytic
impact on the ground is the deployment of more
women’s protection advisers to missions. I reiterate
the call by the Group of Friends for the necessary and
specific budgetary resources to be identified to ensure
that women’s protection advisers are deployed where
they are needed in all the relevant Security Councilmandated missions.
The third issue is the focus on participation. A
defining feature of the resolution 1325 (2000) agenda is
that it goes beyond protection to embrace empowerment.
There is an inextricable connection between
women’s treatment in peacetime and their treatment
in conflict. As Special Representative Bangura put it
recently:
“If women are seen as second-class citizens in
peacetime, their rights will not be respected when
there is unrest. If they are viewed as unimportant
before war breaks out, they will be treated as
expendable during conflict”.
Empowerment cannot and will not happen without
women’s participation. Promoting participation is
a challenge that is shared right across the United
Nations system, but the Security Council clearly has
responsibilities within its remit. The detailed and
independent Security Council Report to which I
referred earlier gives cause for concern in that regard.
While acknowledging progress on other aspects of the
resolution 1325 (2000) agenda, it finds that:

13-29364

“There are worrying indications that the
Council’s focus is less sharp when it comes to the
women’s participation aspect”.
That imbalance needs to be addressed. The Security
Council should factor women’s participation into all its
deliberations and decisions in a systematic way. Such a
focus is essential if we are to move beyond symptoms
and to address root causes.
Finally, let me briefly update the Council on
developments in Ireland. We are currently undertaking
an independent review of our resolution 1325 (2000)
national action plan and, in the interests of transparency
and sharing lessons learned, we intend to make public
the main lessons identified as part of that process. I
would also like to note that the Irish Defence Forces
are breaking new ground in producing their own
resolution 1325 (2000) action plan so as to ensure that
the objectives for which they bear responsibility are
delivered.
As we know, sexual violence in conflict is vicious
and pitiless, and there is no sign of it abating. Rather,
the roll call of shame continues to grow ever longer.
Insofar as today’s debate strengthens our resolve and
brings us closer to achieving a real and life-changing
impact on the ground, it will indeed be worthwhile.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Thomson (Fiji): Allow me, first, to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate, which
provides an opportunity for all members to contribute
to the discussion on the global women and peace and
security agenda. Allow me also to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2013/149), which provides a
clear articulation of the current and emerging concerns
regarding sexual violence as it pertains to international
peace and security.
The past debates of the Council on women and peace
and security in which Fiji has participated have focused
on the broader implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The current report of the Secretary-General
focuses on sexual violence in conflict, bringing into
sharper focus the work needed for the implementation
of the subsequent resolutions, in particular resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010).
Fiji is committed to the elimination of sexual
violence and to working both domestically and with the
international community to do so. At the national level,

63

S/PV.6948

Fiji’s Ministry of Women has revived the Inter-Agency
Task Force on the Elimination of Violence against
Women to coordinate policy responses across all
Government agencies. It is working with the Fiji police
force to implement the law introduced in the last few
years that, among other things, introduced marital rape
as a specific offence under the criminal code, and also
introduced a child-welfare code requiring teachers,
doctors and other professionals to report suspected
child-abuse cases. The Ministry also champions a
campaign on zero tolerance of violence against women
and children, which operates at the community level in
partnership with community leaders, the police force
and non-governmental organizations.
At the international level, Fiji’s commitment to
eliminating sexual violence is expressed primarily
through its peacekeeping efforts. Fiji sends police
peacekeepers to missions where the mandate includes
capacity-building of local security institutions. In postconflict situations, our experience has been that a large
part of that capacity- building is to assist local security
institutions in responding to cases of sexual violence,
from initial contact with victims through victim
counseling through to the finality of police involvement
in such cases. Beyond this, community policing and
assisting local police institutions in awareness-raising
and preventative policing has also formed part of Fiji’s
contribution.
Eliminating sexual violence is crucial, because only
in the absence of sexual and other forms of violence
will the empowerment of women be possible so as to
achieve gender equality. Women in our communities
are change-makers and core to the functioning of our
communities. They are first responders in moments
of crisis, including in responding to natural disasters
and in adapting the approach of communities to new
challenges such as those posed by climate change. Our
societies are only as strong as the weakest among us. If
we are to address emerging security and developmental
challenges, we have to ensure that those most at risk of
marginalization, including at-risk women and children,
are freed from the risk of violence and fully empowered
to contribute.
Accordingly, I would like to conclude by restating
Fiji’s steadfast commitment to working with the
international community to implement resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions.

64

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Elbahi (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate in order to consider the
issue of women and peace and security, which is one
of the permanent items on our agenda. I should like
also to thank the Secretary-General and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bangura.
Aware of the need to highlight the role of women
in peacetime, my Government has established a policy
aimed at empowering women that is based on the
following pillars: the environment, health, education,
economic development, participation in decision-making
processes, the settlement of disputes, and peace and
human rights. A plan of action has been implemented
with a view to implementing that policy. In addition, a
number of administrative units responsible for women’s
affairs have been set up. Gender-specific measures have
been promoted across all departments and ministries,
including in the provinces, in order to establish plans of
actions and strategies aimed at empowering women and
strengthening their participation at all levels.
Projects have also been set up for the economic
empowerment of women through the establishment of
a women’s portfolio, a revolving fund for women for
the purpose of savings and economic development,
and small-business projects that benefit women, set
up by the Zakat department. I would also cite a project
involving young graduates, the establishment of a
group for working women, and other family-oriented
undertakings. Empowerment programmes are focusing
on rural women, particularly in Darfur, Kordofan and
Blue Nile.
We have made considerable progress in terms
of empowering women and strengthening their
participation. For example, laws were enacted on
equality of salary and retirement age. The electoral law
of 2008 increased women’s participation in Parliament;
representation is now at 27 per cent. Women have been
able to run for office and vote since laws to that effect
were enacted in the 1950s and 1960s.
Women were included on the list of candidates for
the presidential election. The participation of women
in the public sector has increased significantly. In the
Parliament, the rate is 28 per cent; in the private sector,
54 per cent; and in terms of economic production,
87.8 per cent. The Justice Department includes

13-29364

S/PV.6948

80 women judges, and there are 50 women diplomats,
including ambassadors and heads of missions to other
countries. Women can join the security and armed
forces and have reached grades as high as brigadier.
They participate fully in the private sector and have
made great strides in the public sector.
My Government has promoted such policies
throughout all of the Sudanese provinces and regions,
focusing on Darfur in particular. The projects are
aimed at meeting the concerns of rural women first and
foremost and include the financing of micro-projects
aimed at alleviating poverty, training and capacitybuilding
programmes,
and
awareness-raising
programmes on health and nutrition, women’s rights,
education and peace education. The project allocates
30 per cent of its funding to small and medium-sized
enterprises.
Furthermore, my Government has undertaken
various projects at the central Government and
regional levels. Those projects depend on the specific
requirements of the area and are aimed at strengthening
women’s participation in peacetime.
A national strategy to eliminate violence against
women was put in place in 2005. A unit on violence
against women and children has also been set up. Special
law-enforcement agencies have been established to
protect women and children, and women’s rights are
also protected within the army.
Genital mutilation was eliminated in 2008, and
the criminal justice system has introduced provisions
relating to war crimes so as to protect women from
all forms of violence in Darfur; that was done in
cooperation with the United Nations Population Fund
and the human rights office in the Sudan. We have also
strengthened the World Health Organization protocol
on the protection of victims of rape, making it possible
to file a complaint and receive reparations. In 2010, a
law criminalizing child abuse was enacted.
In that context, I would like to underscore that
the Sudan’s framework cooperation agreement with
South Sudan will have a positive impact in promoting
cooperation and assisting women in both countries,
in addition to eliminating sexual violence in conflict.
We should note that our disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes have, in coordination
with specialized agencies of the United Nations and
the United Nations Development Programme and
UN-Women, given top priority to women. The aim is

13-29364

to implement a work plan pursuant to resolution 1325
(2000).
The solution to women’s problems in times of
armed conflict is inextricably linked to the efforts to
analyse the root causes of conflicts, such as poverty,
lack of development and climate change, and to find
solutions to them. Measures adopted by the Security
Council must be based on reports of the SecretaryGeneral grounded in accurate information received
from reporting countries, not on reports from certain
non-governmental organizations or the media.
We hope that the discussions in the Council will
lead to the establishment of a system to examine
all women’s issues. In that context, I would like to
underscore the importance of dialogue with countries
concerned in order to analyse and find appropriate
solutions to this very difficult topic.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank Rwanda for organizing today’s very important
open debate. My thanks also go to the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, for
their insightful briefings,
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of European Union, as well as the
statement by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Although the Security Council has clearly stipulated
in the relevant resolutions that sexual violence in
conflict is a serious threat to peace and security,
it remains a neglected and under-reported crime.
The recent annual report of the Secretary General
(S/2013/149) has brought to light some very disturbing
findings. It shows that sexual violence is used in many
conflicts as a weapon of war by armed groups and, in
some cases, even by the armed forces. More than 30
parties from five countries are credibly suspected of
committing or condoning sexual violence in conflict.
And those are only parties in countries on the Council’s
agenda and on which the United Nations had verified
information; the actual figures are undoubtedly much
higher. Especially alarming is the fact that many of the
victims are children. Therefore, the ultimate goal of our
discussion here today must be to find new and better
ways to address that abhorrent crime.

65

S/PV.6948

The report before us contains some very good
recommendations in that regard. Let me mention four
points of particular importance to us.

commitments made in the Group of Eight context to
address impunity for sexual violence in conflict will
have a significant impact.

First, we welcome the work of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism and hope it will continue to
work closely with other United Nations mechanisms
to guarantee the best possible concerted actions in
the fight against sexual violence. We also welcome
the dedicated work of Special Representative Bangura
and the fact that she was able to brief the Council
several times in the past months, including on the
situations in Syria and the Central African Republic.
However, the Council should make more use of the
information received and do more to act and hold
perpetrators accountable. It could, for example, release
corresponding press statements, write specific letters
to the Governments concerned and more often refer
specific cases to the Sanctions Committees and, as a
last resort, to the International Criminal Court.

For my Government, confronting sexual violence
is one of the priority areas in our new national action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We actively support the United Nations, Member States
and civil society in their fight against sexual violence.
Personnel of non-governmental organizations, human
rights defenders and journalists who report about
cases of sexual violence, in particular, are often at a
heightened risk of being targeted themselves. They all
need our support to continue their invaluable work in
raising awareness and helping Governments prevent or
ease the consequences of sexual violence.

Secondly, the Council should keep the issue of
women and peace and security, including sexual
violence, high on its agenda and make sure that all
the relevant reports, mandate renewals and country
visits by the Council contain specific provisions in
that regard. More women’s protection advisers need to
be deployed, including in United Nations assessment
teams and missions.
Thirdly, in security sector reform and in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, more focus should be given to the needs
of women and girls, not only as victims but also with
a view to their active participation in reintegration
processes. In peace agreements, sexual violence shall
figure in one important provision: those who have
previously committed or condoned sexual violence
should be excluded from amnesty provisions and
should not be allowed to serve in the relevant official
functions.
Fourthly, Member States and regional organizations
can also do more. Sexual violence shall under no
circumstances be socially accepted. It is of paramount
importance to criminalize sexual violence by law,
hold perpetrators accountable and provide assistance
services and reparations for survivors. In that regard,
we welcome the recent press statement by the African
Union Peace and Security Council and its call for the
development of new strategies to fight sexual violence
in conflict. Also, we are confident that the recent

66

Let me conclude by saying that the Council should
remain seized of this important issue. It should not and
cannot be separated from the broader security issues.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Moura (Portugal): I would like to thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for convening today’s open
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, for their remarks.
Let me start by commending Ms. Bangura for her
excellent work in recent months and for her efforts to
prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence.
Portugal welcomes the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2013/149), which identifies current and
emerging concerns relating to sexual violence in a
number of countries, such as Syria, the Central African
Republic, Mali, Libya and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
We particularly welcome the fact that the report
discloses new trends and the use of several forms
of sexual violence as a tactic of war against not
only women and girls but also men and boys. Other
interesting elements set out in the report include the
connection between sexual violence and the illicit
extraction of natural resources and the connection
between sexual violence and the failure of security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. Moreover, the report gives
a clear and comprehensive idea of the intensive followup and advocacy work carried out worldwide by the

13-29364

S/PV.6948

current and former Special Representatives to advance
the fight against conflict-related sexual violence.
The Security Council has recognized that the
protection of women is a critical priority for peace
and security. Resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010)
clearly establish the fight against sexual violence in its
agenda. The Council has created the necessary tools
to obtain reliable and accurate information on sexual
violence: a common definition of sexual violence and
common methodologies for data collection through
a monitoring and reporting mechanism are now used
throughout the system. Another promising tool at the
disposal of Member States is the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law, and Portugal welcomes the technical
cooperation that was provided at the request of national
authorities in six countries, including Côte d’Ivoire,
South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
National accountability needs to be reinforced,
as Member States bear the primary responsibility to
prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence by
strengthening of the capacities of national institutions,
in particular health, judicial and social systems. The
action of the international community must also be
reinforced. The deployment of women protection
advisers in the relevant peacekeeping operations, so as
to strengthen the prevention of and response to sexual
violence, needs to be accelerated in order to ensure that
dedicated capacity on sexual violence exists within
peacekeeping and political missions. The challenges
that have delayed the deployment of such advisers must
be overcome. We are encouraged by arrangements that
have allowed the deployment of such advisers in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, but we also note that women
protection advisers are urgently needed in Mali, Syria
and Libya, as mentioned in the report of the SecretaryGeneral.
All of the information contained in the report
is relevant for the Security Council in terms of its
Charter-mandated responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The information that
has already been collected by the reporting mechanism
will make it possible for the Council to have access to
“timely, objective, accurate and reliable information”
on sexual violence in conflict. With such information,
the Council will also be able to take further steps. That
should be understood as a clear message to perpetrators

13-29364

of sexual violence that the Council is ready to apply
sanctions or to use all other means at its disposal,
including referrals to the International Criminal Court,
against perpetrators that have been identified as having
committed sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict.
The Council needs to be consistent in its decisions
and reinforce the message that impunity is simply not
acceptable, sexual violence is simply not tolerable and
there can be no genuine security without women’s
security.
Let me conclude my statement with a word for
the survivors of sexual violence. They are at the
centre of our debates. Let us not forget them and the
fact that, beyond bringing perpetrators to justice, the
international community also needs to afford care and
reparation to women and girls and men and boys that
have been victims of sexual violence in conflict-related
situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank the SecretaryGeneral and Special Representative Bangura for their
statements. I will deliver an abridged version of my
statement in the interests of time; the full text will be
distributed in the Chamber.
New Zealand congratulates Rwanda, in particular
its Minister for Foreign Affairs, who was with us
today, for taking the lead on this very important
issue in the Council. Rwanda is following in a proud
tradition of several African countries that, during
their presidencies, have been willing to stand up in
the Council and highlight those problems, even though
there are some, as we know, who would prefer that the
Council spent its time on other matters.
It is important that, yet again, Rwanda is
demonstrating African leadership on an African
problem. We also join Portugal in the message that it
sent to the victims of sexual violence. We think that
that should be a message sent by the whole of the
international community.
The issue of sexual violence in conflict is a global
problem, and in recent years its gravity has been
demonstrated, in many cases, in Africa, most recently
in places not far from Rwanda. Sexual violence in
conflict is as complex as it is horrifying. Its occurrence
does not necessarily correspond with the intensity of

67

S/PV.6948

the related armed violence: in low-intensity conflicts
and post-conflict situations, women and children can
be at as great a risk of sexual violence as during the
height of hostilities. That complexity requires that the
Council carefully craft its responses in addressing and
focusing on sexual violence in conflict.
In that connection, we are all the more pleased
to note from the assessment in the Security Council
Report cross-cutting report entitled Women, Peace
and Security: Violence in Conflict and Sanctions that,
despite ongoing controversy at the thematic level, the
Council has, in country-specific situations, continued
to apply the substance of the principles that it had
previously developed on women and peace and security.
That is good news.
Even better news is the assessment that there seems
to be an emerging trend, when new problems emerge, as
recently they did in Mali and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to have explicit women peace and security
language incorporated into mandates at the outset of
a mission. We urge that that trend continue. Looking
ahead, there is still great scope for improvement in the
Council’s work in particular cases, as is well illustrated
by the experience in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where many women and children have suffered
serious sexual violence.
Sanctions can, in appropriate cases, play an
important role in combating sexual violence. The recent
actions of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with regard to
listing entities responsible for sexual violence and
explicitly linking the listing to sexual violence, is an
important signal that carefully crafted and targeted
sanctions will be used to combat the most serious and
systematic incidents of sexual violence in conflict. The
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and the
Mouvement du 23 mars have now been listed by the
Committee, and that sends a very important signal.
However, the Council should ensure that the criteria for
listing are regularly updated and harmonized across the
various regimes.
The Council should move to implement the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that similar
powers be given to the Committees responsible for
Somalia, the Sudan, Côte d’Ivoire and Al-Qaida in
Islamic Maghreb. It would be a useful step to add
Guinea-Bissau to that list as well.

68

The deployment of peacekeepers with an explicit
mandate to protect civilians from sexual violence has
been a very important step. But the challenge is to
ensure that such deployment delivers results effectively
in the field. Peacekeepers must be supported with
appropriate training and resources to enable them to
fulfil their protection mandate. We note, for example,
that the Intervention Brigade in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is specifically
mandated, in resolution 2098 (2013), to contribute to
civilian security, which necessarily includes protection
from sexual violence.
We ask that MONUSCO’s intervention operations
be carefully monitored by the Council. Combat
operations are inherently risky for civilian populations,
no matter how principled the motivation, whether Blue
Helmet or not. We must remember the recent reports
in the Kivus about retreating troops committing
extensive acts of rape and sexual violence. It is clear
that, all too often in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, instability resulting from the use of force has
helped create a climate that leads to sexual violence.
Too often in the past, the Security Council has been
caught off balance by outrages against civilians. The
experience in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
shows that the Council should, and can, find better
ways to maintain appropriate engagement so as to
enable the proper management of those risks. The
host country, regional actors, regional and subregional
organizations and troop-contributing countries must all
be involved to ensure the best outcome in protecting
civilian populations and reducing the incidence of
sexual violence.
Just as many Member States have assiduously
addressed sexual violence in their domestic
environments, so, too, must the international community
be equally resolved to make good on its commitment to
protect populations from that all-too-prevalent scourge.
It can do that through the actions and decisions — and
with the support — of the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Laram (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It gives
me great pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on your
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I would like to thank Rwanda, and in particular its
Minister for Foreign Affairs, for convening this

13-29364

S/PV.6948

meeting, which is an opportunity to examine the
measures taken by the Security Council to promote the
participation of women in the resolution of conflicts.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
for their important statements and for participating in
this meeting.
The State of Qatar understands that, as highlighted
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/149),
there are still obstacles to women’s participation
and representation in decision-making, peace and
transitional processes and that all regional and
international bodies should support international
standards to enhance women’s participation in the
protection of women’s and girls’ human rights, as well
as in efforts at establishing peace.
With respect to enhancing the role of women,
the State of Qatar has taken a special interest in the
participation of women in the political field through
many initiatives aimed at enabling women to play
their full role in various areas, including the political
and economic fields. Women have been appointed to
important positions, including as ministers. The wife of
the Amir of Qatar has supported educational, research
and development programmes. The State of Qatar has
adopted a preventive policy so as to protect human rights,
in particular the rights of women. That was reflected
in our 2013 plan, which states that women have a very
important role to play in our society, particularly by
participating in decision-making processes, especially
in the economic and social fields.
We cannot talk about women and peace and
security without dealing with the root causes of the
problem. The protection of women is therefore not just
a humanitarian issue but also an one that guides our
efforts in many fields, especially in the application of
rules for the protection of women in times of conflict
without discrimination or selectivity. We must call on all
parties to conflicts to take special measures to protect
women and girls from sexual violence in conflict.
It is troubling that, even as we are holding this
meeting, many women and girls in various parts of the
world, including in the Arab world, are being subjected
to forms of violence that lead to their killing and to the
displacement of millions of people, especially women
and children, who are more vulnerable and therefore
more affected by such situations. They are exposed in
particular to sexual violence and to psychological and

13-29364

physical violence. Women and girls are exposed to the
worst kinds of violence resulting from conflict in our
region, and they bear the brunt of that violence. In the
Arab region, women in Palestine suffer from the unjust
measures taken by the Israeli occupiers. Women in the
Syrian Arab Republic are exposed to discrimination
and to psychological and sexual violence, detention and
imprisonment. Those acts are crimes against humanity
and war crimes. The conflict in Syria has forced women
and girls to flee from cities because of a lack of security
and a lack of humanitarian access to those women and
girls. That was reiterated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on sexual violence in conflict.
In conclusion, the continued attention by the
international community to the role of women in peace
and security and the enhancement of the role of women
in decision-making processes will have positive effects
on international peace and security and will mitigate
the catastrophic results of conflicts all over the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
Rwanda for having organized this extremely important
Security Council debate. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on sexual violence in conflict
(S/2013/149). And I thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
for her very timely and informative statement. Belgium
fully supports the Special Representative’s mandate
and the six points of her agenda of priorities.
My country has always been a strong advocate
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and will, of course, remain so. In his report,
the Secretary-General clearly highlights how sexual
violence persists in many societies as a common practice
that is often invisible and too rarely prosecuted.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made on behalf of the European Union. I will therefore
limit my remarks to a few comments on the report of
the Secretary-General.
First, my delegation stresses the need to ensure that
the countries concerned themselves take ownership of
and lead the fight against sexual violence. National courts
must, in our view, remain the main place where people
are charged with sexual-violence crimes. We should
of course support those courts in pursuing the fight
against impunity. Concerning crimes against humanity,

69

S/PV.6948

war crimes and genocide, international criminal justice
mechanisms are an important complement to national
efforts. In that context, we believe it is appropriate to
apply the definition of sexual violence in the broadest
sense laid out in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.
Secondly, my delegation is convinced that we must
focus on prevention in the fight against all forms of
sexual violence. That is one of the key conclusions of
the most recent session of the Commission on the Status
of Women, the main theme of which was the struggle
against all forms of violence against women and girls.
Thirdly, I would like to thank the United Nations
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict for its determined and courageous
work. Belgium supports its efforts to strengthen the
capacity of national actors.
Fourthly, the situations in the countries mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General are particularly
worrying. I would highlight the seriousness of the
situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mali and the Syrian Arab Republic, among others.
In the case of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
sexual violence against women is used systematically
as a weapon of war. Belgium attaches absolute priority
to the fight against violence against women, both
by supporting those who are doing their utmost to
help victims and survivors, but also by ramping up
diplomatic efforts to find a lasting solution to the crisis.
We welcome the information provided this morning
by Ms. Bangura on the agreement reached with the
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
strengthen efforts to combat sexual violence in conflict
in that country, and our hope is that the agreement will
be speedily implemented.
Fifthly, my delegation particularly supports
certain recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General. On the one hand, it is necessary to
increase pressure on the perpetrators of sexual violence
related to conflict by adopting targeted measures
against them via the various Sanctions Committees. On
the other hand, we must make every effort to ensure
that victims and survivors have access to all of the
necessary multisectoral services and that compensation
systems are set up and all means sought to effectively
fight against sexual violence in conflict.

70

Lastly, we are strongly in favour of the
mainstreaming of the fight against sexual violence in
the various areas of action of the United Nations. By
way of example, we welcome the fact that the text of the
Arms Trade Treaty that was recently adopted includes
clear references to the need to take into account the
risks of violence against women and girls.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I wish
to thank your delegation once again, Mr. President, for
having convened this important open debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General; the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Zainab Hawa Bangura; and the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security for their very important
briefings today.
Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement delivered today by the observer of the
European Union and welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/149) on the implementation
of Security Council resolutions on women, peace and
security and the recommendations contained therein.
Conflict and post-conflict situations are often
marked by violence and the deprivation of rights. In
armed conflicts, sexual violence represents one of
the most serious forms of violation of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The lack of progress on the issue of sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict, in particular against
women and girls, remains of great concern for us. We
condemn all forms of crimes against women and girls,
and we emphasize the importance of bringing those
responsible for such crimes to justice. All parties to
armed conflict need to take appropriate measures to
protect civilians, especially women and children, from
all forms of sexual violence. It is essential to ensure that
all reports of sexual violence committed by civilians or
by military personnel be thoroughly investigated and
the alleged perpetrators brought to justice.
Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches the utmost
importance to confronting the grave issue of sexual
violence and is particularly encouraged by the
commitment of the Security Council to keep the matter
on its agenda. That commitment was unequivocally
demonstrated by the adoption of resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1894 (2009), which paved the
way for concrete action aimed at preventing sexual

13-29364

S/PV.6948

violence. We fully support the work of the United
Nations in addressing sexual violence in armed conflict,
particularly that of UN-Women, and the mandates of
the Secretary-General’s Special Representatives on
Children in Armed Conflict and on Sexual Violence in
Conflict.
We underscore the responsibility of States
and parties to conflict to observe and uphold their
international obligations and respect international
humanitarian law, which grants special protection to
women and children.
Involving women in conflict prevention and
mediation is therefore essential to building peace and
reinforcing the foundations of democracy. Women’s
participation remains low in both the official and
observer roles. We therefore need to intensify all our
efforts to ensure women’s full participation in the
processes of conflict prevention and resolution, the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security,
and early peacebuilding and post-conflict planning, as
well as in enhancing women’s role in decision-making
processes.
Integrating a gender perspective into peacekeeping
policies and the promotion of women’s participation
in United Nations peacekeeping operations is
fundamental to a more effective performance on the
ground. Recruiting women in the civil, military and
police components of peacekeeping missions can
encourage local women to report incidents of sexual
violence and can also contribute to establishing better
communication with local communities. We will
spare no effort to advance on that issue. The relevant
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have adopted a
policy that one third of the nominated candidates for
peacekeeping missions must be women.
We believe that countries should work on adopting
national action plans or strategies in order to integrate
issues related to women and peace and security, and
gender issues, into their national policies and create
a broader basis for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Moreover, it is also important to increase
State institutions and services’ knowledge and capacity
in order to implement the resolution and collaborate
effectively with international organizations and
civil society. Here I would recall that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has adopted both a national action plan
for the resolution’s implementation and a gender action
plan. Those two documents are crucial to streamlining
activities related to the women and peace and security
13-29364

agenda in the relevant sectors and to accelerating the
resolution’s implementation in our country.
With the aim of improving the overall situation of
women victims of rape, the Ministry for Human Rights
and Refugees of Bosnia and Herzegovina is finalizing
the drafting of the document entitled “Programme for the
victims of rape, sexual abuse and torture in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, 2013-2016”, which will seek to improve
the position of all the victims. One of the goals of the
programme emphasizes the obligation of the State to
provide access to reparations programmes for victims
of war and the need to provide legal and psychological
support to victims and witnesses during and after court
proceedings. The draft strategy on transitional justice
has been prepared, and we are currently in the process
of obtaining the opinions of all levels of Government in
that respect.
Finally, we would like to point out that the
international community has taken noteworthy steps,
including the adoption of the relevant resolutions,
to tackle the issue of sexual violence. But more
importantly, the time has come to start converting
commitments and promises into real actions on the
ground to prevent violence, protect individuals, punish
perpetrators and provide redress to victims. Bosnia and
Herzegovina stands ready to contribute to those efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, first of all, to congratulate Rwanda on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April. I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Rwanda, Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, for their
presentations. This is also an opportunity to express our
greeting of solidarity with Rwanda, which this month
marks the nineteenth anniversary of the genocide. I also
want to mention our particular recognition of the work
that Ms. Bangura has been doing and of the progress in
implementing the provisions of resolution 1960 (2010).
Colombia supports the work of the Security
Council, which complements the results achieved on
the basis of various international agreements, such as
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. Those agreements and
various forums and conferences recognize and promote

71

S/PV.6948

the human rights of women. However, we deplore the
fact that situations continue to occur in different parts
of the world.
With regard to the Secretary-General’s report
on sexual violence in conflict (S/2013/149), which
we are considering today, I would like to recall that,
in accordance to resolution 1960 (2010), information
collected on sexual violence should be timely, accurate,
reliable and impartial. Colombia believes that, in order
for our authorities to take the appropriate preventive and
corrective measures, the kind of information contained
in the report must be more accurate.
We are surprised that some examples of the
situation in Colombia mentioned in the report do not
include sufficient information on the incidents that
took place. While for Colombia it is critical to fight all
forms of sexual violence against women, children and
young people, we underscore that it is of great concern
that the report speaks generically about increasing the
pressure on perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict,
including the individuals, parties and States named in
the reports.
I would like to give a clear explanation here. It should
be understood that, in making that call, the report of the
Secretary-General is referring to the situations listed in
the annex to the report, that is, those situations that are
under consideration by both the Security Council and
the Sanctions Committees established in connection
with such situations, in accordance with the provisions
of the paragraph 3 of resolution 1960 (2010). That
would mean acting in accordance with the mandates
set out and endeavouring to establish clear distinctions
among those situations and the situations mentioned
in the body of the report that are not on the Security
Council’s agenda.
We reiterate our position on the possible
establishment of talks with State and non-State parties
to obtain commitments. Such talks should always
respect national laws and policies. Allow me therefore
to reiterate that Colombia’s policy is that any dialogue
between the United Nations and illegal armed groups
operating in the country can take place only with the
Government’s prior and explicit consent. The Colombian
State attaches the greatest importance to the prevention,
investigation and prosecution of sexual violence in
armed conflict. It is therefore willing to address that
complex problem. We have launched a number of public
policies. We have taken specific steps to protect the

72

rights of victims of sexual violence in armed conflict,
such as Act No. 1257 of 2008, on the prevention and
punishment of acts of violence and discrimination
against women, Act No. 1146 of 2007, on the prevention
of sexual violence and the comprehensive care of
sexually abused children and adolescents, and Decree
No. 552 of 2012, which established the intersectoral
commission for the prevention of recruitment and use
of children, adolescents and young people by illegal
organized groups.
With regard to the justice sector and the armed
forces, as the report indicates, Colombia has adopted
a zero-tolerance policy. It is supplemented by a manual
and protocol that serve as a guide for members of the
armed forces in addressing sexual violence that may
occur as a result of armed conflict. That document is
widely disseminated among members of the armed
forces.
As can be seen, and as the Secretary-General
underscores in his report, Colombia has varying
policies and guarantees that mark a breakthrough in
the State’s efforts to address that complex problem
comprehensively and consistently. Also, work is under
way, in coordination with the United Nations, the
Presidential High Commissioner for Women’s Equality
and 22 Colombian State agencies, to outline additional
preventing measures, in line with the experience in the
field and international standards.
The establishment of provisions for monitoring,
analysing and reporting on sexual violence in
conflict situations should seek primarily, on the
basis of accurate, impartial objective and verifiable
information, to promote the adoption of measures
to prevent sexual violence in conflict situations
and to provide effective responses for the benefit
of victims. In that regard, it is imperative to assist
States in developing and implementing early-warning
mechanisms and procedures to facilitate the reporting,
collection and verification of data. To the same end, the
various agencies of the United Nations must continue to
strengthen coordination, decrease duplication of effort
and build a coherent approach in the field in order
to assist the Security Council in its consideration of
appropriate measures.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Amit Kumar (India): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General, his Special

13-29364

S/PV.6948

Representative Zainab Hawa Bangura and the civil
society representative, Ms. Saran Keïta Diakité, for
their detailed briefings.
Women bear a disproportionate brunt of armed
conflict, even though in most cases they are not
directly engaged in combat. Resolution 1325 (2000)
provides the framework for women to play an important
role in the resolution of armed conflicts through
participation in peacebuilding processes and postconflict reconstruction efforts. Allow me to make a few
comments on that important issue.
First of all, the need for greater coherence between
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UN-Women can hardly be overemphasized. That is
necessary not only for operational effectiveness but
also for the optimal utilization of scarce resources.
There is a need to avoid making standardized
prescriptions when dealing with situations of armed
conflict. The specific causes and characteristics of each
armed conflict vary, and so will possible approaches
and solutions. United Nations peacekeeping and
political missions should be provided the necessary
flexibility to deal with specific situations.
It is also important to recognize that some structural
changes can take place only in the mid to the long
term. Such changes include the encouragement and
consolidation of democratic ideals and practices and
effective improvements in socioeconomic conditions.
The task of capacity-building and strengthening
Government institutions, including in the areas of
security and justice, is therefore extremely critical to
sustainable peace. United Nations support and guidance
are crucial, but ownership by the State concerned
is equally important in order for institutions to be
consolidated.
We support the United Nations efforts to deploy
greater numbers of women’s protection advisers and
gender advisers to its missions. The mandate provided
by the Security Council on women and peace and
security also necessarily requires more resources for
effective, sustained results.
The promotion and protection of the human rights
of women and girls in armed conflict continue to pose
a pressing challenge. There should be zero tolerance for
gender-based violence and sexual violence. All cases
of gender-based violence must be promptly investigated
and its perpetrators prosecuted.

13-29364

However, we would urge caution in drawing
generalized linkages between sexual violence and
issues such as the exploitation of mineral resources and
internal displacement, for example, based, as they are,
on specific country experiences, as the recent report
of the Secretary General (S/2013/149) suggests. It
is pertinent to mention in that regard that the report
itself points to the presence of armed conflict as the
consistent backdrop in all those situations. It is also
critical that the mandates given by the Security Council
be observed and that the report remain focused on the
situations of armed conflict on the Council’s agenda.
The so-called situations of concern are not part of that
mandate.
While United Nations peacekeeping missions have
provided critical support for gender-related issues in
countries emerging from armed conflict, we agree
with the report’s assertion that it is equally important
to pay adequate attention to security-sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes, so as to avoid the risk of relapse. There is also
a need for an increased deployment of female military
and police personnel in United Nations peacekeeping
operations and for appropriate training to enable
United Nations peacekeepers to effectively discharge
their responsibilities. India stands ready to place more
female formed units at the disposal of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for deployment as required.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm India’s commitment
to contribute in a positive manner to United Nations
efforts in the area of women and peace and security.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. We wish you every success in leading the work
of the Council during your presidency and thank your
delegation for convening today’s debate on an issue
of crucial importance. We are grateful to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-Moon and to his Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, for their briefings this morning. We also
take this opportunity to congratulate Ms. Bangura
on her appointment and to commend her for the great
determination she has shown in carrying out her task.
Armed conflicts leave a devastating effect on
societies around the world. Violence breeds more
violence. Undoubtedly, women often bear the brunt of
the many destructive consequences of war and strife.

73

S/PV.6948

In that regard, sexual violence in the context of armed
conflicts remains pervasive, which is a devastating
reality that has yet to be resolved and one requiring
steadfast efforts at all levels.
In adopting resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009)
and 1960 (2010), the Security Council sent the clear
message that sexual violence would not be tolerated
and that ending sexual violence was essential for
maintaining international peace and security. All States
have the moral and legal responsibility to uphold the
rights of all citizens, including women, and to protect
them from sexual violence.
Protecting and promoting the rights of the Afghan
people has been the cornerstone of all our efforts to
build a peaceful and stable Afghanistan. Central
to those efforts is enabling women to regain their
historical role as proactive citizens in Afghan society.
Afghanistan is pursuing the vigorous implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) through our national priority
programme. We have also launched our national action
plan for the women of Afghanistan as a 10-year blue
print that contains specific and time-bound benchmarks
for progress in various areas. As the implementation of
the action plan continues apace, we are confident that
we will realize our vision of seeing Afghan women
thrive and be empowered in all sectors of society — the
social, political and economic.
Afghanistan is fully committed to preventing
all forms of violence against women, including
sexual violence. In that regard, in 2009, we enacted
a law on the elimination of violence against women,
which provided for stronger judicial means to combat
violence. Throughout the country, perpetrators of such
crimes are increasingly being held accountable where
such crimes are committed, with their cases being
prosecuted before the law.
In reference to an observation made in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/149), we wish to
state with full confidence that the Government and
the people of Afghanistan do not and will not tolerate
impunity against any form of human rights violation.
Together with our judicial authorities, the Afghan
National Security Forces are working diligently to
uphold law and order in all areas of the country. As we
move forward, we are confident that our efforts will
continue to bear fruit and that women will be further
empowered.

74

We also wish to highlight the following.
Afghanistan is fully committed to upholding human
rights in Afghan detention centres. In that respect, a
number of concrete measures have been taken by the
National Directorate of Security, including capacitybuilding measures, human rights awareness workshops
for personnel and the establishment of a human rights
division to monitor and investigate human rights
situations. The Afghan police and other security forces
are following a similar approach. In the wake of the
20 January report by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) on alleged cases of
prisoner mistreatment, President Karzai issued a decree
establishing an independent commission to investigate
the cases referred to in the UNAMA report. Since then,
greater focus has been given to ensuring full adherence
to human rights standards in Afghan detention centres.
As the security transition proceeds, Afghanistan
is also resolute in achieving a successful outcome in
its peace and reconciliation process, which is aimed at
ending the current conflict and strife. By ending the
conflict, we will eliminate the very conditions that were
conducive to challenges in the field of human rights.
As members of the High Peace Council and as
members of civil society, women play a central role
in the peace process. The results of our peace and
reconciliation efforts will in no way jeopardize the
hard-won gains of the past 11 years, especially those
relating to human rights, and to the rights of women in
particular.
Before concluding, I wish to state that the
international community has a key role to play in
supporting continuous efforts aimed at ending all forms
of violence against women, including sexual violence,
in conflict-affected and post-conflict countries. For our
part, Afghanistan remains firmly committed to playing
its part in ensuring the full protection of women’s rights
around the world and to preventing sexual violence and
all other forms of violations of human rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Ceylan (Turkey): At the outset, Mr. President,
allow us to congratulate the Rwandan presidency for
organizing today’s important debate.
Turkey has aligned itself with the statement
delivered earlier today by the observer of the European
Union. I shall therefore be very brief.

13-29364

S/PV.6948

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/149)
and the statements made today make clear that, over
the past three and a half years, effective action has been
taken by the United Nations to prevent and address the
scourge of sexual violence in conflict. We also note with
satisfaction the activities and initiatives undertaken
by UN-Women, including through the United Nations
Trust Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate Violence
against Women, to which Turkey is a contributor.
Despite those efforts, sexual violence in conflict
remains prevalent. Both the report of the SecretaryGeneral and the findings of the international
commission of inquiry indicate the occurrence of
serious cases of sexual violence in the course of the
conflict taking place just across our border with Syria.
In that regard, we welcome the intention of Special
Representative Bangura to visit Syria to investigate the
reports of abuses.
As of today, Turkey hosts more than 190,000
Syrians in 17 camps. There are another 100,000 who
have made their way to various Turkish cities and
towns. The massive flight of Syrians out of their
country is certainly because the Syrian regime does
not care about their safety and well-being. Therefore,
the groundless remarks made earlier today regarding
the camps in Turkey should be read through that
prism. The camps in Turkey have been visited by
many international representatives and United Nations
dignitaries, including Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
I do not wish to repeat here yet again their comments
and praise. By attributing groundless allegations to
others, the perpetrators of the massive humanitarian
crisis in Syria are trying to divert attention from their
brutal and inhumane policies. That futile approach will
certainly not prevail.
The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to respond to some claims just

13-29364

made by the representatives of Qatar and Turkey
concerning my country.
What we have heard today from some
delegations — and this is extremely important, as we
have already said — is that the ending sexual violence,
combating it in conflict situations and eliminating the
consequences of armed conflict can be achieved by
removing the root causes of those scourges, stopping
the financing for terrorism, ending interference in the
internal affairs of States and combating policies that
instigate sexual violence against women.
We would like to reaffirm that the negative roles
that Qatar and Turkey have played, which are no secret
to anyone in this international Organization, have
contributed to aggravating the situation in Syria, rather
than to finding a settlement thereto. Some sheikhs
in Qatar provide all kinds of support to terrorists, in
particular those affiliated with Al-Qaida, by providing
money, weapons and media support.
I must not neglect to mention the actions by the
Turkish authorities in smuggling mercenaries and
weapons through our common borders and the rape by
soldiers of Syrian refugee women in camps established
on Turkish territory. I would like to recall that, on more
than one occasion, many officials, including officials
from the Turkish Parliament, were prevented from
visiting certain camps on Turkish territory.
In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm that the
ambiguous role played by the sheikhs of Qatar will
not go unnoticed by the Syrian people. The Syrian
people will in the future prosecute all those who have
committed crimes against them. We have specialized
national committees tasked with investigating all those
crimes, which will be pursued in due course.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

75
