VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

place and continue to take place in Chile, in p_articular
the institutionalized practice of torture, cruel, mhuman
and degrading treatment or punishment, the disappearance of persons for political reasons, arbitrary arrest,
detention, exile and cases of deprivation of Chilean
nationality;
2. Calls once more upon the Chilean authorities to
restore and safeguard, without delay, basic human
rights and fundamental freedoms and fully to respect
provisions of the international instruments to which
Chile is a party and, to this end:
(a) To cease using the state of siege or emergency
for the purpose of violating human rights and fundamental freedoms and, having regard to the observations
by the Ad Hoe Working Group on the Situation of
Human Rights in Chile, to re-examine the basis on
which the state of siege or emergency is applied with
a view to its termination;
( b) To put an end to the practice of torture and
other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment by Chilean State agencies, particularly
the Direcci6n de Inteligencia N acional, and to prosecute
and punish those who are responsible;
( c) To clarify forthwith the status of individuals
whose disappearance is attributable to political reasons;
(d) To release immediately those who have been
arbitrarily arrested or detained without charge and
those who are in prison solely for political reasons;
(e) To release, furthermore, those who are detained
or imprisoned on account of acts or omissions which
did not constitute a criminal offence at the time they
were committed;
(f) To guarantee fully the right of habeas corpus
(amparo);
(g) To cease the arbitrary deprivation of Chilean
nationality and to restore it to those who have been
so deprived;
(h) To respect the right of everyone to freedom of
association with others, including the right to form and
join trade unions for the protection of his interests;

105

arrested or imprisoned, to those forced to leave the
country and to their relatives;
( c) To consider the consequences of the various
forms of aid extended to the Chilean authorities;
6. Requests the President of the thirty-first session
of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to
assist in any way they may consider appropriate in the
re-establishment of basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Chile.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/125.

Accession to and implementation of the
1971 Convention on Psychotropic Sub•
stances

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3443 (XXX) of 9 December
1975 concerning the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic
Substances 48 and its resolution 3445 (XXX) of 9 December 1975 on adequate priority for narcotics control,
Noting with satisfaction that the Convention entered
into force on 16 August 1976,
Convinced that that event constitutes an important
step towards the establishment of effective international
control of the licit trade and the prevention of the illicit
traffic in psychotropic substances through prompt and
satisfactory implementation of the provisions of the
Convention at the national and international levels,
Recognizing that, in pursuance of Economic and
Social Council resolution 1576 (L) of 20 May 1971,
many States have already applied provisionally the
control measures provided for in the Convention and
have voluntarily co-operated with one another and with
the international drug control bodies, particularly by
furnishing pertinent information, a course of action
which should be continued,

To guarantee the right to intellectual freedom;

Aware, however, that complete and effective control
requires universal accession to the Convention and, in
particular, the accession of countries in which psychotropic substances are manufactured,

3. Deplores the fact that, despite previous assurances to the contrary, the Chilean authorities persistently refuse to allow the Ad Hoe Working Group to
visit the country in accordance with its mandate;

Realizing that the Convention imposes substantial
additional responsibilities on the drug control bodies
of the United Nations and on the World Health Organization,

(i)

4. Invites Member States, United Nations agencies
and other international organizations to take steps
which they may consider appropriate as a contribution
to the restoration and safeguarding of human rights
and fundamental freedoms in Chile, in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and welcomes the steps already taken to this
end;

5.

Invites the Commission on Human Rights:

(a) To extend the mandate of the Ad Hoe Working Group, as presently constituted, so as to enable it
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session, and to the Commission at its thirty-fourth session, with such additional information as may be necessary;
( b) To formulate recommendations on possible
humanitarian, legal and financial aid to those arbitrarily

I. Reiterates its appeal to all States not yet parties
to the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances
promptly to take the necessary steps to accede to it
and requests the Secretary-General to transmit t':l.is appeal to the Governments concerned;
2. Appeals to all parties to the Convention and to
the international drug control bodies to implement its
provisions by adopting suitable legislative and administrative measures as provided for in the Convention;

3. Invites the Secretary-General and the DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization to take into
consideration the responsibilities assigned to the drug
control bodies of the United Nations and to the World
4 8 See Official Records of the United Nations Conference
for the Adoption of a Protocol on Psychotropic Substances,
vol. I (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.XI.3),
part four.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

106

Health Organization by the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976

31/126.

Emergency assistance for South African
refugee students

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/6 I of 9 November 1976
relating to the item entitled "Policies of apartheid of
the Government of South Africa",
Noting, in particular, that paragraph 12 of the abovementioned resolution calls upon Member States and
the specialized agencies, through emergency joint projects and financial assistance, to help Lesotho and other
countries bordering South Africa to ensure the provision
of educational facilities to the rapidly growing number
of refugee students from South Africa,
Concerned about the continuing influx of refugees,
including in particular large numbers of South African
students fleeing to the bordering States of Botswana,
Lesotho and Swaziland, thus imposing a heavy burden
on the limited resources and employment opportunities
of these countries,
1. Reaffirms that humanitarian assistance by the international community to all those persecuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa,
Namibia and Southern Rhodesia is appropriate and
essential;

2. Recognizes the urgent need to organize an effective programme of international assistance to help in
dealing with the recent South African student refugee
problem in countries bordering South Africa;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, as a matter of
urgency, to consult with the Governments of Botswana,
Lesotho and Swaziland and the liberation movements
concerned with a view to taking immediate steps to
organize and provide appropriate emergency financial
and other forms of assistance for the care, subsistence
and education of these refugee students;
4. Urges all States to respond generously to any
appeals which the Secretary-General might make for
assistance for these refugees;
5. Calls upon the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations
Development Programme, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Trust Fund for South Africa, the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa and other United Nations bodies and organs,
as may be appropriate, to co-operate fully with the
Secretary-General in the implementation of the programme of assistance;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the situation under review and to report to the General
Assembly as and when necessary.

102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976

31/127.

Measures to improve the situation and
ensure the human rights and dignity of
all migrant workers

The General Assembly,
Recalling the terms of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 49 and of the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,00
Considering the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961 51 and the Vienna Convention on
Consular Relations of 1963, 52
Considering also the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975,53 and the Recommendation concerning Migrant Workers, 1975,H
adopted by the General Conference of the International
Labour Organisation,
Recalling its resolutions 2920 (XXVII) of 15 November 1972, 3224 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974
and 3449 (XXX) of 9 December 1975 concerning
migrant workers, and Economic and Social Council
resolution 1749 (LIV) of 16 May 1973, in which
the Council affirmed the need for the United Nations
to consider the situation of migrant workers in an interrelated manner and in relation to general factors which
have a bearing on human rights and human dignity,
Aware that the problem of migrant workers continues
to be of major importance to many States, despite the
existence of international instruments and despite efforts
exerted by certain States, including the adoption of
bilateral agreements,
Believing that this problem is becoming more serious
in certain regions for political, economic, social and
cultural reasons,
Seriously concerned at the de facto discrimination
frequently suffered by alien workers in some countries
despite the legislative and other efforts exerted to
prevent and punish it,
Noting with satisfaction the work done in the field
of migrant workers by the specialized agencies, particularly the International Labour Organisation, and by
other United Nations organs, such as the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection
of Minorities,
I. Calls upon all States, taking into account the provisions of the relevant instruments adopted by the International Labour Organisation and of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination, to take measures to prevent
and put an end to all discrimination against migrant
workers and to ensure the implementation of such
measures;
2. Invites all States:
(a)
To extend to migrant workers having regular
status in their territories treatment equal to that enjoyed
by their own nationals with regard to the protection
of human rights and to the provisions of their labour
legislation and their social legislation;
·19 Resolution

217 A (III).
r,o Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
,,I United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 500, No. 7310, p. 95.
r, 2 Jbid., vol. 596, No. 8638, p. 261.
r,:l International Labour Office, Official Bulletin, vol. L VIII,
1975, Series A, No. 1, Convention No. 143.
04 Ibid., Recommendation No. 151.
