146

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

and that, in the absence of increased international assistance,
the Government will have to reduce major imports that arc
essential for its development programmes and for restoring
industrial production to pre-sanctions levels,
l. Strongly endorses the appeals made by the Security
Council and the Secretary-General for international assistance to Mozambique;
2. Endorses fully the assessment and major recommendations contained in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 21 August I 98 I ;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the measures he has taken to organize an international
economic assistance programme for Mozambique;
4. Expresses its appreciation also for the assistance
provided thus far to Mozambique by various States and
regional and international organizations;
5. Regrets, however, that the total assistance provided
to date falls far short of Mozambique's pressing needs;
6. Draws the attention of the international community
to the additional financial, economic and material assistance
identified in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General
as urgently required by Mozambique;
7. Urges Member States and organizations which are
already implementing or are negotiating assistance programmes for Mozambique to strengthen them, wherever
possible;
8. Appeals to the international community to provide
the urgently needed external assistance in foodstuffs and
medicines and technical co-operation for disaster preparedness and prevention;
9. Calls upon Member States, regional and interregional
organizations and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to provide financial, material and technical assistance to Mozambique, wherever possible in the
form of grants, and urges them to give special consideration
to the early inclusion of Mozambique in their programmes
of development assistance, if it is not already included;
10. Appeals to the international community to contribute to the special account of Mozambique established by
the Secretary-General for the purpose of facilitating the
channelling of contributions to Mozambique;
11. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to
bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their
consideration, the special needs of Mozambique and to report the decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General
by 15 July 1982;
12. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization and the
United Nations Children's Fund-to maintain and increase
their current and future programmes of assistance to Mozambique and to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective international programme of
assistance, and to report periodically to the Secretary-General on the steps they have taken and the resources they
have made available to assist Mozambique;
13. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Mozambique;

(b) To keep the situation in Mozambique under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and international financial institutions and
other bodies concerned, and to apprise the Economic and
Social Council, at its second regular session of 1982, of the
current status of the special programme of economic assistance for Mozambique;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
of Mozambique and the progress made in organizing and
implementing the special programme of economic assistance
for that country in time for the matter to be considered by
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December /98/

36/216.

Assistance to Djibouti

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/93 of 13 December 1977, 33/
132of 19 December 1978 and 34/124of 14 December 1979,
in which it, inter alia, expressed its deep concern at the
serious economic situation prevailing in Djibouti and
strongly appealed to Member States and to the international
institutions concerned to offer effective and sustained assistance to that country to enable it to deal with the critical
situation arising from its economic difficulties and requested
the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to mobilize the
necessary resources for an effective programme of financial,
technical and material assistance to Djibouti,
Recalling also its resolution 35/89 of 5 December 1980,
in which it drew the attention of the international community
to the critical economic situation still confronting Djibouti
and to the list of urgent short-term and long-term projects
submitted by the Government of Djibouti, 205
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 206
to which was annexed the report of the mission which he
sent to Djibouti in response to General Assembly resolution
35/89,
Taking note of the critical economic situation of Djibouti
and the list of urgent and priority projects, formulated by
the Government, that require international assistance,
Noting with concern that the harsh effects of the prolonged
drought continue to persist and place serious strains on the
fragile economic, social and administrative infrastructure
of the country,
Noting the conclusion of the Committee for Development
Planning at its seventeenth session, 207 in response to the
application of Djibouti for inclusion in the list of the least
developed countries, that Djibouti did not satisfy the existing
criteria for inclusion in that list,
Noting the statement made before the Second Committee
on 6 October 1981 by the Co-ordinator of Special Economic
Assistance Programmes, in which he emphasized the importance of priority projects for diversification of the economy and the urgency of providing increased financial,
material and technical assistance to Djibouti, 208
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the .;teps he has taken to organize an international economic assistance programme for Djibouti;

"" See A/35/415, annex.
206
A/36/281.
"" Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. /91',J, Supplement No. 7 (E/1981/27), para. 104.
'"" Official Records of the Genaal Assembly. Thirtv-sixth Session, S1•cond Committee. 7th meeting. paras. 28 and 29.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations
contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General;
3. Notes with appreciation the assistance already provided or pledged to Djibouti by Member States and organizations of the United Nations system;
4. Draws the attention of the international community
to the critical economic situation confronting Djibouti, to
the assistance immediately needed for the victims of the
drought and to the list of urgent short-term and long-term
projects submitted by the Government of Djibouti for financial assistance as described in the annex to the report
of the Secretary-General;
5. Requests the Economic and Social Council to invite
the Committee for Development Planning, in the light of
the new data and information provided by the Government
of Djibouti to consider, on the basis of the existing criteria,
its eligibility for inclusion in the list of the least developed
countries;
6. Renews its appeal to Member States, the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system and international economic and financial institutions to
provide Djibouti with ample and appropriate assistance,
bilaterally and multilaterally, whenever possible in the form
of grants, to enable Djibouti to cope with its special economic hardship;
7. Calls upon the international community to contribute
generously to the special account which was established at
United Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General for
the purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions
to Djibouti;
8. Invites the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of their governing bodies,
for their consideration, the special needs of Djibouti and to
report the decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General
by 15 July 1982;
9. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to maintain
and increase their current and future programmes of assistance to Djibouti, to co-operate closely with the SecretaryGeneral in organizing an effective international programme
of assistance and to report periodically to him on the steps
they have taken and the resources they have made available
to assist Djibouti;
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Djibouti;
(b) To continue to ensure that adequate financial and
budgetary arrangements are made to mobilize resources and
to co-ordinate international assistance to Djibouti;
(c) To keep the situation in Djibouti under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and international financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council,
at its second regular session of 1982, of the current status
of the special programme of economic assistance for
Djibouti;
(d) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
of Djibouti and the progress made in organizing and implementing the special programme of economic assistance
for that country in time for the matter to be considered by
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

147

36/217. Special economic assistance to Guinea-Bissau
The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 35195 of 5 December 1980, in
which it reiterated its appeal to the international community
to provide continuous financial, material and technical assistance to Guinea-Bissau to help it overcome its financial
and economic difficulties and to permit the implementation
of the projects and programmes recommended by the Secretary-General in his report of 21 August 1980 submitted
in response to General Assembly resolution 341121 of 14
December 1979, 209
Recalling also its resolution 3339 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, in which it invited Member States to provide
economic assistance to the then newly independent State of
Guinea-Bissau, and its resolutions 32/100 of 13 December
1977 and 33/124 of 19 December 1978, in which it, inter
alia, expressed deep concern at the serious economic situation in Guinea-Bissau and appealed to the international
community to provide financial and economic assistance to
that country,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General of
31 July 1981, 210 to which was annexed the report of the
mission which he sent to Guinea-Bissau in response to General Assembly resolution 35/95,
Recalling that Guinea-Bissau is among the thirty-one least
developed countries,
Noting with concern that Guinea-Bissau continues to be
beset by a wide range of economic and financial difficulties,
Noting that the Government of Guinea-Bissau, by the
application of a policy of economic austerity, was able to
reduce the budget deficit in 1980 to a level substantially
lower than in the two preceding years, although the country
will continue to be dependent on external sources for public
capital expenditure,
Also noting with concern the chronic deficit in the balance
of payments, the substantial increase in loans and the inordinately low level of foreign exchange reserves,
Noting that Guinea-Bissau again experienced a poor harvest in 1980, owing to irregular and inadequate rainfall, and
that the country needs emergency food aid,
Further noting with concern that the response of the international community to date has not been commensurate
with the needs of the situation and that many of the projects
approved for the special programme of economic assistance
by the General Assembly at its thirty-third session have not
yet been financed,
Taking note of the results of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, particularly of the
Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the
Least Developed Countrics, 211
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for GuineaBissau;
2. Endorses.fully the assessment and recommendations
contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General
and draws the attention of the international community to
the requirements for assistance for the projects and programmes identified therein;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those States and organizations that have provided assistance to Guinea-Bissau
in response to appeals by the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General;
"" A/J5/34:l.
"" AIJ6/263.
211
Report of the United Nations Conference 011 the Least Developed
Countries, Paris, l~/4 Septemher 198/ (United Nations publication. Sales
No. E 82 1.8) part one, sect. A
