United Nations

A/RES/59/201

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 March 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 105 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2004
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/59/503/Add.2)]

59/201. Enhancing the role of regional, subregional and other
organizations and arrangements in promoting and
consolidating democracy
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling its resolution 55/96 of 4 December 2000 and all relevant resolutions
of the Commission on Human Rights, in particular resolutions 1999/57 of 27 April
1999, 1 2000/47 of 25 April 2000, 2 2001/41 of 23 April 2001, 3 2002/46 of 23 April
2002, 4 2003/36 of 23 April 2003 5 and 2004/30 of 19 April 2004, 6
Recalling also that all peoples have the right to self-determination, by virtue of
which they can freely determine their political status and freely pursue their
economic, social and cultural development,
Reaffirming its resolve, expressed, inter alia, in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, 7 to implement the principles and practices of democracy, and
recognizing the diverse nature of the community of the world’s democracies,
1.
Declares that the essential elements of democracy include respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms, inter alia, freedom of association and
peaceful assembly and of expression and opinion, and the right to take part in the
conduct of public affairs, directly or through freely chosen representatives, to vote
and to be elected at genuine periodic free elections by universal and equal suffrage
and by secret ballot guaranteeing the free expression of the will of the people, as
well as a pluralistic system of political parties and organizations, respect for the rule
_______________
1
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1999, Supplement No. 3 (E/1999/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2
Ibid., 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
3
Ibid., 2001, Supplement No. 3 (E/2001/23), chap. II, sect. A.
4
Ibid., 2002, Supplement No. 3 (E/2002/23), chap. II, sect. A.
5
Ibid., 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23), chap. II, sect. A.
6
Ibid., 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II, sect. A.
7
See resolution 55/2.

04-48832

A/RES/59/201

of law, the separation of powers, the independence of the judiciary, transparency and
accountability in public administration, and free, independent and pluralistic media;
2.
Reaffirms that the promotion and protection of all human rights is a basic
prerequisite for the existence of a democratic society, and recognizes the importance
of the continuous development and strengthening of the United Nations human
rights mechanisms for the consolidation of democracy;
Recognizes the importance of all actions taken at the regional and
3.
subregional levels that are aimed at facilitating the establishment, development and
consolidation of democratic institutions, based on democratic values and principles
and capable of responding to the specific needs of the countries in each region;
Acknowledges the importance of better awareness of democratic values
4.
and principles in all regions and for all people;
5.
Reaffirms that democracy, development and respect for all human rights
and fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually reinforcing, that
democracy is based on the freely expressed will of the people to determine their
own political, economic, social and cultural systems and their full participation in
all aspects of their lives and, in that context, that the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national, regional and international
levels should be universal and conducted without conditions attached; the
international community should support the strengthening and promoting of
democracy, development and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
the entire world;
Acknowledges that democracy contributes substantially to preventing
6.
violent conflict, to accelerating reconciliation and reconstruction in post-conflict
peacebuilding and, in peacetime, to resolving disputes that may impede economic
and social progress;
Recognizes the need for Member States to pay further special attention
7.
and contribute to democratic institution-building by including relevant objectives to
this effect in the mandates of peacemaking, peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding operations and by providing adequate resources in that regard;
Invites intergovernmental regional, subregional and other organizations
8.
and arrangements, as well as non-governmental organizations, to engage actively in
work at the local, national, subregional and regional levels for the constant
promotion and consolidation of democracy and to initiate exchanges with the United
Nations system on their experiences, inter alia, by:
(a) Identifying and disseminating best practices and experiences at the
regional, subregional and cross-regional levels in promoting and protecting
democratic processes;
(b) Establishing and supporting regional, subregional and national civic
education programmes that provide access to information on democratic governance
and stimulate dialogue on the functioning of democracy;
(c) Encouraging the study, in schools and universities, of democracy, human
rights, good governance and the functioning of public administration, political
institutions and civil society organizations;
(d) Elaborating and widely distributing reports, assessments, training
material, handbooks, case studies and documentation on alternative types of

2

A/RES/59/201

democratic constitutions, electoral systems and administration so as to assist
populations in making more informed choices;
(e) Encouraging the use of democratic consultative mechanisms in disputes
as an opportunity for the parties involved to advance their interests within
institutional frameworks;
(f) Working with the focal point for democracy of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
9.
Invites States members of intergovernmental regional organizations and
arrangements to include or reinforce the provisions of the constitutive acts of the
organizations and arrangements that are aimed at promoting democratic values and
principles and protecting and consolidating democracy in their respective societies;
10. Welcomes the adoption by various regional, subregional and other
organizations and arrangements of institutional rules designed to prevent situations
that threaten democratic institutions;
11. Invites intergovernmental regional organizations and arrangements to
institutionalize dialogue among themselves on joint actions to promote and
consolidate democracy and democratic practices in all areas;
12. Encourages Member States and intergovernmental regional and
cross-regional organizations and arrangements, as well as non-governmental
organizations, to initiate networks and partnerships with a view to assisting the
Governments and civil society in their respective regions in disseminating
knowledge and information about the role of democratic institutions and
mechanisms in meeting the political, economic, social and cultural challenges in
their respective societies;
13. Urges the continuation and expansion of activities carried out by the
United Nations system, intergovernmental organizations and Member States to
promote and consolidate democracy within the framework of international
cooperation;
14. Invites the United Nations system to identify, develop and coordinate
effective policies of assistance in the field of democracy and, in this context, to
support programmes of technical assistance to States, upon their request, aimed at:
(a) Developing a competent, independent and impartial judiciary and
accountable government institutions;
(b) Strengthening political party systems, free and independent media and
civil society organizations;
(c)

Fostering a democratic culture;

15. Calls upon the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to stimulate dialogue and interaction within the United Nations
system and between the United Nations system and interested intergovernmental
regional, subregional and other organizations and arrangements on the ways and
means of promoting democratic values and principles, on the basis of the present
resolution and other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and of the
Commission on Human Rights, and, to this end, to invite, inter alia, the Department
of Political Affairs of the Secretariat, including its Electoral Assistance Division,
and the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, the United
Nations Development Programme, the International Labour Organization, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and regional
3

A/RES/59/201

organizations to inform the Commission on Human Rights, at its sixty-first session,
of action taken to promote and consolidate democracy;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of Member States.
74th plenary meeting
20 December 2004

4
