UNITED

NATIONS

THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR

rd
MEETING: 4 DECEMBER 1978
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2 103) . , . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Expression of thanks to the retiring President . , , , , . . , , . , , , , . . , . . . , . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . , , . , . . , . , . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . .
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 1 December 1978 from the Chargé d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Congo to the United Nations addressedto the President of the
Security COUnCil(S/12945)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .., . . . . , . .

1

SIPV.2103

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference ta a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplenzents of the Ofjkial Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2103rd MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 4 December 1978, at 3 p.m.
I?%~i%nt: Mr. Rüdiger von WECHMAR
(Federal Republic of Germany).

the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United King
dom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Venezuela.

At the invitation of the President,Mr, Gayama(Congo)
and Mr. de Figueiredo(Angola)took the placesreservedfor
thim at the sideof the Councilchamba:

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2103)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 1 December 1978 from the Chargé
d’Affaires a-i. of the Permanent Mission of the
Congo to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12945)
The meetingwascalled to order at 4 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT: It is my very pleasant duty, as this is
the first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
December, to express appreciation on behalf of the
members of the Council to Mr. Léon N’Dong, representative of Gabon for his services as President of the
Council for the munth of November. On behalf of the
members of the Council, 1 pay a tribute to him for the
admirable manner in which, with great diplomatie skill, tact
and courtesy, he presided over the Council’s work last
month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agendawasadopted.

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 1 December 1978 from the Chargé D’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Congo to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12945)
2. The PRESIDENT: 1 wish to inform members of the
Council that 1 have received letters from the representatives
of the Congo and Angola in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with

3. The PRESIDENT: 1 should also like to inform members
of the Council that 1 have received a letter dated
4 December from the President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia which reads asfollows:
“The Security Council is now considering the question
of Namibia. 1 wish to convey to you the desire of the
United Nations Council for Namibia to participate in this
debate, without the right to vote. For this purpose the
Council for Namibia Will be represented by a delegation
headed by myself, as President of the CounciI, and
including the three Vice-Presidents of the Council,
Mr. R. Jaipal (India), Mr. F. CuevasCancino (Mexico) and
Mr. F. K. Bouayad-Agha (Algeria).”
4. On previous occasionsthe Council has extended invitations to representatives of other United Nations bodies in
connexion with the consideration of matters on its agenda.
In accordancewith past practice, 1 propose that the Council
should extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure;to the President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia and the delegation of the
Council.
At the invitation of the President,MissKonie (President
of the United NationsCouncilfor Namibia)and the other
membersof the delegationtook placesat the Counciltable.

5. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have receiveda letter dated 4 December from
the representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria which
reads as follows:
‘<We, the undersigned members of the Security Council,
have the honour to request that the Council should
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure to Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, Permanent Cbscrvcr of the South West Africa People’s Organization to
the United Nations, when it takes up the question of the
situation in Namibia.” [S/12952.]
If I hear no objection, 1 shall take it that the Council agrees
to the request.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. Gurirab (Permanent Observer of the South West Aftica hple's
Ofganization)took a placeat the Counciltable.

like an ostrich and pretend that nothing is happening, as
though it did not reject the policy of fait accompli which
we have already observed in Zimbabwe and with whose
consequences we are familiar, or take the course which the
African Group advocates, namely, courageously draw the
proper conclusions from the role assigned by the Charter to
the Security Council and the imperatives of the struggle and
vigilance which the African peoples have undertaken to free
their continent from the yoke of exploitation.

6. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council is meeting
today in accordance with the request made by the Croup of
African States at the United Nations in a letter dated
1 December addressed to the President of the Council
[S/1294.5]. In addition, members of the Council have
before them a letter dated 1 December from the President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia to the President
of the Council /S/12951].
7. I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the following reports of the Secretary-General
which are before the Council: document S/l2938, which
contains the report of the Secretary-General submitted
pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 439 (1978) and
document S/I2950, containing the supplementary report of
the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to the same
resolution. Members of the Council also have before them a
letter dated 4 December from the representative of Angola
to the President of the Council [S/129.53/.

14. It is clear from the Secretary-General’s report that
South Africa intends to follow a course totally opposite to
that set by the United Nations, in particular in resolution
435 (1978). The Western proposals, which Pretoria has
hastened to recognize since April of this year, are thus
rejected in spirit and in form, which, furthcrmore, was clear
from the famous joint statement published following tbe
talks between the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the five
Western Powers and the Government of South Africa
(S/12900, annex II].

8. The first speaker is the representative of the Congo,
who wishes to make a statement in his capacity as
Chairman of the Group of African States at the United
Nations for the month of December. 1 invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

15. The veil bas now been torn from this cruel game which
is being played with the fate of millions of mer-r, women
and children in that part of Africa. If, indeed, as the report
of the Secretary-General indicates, Pretoria arrogates to
itself the right to continue to be the regent of Namibia and
to speak for it at the United Nations, we are cntitled to ask
why those elections, without any democratic foundation,
are needed. Nor do we understand the relationship which
the Pretoria Government establishes between its nonacceptance of resolution 435 (1978) and the commitment
it makes to seek acceptance by the famous other parties
concerned, namely, its puppets.

9. Mt. GAYAMA (Congo) (interpretation from French):
On behalf of the African Group, 1 should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. In your eminent person, it
is also your great country, the Federal Republic of
Germany , that is being honoured. We regard it, too, as a
happy symbol because of the close Iinks between your
country and Africa in a wide variety of fields, and also
because of the active part your Government has taken,
within the group of tïve Western Powers, in the recent
evolution of events in Namibia.

16. South Africa still resolutely chooses confrontation
both with the South West Africa People’s Organization
(SWAPO), the sole authentic representative organization of
the Namibian people, and with the entire international
community through the United Nations when it haughtily
refuses, on the one hand, to allow the United Nations
Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) to be established in
Namibia and, on the other, to respect the timetable for the
withdrawal of its troops SOas to make possible UNTAG’s
establishment and the organization of free and democratic
.elections under United Nations supervision.

10. For ail those reasons and doubtless also for other
historical reasons which are decisive for understanding the
question under review-because
that Territory was entrusted by the Berlin Conference of 1885 to direct
administration by Germany and later placed under an
International Mandate-we believe that you are particularly
qualifred to guide the work of the Council to a successful
conclusion.

17. We see this as an attitude of provocation which is
being presented as for the benefit of the maintenance of
peace end security in Africa and in the world. But it is for
the members of the Council, and in particular the permanent members of the Western bloc, authors of the plan
which bears their names, to pronounce themselves on such
enigmas which seriously diminish the credibility of the
United Nations. Since the last series of meetings of the
Council, the conduct of the tïve Western Powers has been
bizarre. This deliberately enigmatic behaviour is a betrayal
of the confidence which the African countries, on their
insistence, have placed in them as regards trying to put an
end to one of the most unbearable aberrations in the
fistory of our contemporary world. Indeed, international
opinion is still puzzled by this disturbing contrast between
the feverish activity of a few months ago and this
unparalleled passiveness in the face of the disdainful
attitude of South Africa.

11. We also congratulate most warmly your predecessor,
Mr. N’Dong, the representative of Gabon, who is one of us
and who, in that capacity and because of his personal
qualities, guided the work of the Council with ski11 and
effectiveness.
12. In
disregard
of resolutions
435 (1978)
and
439 (1978), South Africa today intends to organize elections in Namibia which the international community did not
wish or propose and whose purpose is nothing less than to
maintain that Territory within the movement of the
apartheid system, which is a crime against mankind, and to
ensure that the people of southern Africa will be kept in
perpetual subjection.
13. Given that profound expression of scorn, two attitudes are possible. The United Nations cari either behave
2

18. In any case, in African opinion Pretoria bas been at
the same time Munich and Canossa. The Fascjst régime
pretends to play a gamc of peace SO as to prepare for war
before those W~O are too credulous, and then to strike the
final blow at those ~110 thought they could confront the
dragon with a flower rather than with a rifle,

if they found themselves under a permanent threat as the
African people as a whole has been for decades.Thus, to
mention only Europe, which people at a given time in its
history has not taken up arms to resist the invader and
defend its freedom? Those who, in various parts of Europe,
have fought against the hegemony of Napoleon or the
fascism of Hitler, without going back to Joan of Arc and
beyond, have written, often in blood, unforgettable pages
of their national history.

19. Since the beginning of the negotiations between the
Western Powers and the South Africans, most African
countries bave maintained their reservations. It was obviously too good to be true that suddenly the beast was
transformed into an ange1 of peace and had become a
spokesman surrounded by respect and consideration. What
the history of recent years had shown to be the true nature
of the South African régime was as though forgotten, even
obliterated. The Western Powers have even, to some extent,
persuaded the United Nations to go back on one of its most
important decisions, that revoking South Africa’s Mandate
over Namibia and placing the Territory under the direct
responsibility of the United Nations. That wasthe reason
for the establishment of the United Nations Council for
Namibia.

25. As regards Africa, it is no secret to anyone that the
struggle against the minority Powers in southern Africa has
never SO blinded us that we have neglected the smallest
opportunity that might offer prospects of peace and
freedom for the peoples of that region. The struggle is not
only one of arms, it is also ùiplomatic. 1 shah confine
myself to the declarations of the heads of States members
of the Organization of African Unity at Dar es Salaam in
1964 and at Mogadiscio in 1974 and, of course, to the
Lusaka Declaration of 1970, which wasaIso adopted by the
United Nations. While the African States reaffrrmed therein
their determination to free their continent from the yoke
of its oppressors, they also made it clear that they were
prepared at any time to sit at a negotiating table with their
enemy, South Africa, in order to find a peaceful solution,
should that prove possible.

20. Those inglorious compromises by the Organization
were only justifïed by the guarantee that seemed to be
offered by the commitment of the Powers allied with South
Africa finally to exert on their protégé the pressureswhich
the international community had a11the time called for SO
as to make the South African régime comply with the
requirements of the prcsent-day world and particularly with
the terms of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

26. The behaviour of the liberation movements recognized
by the Organization of African Unity has always been
inspired by this African line of conduct. Thus SWAPO, in
the most significant moments in the history of Namibia, has
always maintained the showof dignity and of responsibility
which characterizesit.

21. The present situation, which they now pretend to
deplore by criticizing South African treachery, was to be
expected, the more SO since countries as expert in diplomacy as the Western Powers must surely have realized
that no advantage could be gained by negotiating frorn a
position of weakness with a Government with neither faith
nor law. The Western Powers, for reasonswhich still remain
obscure, deliberately placed themselves in the position of
supplicants of South Africa. They beseeched South Africa
to grant a little peace, a little democracy, a little freedom, a
little independence, and no more. Knowing how thoroughly
those concepts of peace, democracy and freedom had been
disregarcled by a11 the colonial and imperialist Powers, it
was more than certain that one could expect the same
disregard.

27. The role and place of SWAPOin the liberation process
of Namibia are distorted nowadays by South African
propagande, supported in this by those who have never
agreed to recognize SWAPO as the only genuine representative of the Namibian people. It is difficult to fault
SWAPO on this matter. Everyone knows that SWAPO itself,
the only movement which correctly reflects in political
terms the purpose of the aspirations of the Namibian
people, is also the only one to draw the inference from the
oppression in which South Africa wished to maintain its
country: armed struggle of national liberation with a11that
it implies in terms of sacrifice, devotion and organization,
ail these placed in the serviceof the people of Namibia as a
whole.
28. This is not the case of other tiny groups hastily
converted by the grace of Pretoria and of certain countries
into “political forces”. It has neverthelessbeen recognized
that, without the decisive action of SWAPO, there would
today have been not the slightest commotion on the
question of Namibia. Above ail, South Africa would not
even deign to speak, albeit in negative terms, of the
possibihty of self-determination for that Territory.

22. Furthermore, colonialism and neo-colonialism are not
SO different, that one could imagine that South Africa
would not, logically, impose its own concept of the
organization of society.
23. It Will be objected-and some have done SOcovertlythat the Africans lack realism, that they go to extremes, that
they do not take into account the interest of the
populations living inside Namibia, and SO on. Actually, it
must be admitted that there has been bad faith, even
hypocrisy and too short a memory on the part of those
who find that we are too demanding.

29. In so doing, South Africa is not mistaken; it has seen
and continues to see in SWAPO the only force capable of
constituting itself into an alternative to its authority based
on gp&kl
and neo-coloniahsm. In the political shortsightedness which characterizesthe powers of domination,
South Afnca and no doubt the Western Powers tried to

24. First of alI, we wonder which of the societies or
civihzations represented here would simply fold their arms
3

ourselves witli
thc struggle,
cvcn
tlrr~u\cll, hw:luSc
of
l>rctori;l’s c~miplicity
with certitin ctruntrics cvcr c;tger to
:tdvoctttc respect for humnn rights. this strugglc is :tt üll
times rcprcscntctl
as ;t fi&! against il11 illl~C1. ‘I’h
sirttpglc
for ttte ilignity anil frccclom of‘ tlWt1 iS itiiliniitcd.
‘I’itnc
IlilS
no bcaritig on the nialter. ‘I’he mi1rül strctrgth tif cvcn thc
tnost
tltlmiliilttXl
f1utn:a~ hcing Gltltt0t
Ile crttshcd
hy trrrtttrc

SWAPO by proposing
fortnolly
thnt power
should he transmittcd
by mei$nS of frce :tntl firir clcctions.
frotn the Adminislcring
Authority,
South Africa, to tlte
electcd represcntntives of thc Namibian pcople. No cloubt it
was cxpected that by runtiing for elcction SWAPO WOUld
be comtnitting
suicide. But tbe cncmies of SWRI’O wcre
quickly disappointe
by tlte reports of tlte secret services,
which assurer1 them of certain victory for SWAPO, üboVc
(111
if thcre were elections, One cnnnot ntherwisc Wplilitl thC
sucltletl revetxtl hy I’lItWiil
and thc Western Powers, Xi IS
borne out by Ille joint statement signcd hy them in South
Africa, in which thcy almost complctcly
rcvcrsc thcir
position
in respect of tfic cotnniitnten t çontainetl
in
resolution
435 (1978) nnd the assurances givcn to Africo
and SWAPO.

emhrruss

nid

Tlle rclcntlcss way in wlticlt South Africa slanrlcrs i1iitl
il&titlSt
SWAI’O flllly convinccs
US, if
tllilt
wcrc
necdctl, that thc course chosen by SWAI’O is ttie only valid
otie in tlic prcsent circunistanccs.
WC thcrcforc rcitctxtc otit
total, moral, political nncl m:tlcrinl conimitriient
to SWAPO
in its just strugglc
for
thc tUtill :1nd cffcctivc libcration
of
tlte Territory of Nnmibia.
fightki

itltCrtliltioii~~1
ktVCS

conimttnity
LIS II0

31Lcrnntivc

ht2

CWtritry,

lx.! CQCII

trpprcssitig

11101~

tltctii

mi

39. J.kt us ;IhoV1’ illl rcmain rIcar reginliti~~ tl1c olijcclivcs
Of ottr rliscttssiotis. ‘I‘ltc l>url~tlsC t~l’otir ccrnsirlcri1li~\tt 01’ Il1C
question
uf Natnihia
113s bccn tc1 cns11rc tl1at in fair
clectiotts ttriclcr tire supervision and cotilrc~l 01‘ tlrc ljnitcd
Nations, SWAPO, rccognizecl by thc Orpanization
of African
Unily ~II~I tltc Ilnilccl Ni1tiotzs ils the SO~C ittld nutlu?nlic
represcntativc
of thc Namibi;1n pcoplc, Will be abIc to SLOW
t0 llte illlcrntltiotrul
çonimitt1ity
Ilte uvcrwhclniing
sul1llot’L
wlticl1 it cnjoys nmonRst thc Natuibittn
l>et,ple. Srlutl1
Africn, wltilc pïctcticling
tlirouglt
cIffiCiill
tnlks 11, üccept
Sucli f:iir clcctions iititlcr Ihc supcrvisiun :1ttd ctnttrol of tl1C
Ilt1ilctl
Nittions,
I1a~ continuously,
through
st:ttcmcnts
issuctl hy ils ICildillg
C~~~vcrttniettt officinls, SyStCltl:ttiCillly
rcjeçtcil ariy possibility
of SWAI)C)‘s bccotning llic forma1
polilical nutl1ority in Namibia tl1rougI1 elcctions. ‘I’lrc enlire
process of these lalks aitncd i1t t1tt intcrnutionully
:tcceptable
SCttlclTlCtl(
IlilS
tlltlS
hcet1 vitintctl from Ilte vcry bcginning

33,

AfrjCit

011

38. Tu judge frotti bis IiltlZSt stand, tlir Strutlr African
Prime hlinislcr itl)l3nrcrltly tisstttltcs 111x1 tl1c ovcrwltclnrittg
majurity of govcrtinicnt
ol’liciuls in the ilttCYlliltit~llill
Crltlltnunity suflèr frotn sonle kitrrl OI’ irc11tc mental dcficiency.
‘r0 tleclarc SoULll Ai’ricit’S willittgticss 10 illliA! hy rssolutic,t1
435 (107X) ;titil :tt ttic s:tttic linic! jo~l’ttlly rcfcr tc,~I1is I’uturc
discussions with thc sptirir1us relxxxcntntivcs
:1pliointctl
through
riggcd clcctions
LIS it IIi~llttïll
ftC\t
StCll
itr COopcrtttitlg
witl1 (Itc Ilnitcd
Nations is cynicism
hcyond
bclicf’.

32. It is thcrcfore clear thnt Ihere cttn bc no sol11 tien 11)
thc Natnibian problcm unlcss
n start is amende on thc solution
of the Soutlt African problem as such. WC would tlteref«rc
advoca te that thc Sccurity Council slioulcl also envisngc tl1c
situation
from B global standpoint,
by rcsorting to tl1e
relevant provisions of Chapter VII of tlic Charter. I~ccx1use
if therc arc to lx ncgotiations
with
thc fipcrrtltrf~l
régime
now sttbjugitting Namibia, D Territory
utttlcr Unitcd Nations
authority,
these negotiations
shottld
no1 bc cnrricd
on from
a position of weakncss. Only if Sattlh Afric: is subjcctctl to
the rigours of gcnirinc econotnic
sanctions, bcginrting witlr :I
total embargo on pctrolcuni,
:In enihnrgo botti c I’fectivc ;~II~I
ni:inil:itary,
C:Itl
it IX cspcctcd,
witlt illly
tlcgrcc
of
ccrtainty,
to comply
wiLli tlie injunctions
of Ll1c international
communily
:1s slatecl in resolution
385 (1076),
435 (1978) nnrl 430 (1078).

Thc

Will,

37. ‘I’ttc consitlcratiutt
of ttrc rlucsticul of Namitria hy thc
Sccurity
Cotincil
sincc
the ildC~ptiOl1 of rcsolutiirn
385 (1476) \V;IS intcndetl ttl cslahlish tl1c frittucwork
for Un
itlt~rlliltioltall~
;ICCl!]>tilt)lC
St!ttlCtll~tlt
of th
qursticin Ol
Nnmihin
tl1rnuglt
elcctiuns
untlcr
tltc supervision
ml
cotttrt1l of Il~e (lttilcil Nations, Tltcsc inil i;tl rihjcctivrs bave
hy ttow ticen uttcrly distorterl. ‘I’hC IllittIOCttVtYS
ol’ SOUtlt
AfriCil,
itt all its CytliCill ;ttId ctxttiiviirl: dcstcrity,
rini ilf
put ting tltc Uni~ctl N:1ti<)tts it1 tlte position of’ Icgi titnixing
tllc powcr 1JilSC wttich
Sottth Africa is ;tI Iftis vcry moitlcttt
crcalinp
in Natnibia
for its tribal pulll\cts atttl ttctr-ctllr~ttii11
racist sttpporlcrs of'~~pur'f/r~~irl.

31. These comtnenl;s should leave no room for tnisunderstanding regnrclitig tlte Wiiy
ii1 wliicli
we slttrultl rtow
consider this situation. Indeed, it now appears clcarly to us
that South Africa not content with its plan of crca ting
buffer Stütes in tlte soutlicrn part of ottr contittcnt,
is
making cvery effort tu aggravate an alreatly tcnse situ:1tion,
and thercby to maintnin hcgcmony
in thc rcgion. Tlius,
Pretoria intends to stick to jts odjous policy of u/x~lt~$~l
and ensure tlxrt it Will Inst forcvcr.

34.

~friculls

36. Miss I\ONIE’ (Prcsitlent of UIC Ilnitctl Nnrituts ~,*clttncil
for Ni11t1ibia): Mr. I’rcsident,
1 wouttl csprcss tr) yon tltc
sincerc el~prcci:1tion of tltc tlelcgi1tiot1 of 111~ tlttitcJ Ni1ticjtls
Couticil for Ntllllit~iil
for
titis qptxtttiiity
10 nddrcss the
Secttrily t’otiiicil
during this [?llilSc
OI ils Jctibcr:itiorts
oit
the question of Nttmibii1. 1 ~l~~ttltl like itlst) tu ct)n~\ri\tulitte
you on your assunil~tion 01 thc presidatcy
of tlic C’r,uneil.

30. WC must adcl thni this net of diplotnutiç
hz1 faitIl, of
which there are fcw cxatnplcs in history. except in sinistct
C:ISCSas in Munich which WC rccullcd lucre carlier, has hecn
carried
ollt
CleSpitC
the rilCt that S0lltll AfriCil
IütltlCtlCll
0
barbarous
aggrcssion ügainst SWAPL) culminating
in t Ix
massacre at Kassinga lnst Junc. This was to lx thc finnI
solution
of the probletn
of SWAPO, but I’retori:i
only
succeedcd in confirming
tlic supcriority
of that niovctnent
over a11 the tribal groups which hnd set: thcmselvcs up as
political forces at the Turnhallc
meeting.

SCltlttt

hrlltn~ity.

iletcrtnincd
to hritig down thc usurper
ilic, soi1 of tlteir own couiitry.

Will itsclf fintl tllilt
but flilly to nssociatc
4

through the duplicity
objectives.

inherent in South Africa’s policy

Onits bordersto preventthe flow of ideasand resources
to
the ow-essedmajority of the peopleof south Africa. I~I
Order to keep Namibia weak, South Africa intends to
PrOmotethe preservationof the homelandswith ail its
consequences
of disintegration
fo: Namibia,

40. TO pretend, as some do, that to declare the elections
which South Africa is perpetrating today on the Namibian
people nul1 and void is to rule out the significance of the
manoeuvre, is cither incredible naïvety or doubtful good
.faith. While the dccision of the Security Council declaring
suc11elections nul1 and void denies them any legitimacy in
the international COnmUnity,
it cannot prevent South
Africa from creating a power base in Namibia, the
benefïciaries of which Will be South Africa’s tribal puppets
and the nco-colonial racist supporters of apartheid. "J'his
then is the substanceof the matter which now confronts
the Council,

4.4. Thisbasbeenthe pattem of South Af&an behaviour
with regard to Namibiaand the basisof its implacable
defianceof the well-considered
views of the international
community.

41. The idea that once these elections are completed
South Africa Will merrily accept a second round of
elections to which it Will gracefully invite the United
Nations, thereby fulfilling its responsibilitiesunder resolutiens 385 (1976), 431 (1978),432 (1978), 435 (1978) and
439 (1978), is self-delusionor worse. South Africa’s intentien is to entrench its clique of neo-colonialpuppetsin
power through theseriggedelections to ensureindefinitely
its ruthless exploitation of the people and resourcesof
Namibia.
42, In its f’renzied arrogance,South Africa is beginningits
so-calledelections today in an atmosphereof terror and is
conducting massarrestsof a11Namibian patriots who see
through this sordid manocuvring. 1 am informed that the
Soutb African sccurity police bave arrestedDaniel Tjongarero,Vice-Chairmanof SWAPO, at Windhoek,Mokgenedi
Tlbabancllo, Secretary for Information of SWAPO, Lucia
Hamutenya, Secretary for Legal Affairs of SWAPO, Axe1
Johannes, Administrative Secretary of SWAPO, John
Konyero, senior officia1 of SWAPO Youth League,and
Solomon Gamatham, Deputy Secretary for Transport.
ThcseNamibianpatriots and SWAPOofficiais werearrested
in the early heurs of 3 Decemberunder section6 of the
notorious Terrorism Act. A total of 80 other SWAPO
supporterswere rounded up and gaoled.SOmuchfor free
electionsunder South African supervisionand control.
43. South African objectives in Namibiahaveahvaysbeen
either the annexation of Namibia or the completecontrol
of the Covernmcnt, people and resourcesof the Territory
through some kind of puppet régime. The history of the
issuesince thc beginningof the United Nations makesthis
quite clcar. The carlier attempts of South Africa to annex
Namibiafailed. Since then it hasattempted the fragmentation of the Territory through its homelandpolicy and the
brutal repressionof all Namibianpatriots who attemptedto
preservenational integrity and achieveself-determination,
freedom and national independencein a united Namibia.
For severaldecadesSouth Africa basrejected a11attemPts
for a negotialed settlementleadingto an independentState
of Namibia. The goalsof South Africa now arc easyenough
to see.The wealth and natural resourcesof the Territory
are immense.its rcservesof diamondsand uranium and
many other mine& are irresistible booty for the racists
and colonialistsat Pretoria and their allies.The preservation
of the heinoussystemof apartheid in South Afrjca depends
on many factors, including the presenceof a security belt
5

45. In 1967 the United Nations created the United
Nations Council for Namibiato administerthe Territory
until independence
wasachieved.Throughoutmore than a
decadethe Councilhassupportedthe legitimatestruggleof
the Namibianpeopleto achieveselfqdetermination,
freedorn
and nationalindependence
in a unitedNamibia.Thc justice
of thc causeof the Namibianpeopleistoday recognizedby
a vast majority
of the peoplesof the internationalcommunity. The Councilfor Namibiabasrepresented,
andWill
continue to represent,the legitimate interests of the
Namibian peoplein spite of a11the temporary setbacks
which the United Nationsmay suffer in imposingthe Will
of the majority of the internationalcommunity on the
recalcitrant and criminal supportersof apartheid at Pretoria. The Councilfor Namibiawill continueto act in close
co-operationwith SWAPO, the soleand authentic representativeof the Namibianpeople,in their struggleuntil
genuineindependence
isachievedin Namibia.
46. The GeneralAssembly,at its ninth specialsession,
adopted the important Declarationon Namibia and the
Programmeof Action in Supportof Self-Determination
and
National Independencefor Namibia[resolution S-Y/21 in
which it defined the principlesvital to the accessionof
Namibiato genuinenationalindependence.
The convening
of the specialsession,moreover,constituted a decisive
reaffirmationof the determinationof the UnitedNationsto
compel South Africe to withdraw from Namibiaand to
create an independentNamibiatruly representativeof the
aspirations of the major@ of its people t0 selfdetermination,freedomandnationalindependence.
47. SinceJanuary 1976,the Security Councilhasseenits
efforts to find an internationallyacceptable
solutionfor the
questionof Namibiafrequently underminedby the manoeuvringsof South Africa. The unilateralappointmentOf
the so-calledAdminjstrator-General
for Namibiawasa Clear
indication of South African bad faith during the early
stagesof the talks whichcalledfor a UnitedNationsrole in
the transition to Namibianindependence.
The unilateral
regist+rat,ion
of votersin Namibia,accompanied
by ail fOm
of petty corruption, further underlinedthe duplicity of the
apartlzeidmafia with respectto the officia1talkspromoted
by certain Westerncountries.The aggression
againstAngola
and tbe massacre
of Namibianrefugeesat KaSSin!$further
emphasizedthe treacherousnature of Afrikaner Cooperationwith the UnitedNations.
48. ‘fhe Security Council is clearly confronkd with a
ferocious challengeto its authority. There cari be no
hesitation on the meansto bring about South African
compliancewith the decisions
of the GeneralAssemblyand
the Security Council.The CouncilmustconsiderapPlYi%

5

a.

but

a11we see

which

leave

the

arc

dclibmtc

picture

vagueness
as

and

obfuscations

confused as before. We bave

gleanecl from thc Sollth African
rcspunse
that
South
Africa
bas finally agrecil to the holding of the clections supervjsed
by the United Nations seven montlis after the emplacement
of UNTAG, nnd that it Will continue to retain authority in
the Territory even ofter the so-called interna1 elections.
Other than that WC sec no Sign that South Africa bas made
any commitments, cxcept that il Will “in the course of thc
coming month . . . recommend to the parties concerned
that resohltion 435 (1978) Should be implemented” /ibid.,
para. 4 (dl.

60. This rcfercnce tel “Parties concerned” sounds
ominous. On thC ont tiand,
WC arc
told that the racist
South African Government Will retain authority in
Namibia; on the other hand, there is this dangerous
mention of “parties conccrncd”. Which parties’? The
puppet groups that Pretoria bas becn patronizing in order
to perpetuate its rdc over Namibia? It must ccrtainly refer
to them, because the genuine representatives of the people
of Namibia have a11been arrested, at least a11the leadersl~p
that was inside Namibia. We hear disparaging comments
from the Western press on elcctions and democracy in third
world countrics. We now want to hear from the same
sources their comments of “elections” at the point of
a gun.
GI. Namibia today is an armed camp, and the forced
registration of voters, the military build-up on Angola5
borders and the arrest of the genuine representatives of the
Namibian peoplc do not exactly make for free and fair
elections.

64* As for us, we continue to support SWAPO, recognized
net only bY the Organization of African Unity but also by
the United Nations as the authentic representative of the
Namibian people. Phalanx upon phalanx of SWApoys
comrades Will rise to aid them, and South Africa cannot
hope to quel1 the tide for genuine independence in
Namibia. The people of Namibia Will never be satjsfied bY
sham elections and a puppet body.
65. We are at a dangerous crossroadsin the history of
southern Africa. If we do not exercisetare and caution, we
could still fail at the final fente. That would be a tragedy
not onlY for southern Africa, but for the world. 1 may
sound Iike Cassandra,but she wasright about the fa11of
Troy. Até a vitbriu final. A luta continua.

64. Mr. McHENRY (United States of America):
Mr. President, 1 should like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the responsibiiities of the presidency of the
Security Council and to pass 011 to your predecessorour
congratulations on the job which he performed during his
tenure in office.
67. The delegations of Canada, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom and the United
States may wish to take the floor in the Council at a later
stage in order to make a fuller statement of our views
concerning the current situation in Namibia. However, at
this first meeting of the Council on Namibia in December
we consider ourselvesobliged to emphasize certain themes
that are basicto the thinking of our Governments.
68. First, we want to reiterate the statement made by the
Foreign Mini&ers of the Five at Pretoria on 19 October that

62. As we see it, South Africa bas left for itself a number
of options. For example, it bas deliberately not anrwered
many of the vital questions raiscd in the Secretary-General%
report of 24 November [S/12938/. Further, what is to
prevent South Africa from saying that the “parties concerned” do not accept this or that proposal-meaning, of
course, that Pretoria does not accept this or that proposaI;
what is to prevent South Africa from staging another
Kassinga, just as matters appear to movd forward? As it is,
the racist General Jennie Geldenhuys, commander of the
racist troops in Namibia, is yuoted in today’s reports as
saying that the number of incidents involving freedom
fighters in October was the highest since May, and one of
the highest since April 1966. In actuel terms, we are no
further along than we wcre in May this year, when South
Africa sabotaged a forward movement by carrying out a
murderous assault inside Angola. And what is to prevent
South Africa from doing the same again?

“ . . . they sawno way of reconciling suchelections with
the proposa1which they had put forward and which the
Security Council had endorsed. Any such unilateral
measure in relation to the electoral process will be
regarded as nul1 and void.” [S/12900, annex U, para. 5.1
We have repeatedly made clear our concem over these
illegal elections. Indeed, the Council will recall that on 13
November, after the adoption of resolution 439 (1978), the
representative of Canada, speaking on behalf of the Five,
referred to the so-calledinterna1 elections as follows:
“We do not consider them as having any significance.
We Will not accord any recognition to the outcome.
Those elections cannot be consideredfree and fair and are
irrelevant to the progressof Namibia to an internationally
acceptable independence. We share the apprehensions
expressecI in this debate, rnost notably bY our Africm
colleagues, that this unilateral processmight be used to
frustrate the implementation of resolution 4% (1970”

63. The decolonization process for Namibia is far from
complete. Neither the United Nations nor those Governments which have been involved in the process cari corisider
their work done. In fact, it is now more important than
ever that the Western Five that have been undertaking
negotiations should continue with their task, not onlY of
seeking further clarifications from South Africa but also of
ensuring that South Africa will honour the outcome of
those negotiations. In the same spirit, while we appreciate
the work of the Secretary-General, we also aPPea1to him t”
continue negotiations and consultations.

[2098th meeting, paru. 20.1

69, Secondly, we are deeply concerned bY the actions of
the police authorities during the course of this week-end in
&t&ing
without explanation prominent members of
S~A~O who make their homes in and around Windhoek.
Those actions have deprived a number of leading members
of a particular sector of the spectrum of political opinion
witKn Namibia of their basic human liberties of speech,
7

movement, press and assembly. We know a number of the
men and women who have been detained and hope that
they Will leam of our deep concem at their detention.
70. Thirclly, the Five state that they deplore the resort to
intimidation, force and violence in Namibia. While not
having avajlable to us the necessary facts on which to base
an opinion as to responsibility, we strongly regret the acts
of violence which took place in Namibia during this
week-end. SUC~ actions and the responses which they
generate run directly counter to the effort to bring about
the fair, peaceful and open democratic elections under
international supervision that are called for in the proposa1
by the Five for the settlement of the Namibian question.

71. Finally, we should like to note from the supplementary report of the Secretary-General the statement
conveyed by the Deputy Permanent Representative of
South Africa on 2 December that “South Africa reaffirms
that it Will retain authority in Namibia pending the
implementation of the proposal” (S/12950, parn. 8/. The
Five attach importance to this explicit recognition by
South Africa of its responsibility for the unfolding of
events in Namibia. We shall continue to address the variety
of questions raised in the context of which 1 bave just
spoken.

The meeting

rose at 5 pm.
