Reaolation1 adopted on the reporta of tlu, Seeond Commhtee

3. fovites Governments _to provide additional support to the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization by making available through voluntary
contributions, in accordance with section 11, paragraph
23, of General Assembly resolution 2152 (XXI), adequate resources for an expanded programme of fi.eld
activities uncler flexible procedures ;
4. Rcq11csts the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to accelerate the preparatory work
within its competence for the next United Nations
Development Decade and to co-operate actively in the
concerted efforts being undertaken by the organizations
in the United Nations system to elaborate the international clevelopment strategy for the 1970s;
5. Endorses Industrial Development Board resolution 11 (II) of 14 May 1968,10 in which the Board
recommended the sum of $1.5 million as the planning
leve! of the regular programme of technical assistance
for industrial development in 1969 and 1970.;
6. Co11siders that the United Nations Industrial Development Organization should be entrusted with the
responsibility of executing a larger number of projects
related to industrial development under the two components of the United N ations Development Programme, taking into consideration the increasing flow
of requests for such projects.
1745th (Jlenary meeting,
17 December1968.

2408 (XXIII). Report1 of the Governing Councll
of the Unlted Nation1 Development Pro•
gramme
Tite General Assembly
Takcs note with satisfaction of the reports of the

Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme on its fifth and sixth sessions. 18
1745th (Jlenary meeting,
17 December 1968.

2409 (XXIII). Promotion of follow-up inve1tment
Tite General Asscnzbly
Talles note of tbe measures taken by the United

N ations De\'elopment Pro~ramme, in response to paragraph 2 of Gene.ral Assembly resolution 2280 (XXII)
of 4 December 1967, concerning the promotion of
follow-up investment. 17
1745th (Jlenary meetinr,,
17 December 1968.

2410 (XXIII). Unlted Nations Capital Develop•
ment Fund
Tlic General Assembly,
Rccalling its resolutions 2186 (XXI) of 13 Decem-

ber 1966 and 2321 (XXII) of 15 December 1967,
Takinq note of the decision of the Governing Council
of the Cnited Xations De,·elopment Programme at its
sixth session requesting the Admiuistrator to continue
his efforts to enable the U nite<l N ations Capital Developmcnt Fund to begin operations, 18
ir. /bid .. annex VI.
te Official Rtcords of tht Economic a11d Social Co11ncil,
Forty-fifth StssiOPI, Supplement No. 6 (E/4451) and Supplement No. 6A (E/4S45).
11 !bid., S11pp/e11u11t No. 6A (E/4545), paras. 197-223.
1 • lbid., para. 267.

27

l. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1350 (XLV) of 2 August 1968, in which the Council,
inter alia, requested the Administrator of the United
N ations De.velopment Programme to identify specifi.c
projects in the programme of work of different organizations of the United Nations system which could
benefit from investment within the scope of the existing
resources of the United Nations Capital Development
Fund;
2. Further endorses Trade and Development Board
resolution 42 (VII) of 17 September 1968,19 in which
the Board, inter alia, stréssed the urgent need to begin
operations of the United Nations Capital Development
Fund as an important instrument within the United
N ations system for aiding and accelerating -the economic
development of the deV'eloping countries, especially in
the field of their investment activity ;
3. Decides to continue the provisional arrangements,
set forth in paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 2321 (XXII), for the implementation of its resolution 2186 (XXI);
4. Further decides to review at its twenty-fourth
session the institutional arrangements for the United
N ations Capital Development Furid.
1745th (Jlenary tHeeting,
17 December 1968.

2411 (XX.ID). International development strategy
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2218 B (XXI) of 19 Decem-

ber 1966, which envisaged the elaboration of an international development strate~y for the 1970s,
Recalling further its resolution 2305 (XXII) of 13
December 1%7, in which it decided to consider at its
twenty-third session the appropriate procedures to be
followed for proclaiming the 1970s the Second United
N ations Development Decade and for approving a
programme of action within the framework of an international development strategy for that Decade,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1356 (XLV) of 2 August 1968 on the United
Nations Development Decade,
Taking note of Trade and Development Board resolution 47 (VII) of 21 September 1968, 20 in which
the Board, inter alia, reaffirmed the important role
that the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development had to play within its competence in the
combination of efforts within the United Nations family
for the preparation of the Second United Nations Development Decade,
Recognizing that the formulation of an international
development strategy for the Second U nited .N ations
Development Decade calls for a major co-operative
effort and co-ordinated action on the part of the United
Nations system of organizations under intergovernmental guidance,
N oting U.'ith satisfaction the preparatory work undertaken by the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the Committee for De.velopment Planning and the
organizations in the United Nations system, in pursuance of General Assembly resolutions 2218 B (XXI)
and 2305 (XXII),
19 See Official Record.r of tht Gen.trol Asmnbly, Twentythird Session, Suppl,mmt No. 14 (A/7214), part II, annex I.

20 lbid.

28

General Assembly-Twenty-third SeHion

Recognizing that the primary responsibility for the
economic dev.elopment of developing countries rests on
them and also that a fuller mobilization and more effective utilization of the domestic resources of these
countries is possible only with concomitant and effective
international action,
Recogni::ing furtlzer that the hope an? confid~nce
with which the task of the Second Umted Nations
Development Decade can be appr~ached will de~end to
a considerable extent on the ach1evements durmg the
transitional period befare the commencement of the
Decade,
l. Requcsts the Economic and Social Council to
enlarge its Economic Committee by twenty-seven States
Members of the United Nations and members of the
specialized agencies and of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to be designated annually, until_ the
preparatory work has been completed, by the Pres1de~t
of the General Assembly keeping in view the compos1tion of the Economic ~nd Social Council, equitable
geographical distribution and the need to ensure the
maximum degree of continuity;
2. Decides that the enlarged Economic Committe.e
shall be the Preparatory Committee for the ~econd
United Nations Development Decade and to th1s end
shall be responsible to the General Assembl;y and sh~ll
report to it, through the Econo1:1\c and Soc_ia) _<:;01111c1l,
in conformity with the Counc1l s respo~s1b1lttte~ for
co-ordination under the Charter of the Umted Nations;
3. lnstructs the Preparatory Committee:
(a) To prepare, on the basis of the relevant studies,
conclusions and proposals formulated-within their
respective fields of competence-by the bodies and organizations in the United Nations system and taking
into account the comments made by Governments of
Member States, a draft of an international development
strategy for the 1970s, which would enunciate, within
a comprehensive, coherent and integrated framework,
the. goals and objectives, both general and sectoral, as
well as concerted policy measures at the national,
regional and international levels, to realize these goals
and objectives ;
(b) To make suggestions on an evaluation and implementation mechanism for the Second United Nations
Development Decade ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in arder to assist
the Preparatory Committee in the fulfilment of its task,
to utilize the expertise available in, and the preparatory
work already accomplished by, the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the secretariat of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
to convene the meetings of the Committee for Development Planning as often as necessary to expedite
the work of the Preparatory Committee and to submit
such views and contributions as he may deem appropriate:
5. Requests the Trade and Development Board to
continue its efforts to reach the maximum degree of
agreement on issues which were remitted to it by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
at its second session and which are of basic importance
for the elaboration of the international development
strategy for the 1970s;
6. Requests the United Nations Industrial Development Organization. the United Nations Development
Programme, the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and other organizations in the
U nited N ations system to accelerate their preparatory

work for the Second Unitecl Nations Development
Decade and bring their sectoral plans into phase with
the Decade;
7. Requests the Committee for Programme and Coordination to assist the Preparatory Committee in the
performance of its task, as appropriate;
8. Rcqucsts the Preparatory Committee to establish
its programme of work ancl calendar of meetings in
such a manner as to be able to submit to the General
Assembly at its twenty-fourth session, through the
Economic and Social Council at its forty-seventh session, a preliminary draft of an international development strategy, as envisagecl in paragraph 3 (a) above,
with a view to finalizing the draft early in 1970;
9. Further requests the Preparatory Committee to
communicate its programme of work and calendar_ of
meetings to Governments and ali concerned orgamzations in the Unitecl N ations system to facilitate their
contribution, in time, to the formulation of an international development strategy;
10. Decides that the meetings of the Preparatory
Committee shall be held, as appropriate, in New York
and Geneva;
11. Stresses the need for developing countries to
intensify their efforts to accelerate their economic and
social development and the need for the developed
countries to supplement their efforts by conco!11it~nt
measures aimed at realizing the development obJecttve
common to the world community as a whole;
12. Im:ites Governments o: Member States to contribute effectiyeJy, through appropriate national and
international boclies, to the preparatory work for the
Second United Nations DeYelopment Decacle and to
communicate to the Secretarv-General, for' submission
to the Preparatory Committee, any _vi~ws they may
have on the formulation of the pre!tmmary draft of
an international development strategy;
13. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1357 (XLV) of 2 August 1968 on the mobilization
of public opinion in developed and developing countries
regarding the Second United Nations Development
Decade;
14. W elcomes the contributions which the various
intergovernmental organizations not within the United
Nations system can bring to the preparation of the
Second United Nations Development Decade,
1745th plenary meeting,
17 December 1968.

*

*

*

The Economic Committec, which is referred to in paragraph
1 of the above resolutio11, consists of the ful/ membership of
thc Economic and Social Council for 1969: ARGENTINA. BEL·
GIUM,

BuLGARIA,21

CHAD,

CONGO

(BRAZZAVTLLE),

fRANCE,

GUATEMALA, INDIA, INDONESIA, IRELAND, JAMAICA, JAPAN,
KUWAIT, LIBYA, MEXICO, NORWAY, PAKISTAN, SIERRA LEONE
SUDAN, TuRKEY, UNION OF SonET Soc1ALIST REPUBLJCs,2 2
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN and NoRTHERN lRELAND,
UNITED REPUBLTC OF TANZANIA, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
UPPER VoLTA, URUGUAY and YUGOSLAVIA.

Thc Presiden/ of thl' General Asscmbl~•, Í1I p11rsua11ce of
poragraph 1 of tlze above resolutio,1 and taking into acco11nt
Economic and Social Council rcsn/11tin11 1388 (XLV) of 19
Deccmbcr 19:58, dcsignatcd thc fo//owing additional Sta/es : 23
21 !bid.,

Twenty-third Sessimi, Annexes, agenda item 37,

document A/7491.
22 ]bid., document A/7490.
.
28 !bid., documents A/7269 and Add.l and 2.

Resolutions adopted on the reporte of the Second Committee
ALGERIA, BRAZIL, BURUNDI, BYELORUSSIAN SovIET SocIALIST
REPUBLIC 24 CAMEROON CAN ADA, (EYLON, COLOMBIA, COSTA
RICA, FE~ERAL REPUBLI~ OF GERMANY, lRAN, hALY, LEBANON,
MAURITIUS, NETHERLANDS, NIGERIA, PANAMA, PHILIPPINES,
PoLANo,25 RoMANIA, SPAIN, SwEDEN, SwnzERLAND, THAILAND,
TUNISIA, UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC and VENEZUELA.

2412 (XXIII). lnternational Education Year
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2306 (XXII) of 13 December 1967, by which it decided to_ <;Jbserve an_ lnternational Education Y ear and prov1s10nally des1gnated
the year 1970 for this purpose,
N oting with satisfaction Economic and Social ~ouncil
resolution 1355 (XLV) of 2 Augu_st 1968, p~rhcula'.ly
the invitation to ali the United Nations agencies, bod1es
and organs to participate in the preparation of programmes of concerted action within the context of an
over-all strategy for developm~nt d1;1ring the 1:ext
decade and in clase co-operat10n w1th the Umted
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Noting with appreciation that consultations between
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the interested specialized agencies
have taken place and that th~ International ~~ucati_on
Year was reviewed at a meetmg of the Admm1strahve
Committee on Co-or<lination in October 1968,
NótÍng with appreciation the reso!utiort on the International Education Year adopted on 19 November 1968
by the General Coníerence of the United _Na~ions Ed?cational, Scientific and Cultural Orga111zat1on at 1ts
fifteenth session and in particular the fact that the
organization wo;ld assume_ primary :espons\bility for
the preparation and executton of an mternahonal concerted programme,
Recognizing that education in a broad sense is an indispensable factor in the development of h~man resources which is essential to ensure the attamment of
the goals of the Second United Nations Development
Decade,
1. Decides to designate 1970 as International Education Year;
2. Endorses the programme of action for the International Education Year set out in the resolution
adopted by the General Conference of the United
N ations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and described in the reports submitted by the
Secretary-General to the Economic and Social Council 26
and the General Assembly ;27
3. Renmimends States Members of the United
Nations and members of the specialized ag~ncies and of
the lnternational Atomic Energy Agency to take stock
of the situation with respect to education and training
in their countries and to p1an and initiate or stimulate
action and studies linked to the objectives and themes
of the lnternational Education Y ear in the context
of their preparation for the Second United Nations
Development Decade ;
4. Requests the United N ations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orgat,ization and the organizations of
the ünited Nations systern concerned to provide within
24 !bid., document A/7492.
25 [bid., document A/7493.
2e E/4518.
27 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twe11ty-tltird
Session, An11e.res, agenda item 38, documents A/7239 and Add.1.

29

available resources ali possible assistance to Governments, especially those of the developing countries, in
their efforts to pursue the objectives formulated by the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization for the International Education Y ear;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General, with the
assistance of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-fourth session, through the
Economic and Social Council at its forty-seventh session, on the progress achieved by the organizations of
the United N ations family in the preparations for the
International Education Year.
1745th plenary meeting,
17 Dccember 1968.

2413 (XXIII). Exploitation and conservation of
living marine resources
Thc General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2172 (XXI) of 6 December
1966 requesting the Secretary-General to prepare proposals for ensuring the most effective arrangements
for an expanded programme of international co-operation to assist in a better understanding of the marine
environment through science, and for the development
of marine resources, with due regard for the conservation of fish stocks,
Havin.(J considered the report entitled "Resources of
the sea beyond the continental shelf" 28 prepared by the
Secretary-General under Economic and Social Council
resolution 1112 (XL) of 7 March 1966 and the report
entitled "Marine science and technology: survey and
proposals" 29 prepared by the Secretary-General under
General Assembly resolution 2172 (XXI),
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1381 (XLV) of2August 1968,
Taking into account the valuable and extensive work
accomplished and being carried out in this field by
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and its Committee on Fisheries, and by other
specialized agencies and intergovernm~ntal or&:anizations concerned, striving towards an mcrease m the
worl<l's food pro<luction,
Deeply concerned that a large proportion of the
world's population continues to suffer from malnutrition
and notably from lack of protein,
Mindjul of the importance of the living resources of
the sea as one of mankind's most important food resources,
ReaJizing the increasing importance of maximizing
the sustainable yield of living marine resources through
conservation and rational development,
Aware of the grave danger of the over-exploitation
and depletion of these resources, to which the rapid
progress in fisheries technology is contributing,
l. Invites Governments of Member States to increase international co-operation in the field of <levelopment ancl exploitation of living marine resources outside the limits of national jurisdiction. having regard
to the special needs ami interests of the developing
countries and with particular emphasis on the need for
rational exploitation ancl con,ervation of fish stocks.
taking into account the valuable work of the Food and
.\griculture Organization of tlw United Nations and
2s E/4449 and Add.l and 2.
:l8 E/4487 and Corr.1-6 and Add.1.
