S/PV.7721

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7721st meeting

Tuesday, 21 June 2016, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Barro
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-18565 (E)
*1618565*

S/PV.7721

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, who is joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Kuwait City.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
country’s accession to the presidency of the Security
Council. I am sincerely grateful for the ongoing
support provided by you and the members of the
Security Council.
(spoke in Arabic)
I am grateful for this opportunity to brief the
Security Council once again on progress in the Kuwait
talks and on the prospects for Yemen’s return to peace.
Today, I am providing this briefing from Kuwait, two
months after the launch of the peace talks, which have
been characterized by a positive spirit at times, and
also by a certain apprehension. Progress has been made
in some cases, while further efforts are still needed
in others.
Over the previous period of the talks, the parties
unanimously agreed on the need to reach a peaceful
solution to put an end to the conflict in Yemen. The
parties have met directly in several sessions and agreed
on solid foundations to build on. A number of prisoners
and detainees, including children, have been released.
The cessation of hostilities has allowed humanitarian
aid to reach areas that were previously not accessible.
2/6

21/06/2016

Participants in the Kuwait peace talks have held
a number of important sessions characterized by an
extraordinary openness, and they have discussed the
most sensitive issues, including military withdrawals,
security arrangements, the hand-over of weapons,
sensitive political issues, ways to improve the economic
and humanitarian situation, and the release of prisoners
and detainees.
After intense talks with both parties, during
which I listened carefully to their respective views and
concerns, I presented a road map outlining a practical
plan to put an end the conflict in Yemen and return
the country to a peaceful political process. The road
map provides for the implementation of the security
arrangements specified in resolution 2216 (2015) and
the establishment of a national unity Government that
would ensure the delivery of basic services and address
the recovery of the Yemeni economy.
According to the proposed road map, the national
unity Government would also be responsible for
preparing a political dialogue to define the remaining
steps for a comprehensive political solution, including
an electoral law, the mandates of the institutions
that would oversee the transition period, and the
completion of the draft constitution. It is essential that
this political dialogue also find ways to ensure the
more effective participation of women, young people
and representatives from the south of the country
in determining Yemen’s future. I note that the road
map also addresses the need to establish national and
international mechanisms to monitor and support the
implementation of an agreement between the parties.
The delegations have responded positively to the
proposals, but have not yet reached agreement on the
sequencing of the different steps provided for in the
road map. When would the Government of national
unity be created? What if particular provisions of the
road map were implemented and others were not?
These are important concerns that need to be addressed
carefully and wisely in order to ensure a comprehensive
solution with solid foundations. I look forward to the
support of Member States of the region and the Security
Council to encourage the parties to overcome their
differences quickly, strengthen their common ground
and demonstrate good faith. Yemen is on the path to an
agreement and each day of delay needlessly extends the
country’s agony.
16-18565

21/06/2016

The situation in the Middle East

The cessation of hostilities that was declared on
10 April 2015 has continued to provide relief from
violence in many parts of Yemen. The de-escalation
and coordination committee, which is based in Kuwait,
and the local disengagement councils have continued
to play an important role in de-escalating outbreak of
violence and reducing violations of the cessation of
hostilies. Unfortunately, the work of the committees
has not been able to end serious violations, such as the
shelling of a popular market in Ta’izz that resulted in
18 civilian deaths and dozens of injuries. In addition,
there have been violations in Al-Jawf, Ta’izz and
the areas bordering Saudi Arabia. I encourage the
Security Council to call on all parties to fully cease all
hostilities, respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law, and protect civilians.
My team has pursued several initiatives to support
and incentivize the members of the de-escalation
and coordination committee and the disengagement
councils, with the support of the Kingdom ofSaudi
Arabia, the European Union, the United States,
Germany, the United Kingdom, Turkey and the
Netherlands. This has included training workshops
to build the capacity of members of the councils in
several governorates. This training will be repeated
and broadened over the coming weeks to cover all
remaining disengagement council members. I note that
Prime Minister Mr. Ahmed Obaid Mubarek Bin-Dagher
and members of his Cabinet retuned to Aden on 4 June
in order to support the resumption of basic services and
the reinforcement of security and stability. His efforts
enjoy our support. I also acknowledge the ongoing
work to counter terrorism in the south, which has led to
a relative improvement of security.
While progress in the Kuwait talks raises hope for
the future, we must be mindful of the severe decline
in the living conditions throughout the country. The
failure to provide basic services over the past year has
had a devastating impact. High temperatures and the
lack of electricity in Aden, Hudaydah and elsewhere
have exacerbated the health crisis in these areas and
caused a number of preventable deaths. In this regard,
I welcome the efforts of the United Arab Emirates to
urgently provide fuel and emergency power to Aden.
In recent months, the Yemeni economy has seen
a dangerous deterioration. Since early 2016, Yemen’s
gross domestic product has shrunk by more than 30 per
cent. To address this alarming situation, the Central
Bank has continued to ensure the import of such basic

S/PV.7721

commodities as rice, wheat and medicines. Such support
will become more difficult in the weeks ahead , however,
leading to a deterioration in the living standards of
Yemenis, especially vulnerable groups. In this regard,
my Office is coordinating with the Government of
Yemen, the Central Bank and certain Member States
to fmd quick solutions to the rapidly deteriorating
economic situation. I recently met with the Minister
of Finance and the Governor of the Central Bank, who
are playing a very constructive role, and we discussed
practical initiatives that can be rapidly implemented in
order to help prevent the economic and humanitarian
situation in the country from deteriorating further.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen is alarming
and there are credible warnings from humanitarian
organizations of a humanitarian catastrophe should
the situation not be addressed forthwith. I welcome
the release of prisoners that took place at the
beginning of the holy month of Ramadan, based on
the recommendations of the committee for prisoners
and detainees established within the framework of the
Kuwai talks, which communicates data on the names
of the prisoners released. In this regard, I welcome the
release by the Government of Yemen of 54 children
to their families, in coordination with UNICEF
and the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Furthermore, more than 400 detainees, including
prisoners of war, have been released by Ansar Allah in
recent weeks. I emphasize the obligation of the parties
to immediately and unconditionally release all children
and to prioritize the release of vulnerable detainees,
such as the elderly, sick and wounded, as well as those
individuals identified in resolution 2216 (2015).
On the other hand, the limited release of prisoners
has been accompanied by the continued and systematic
persecution of civilians, including journalists and civil
society activists in Yemen. These acts of intimidation
and harassment are clear violations of international
human rights instruments. I call on all parties to
halt these acts and to fulfil their obligations under
these instruments.
In short, the general atmosphere remains
positive, although difficulties persist that need to be
addressed. The Kuwait talks have progressed slowly
yet constructively over the past two months. We count
on the commitment of the parties and appeal to them
to speed up their negotiations in order to reach a
comprehensive settlement as soon as possible.

16-185653/6

S/PV.7721

The situation in the Middle East

The support of the Security Council has been a key
factor in supporting progress in the talks. The parties
have received the international community’s clear and
consistent message that a solution must be reached here
in Kuwait. I appreciate the encouragement and support
of Member States in reaching a negotiated and peaceful
end to the conflict, and remain profoundly grateful
to the General Secretariat of the Gulf Cooperation
Council and the League of Arab States. I also extend my
sincere and utmost gratitude to the Amir of Kuwait, His
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah,
for his generous and steadfast support, and for the
staunch efforts of the Government and the people of
Kuwait in hosting the talks, as well as for all the facilities
they continue to provide. We expect nothing less from
that State, which has always sponsored initiatives in the
service of peace and humankind.
Yemenis are watching the developments in the
peace talks in Kuwait with great hope and impatience.
The people of Yemen have experienced the indignity
and suffering of war for too long. I am confident
that the unprecedented international support for the
ongoing process will encourage the different parties
to overcome obstacles and difficulties and reach a
comprehensive political agreement. Over the past
weeks, the delegations of the Government of Yemen,
the General Popular Congress and Ansar Allah have
demonstrated a true commitment to make peace, as
well as political wisdom in the negotiations, which did
not shy away from broaching sensitive and complicated
issues. We have to recognize that any agreement that
emerges from the Kuwait peace talks will do so in a
very difficult context, and its implementation will
pose a serious challenge. Yemenis should listen to
their patriotic and political conscience and ensure
implementation for the sake of the national interest.
Within the next few days, I will provide the Yemeni
parties with a written proposal for the upcoming stage.
The peace agreement we seek will restore security
and stability for Yemen and will constitute a sign of
hope for the Middle East, which is beset by a series
of regional and international disputes. The parties to
the negotiations now have the responsibility to find a
political solution for the pending issues, which mainly
concern the timeline and the sequencing of the different
steps. I call on all parties to show political courage
and make their national interests prevail by making
the necessary concessions to reach a comprehensive
agreement that safeguards the safety and security of
4/6

21/06/2016

Yemen and its citizens and ensures the well-being of
the country.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Ahmed
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to begin, Sir, by warmly congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. We also very much appreciate the skill with
which the Ambassador of Egypt led the Council during
the previous month. I would like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his teadfast efforts in the
process in Kuwait. We await his visit in the next few
days to lend greater impetus to the efforts to establish
lasting peace in Yemen. The Government of Yemen
also expresses its gratitude to the Emir, the Government
and the people of Kuwait for their outstanding efforts
to promote peace in Yemen. Those efforts will remain
etched in the memory of future generations of Yemenis.
Since the announcement by the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, on 18 April, of the date for
negotiations, in spite of the circumstances surrounding
the negotiations, the Government of Yemen has
actively committed itself to furthering the efforts
of Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed. In the next few
days, we will examine all the documents submitted
by the Special Envoy in accordance with the Kuwait
plan. That plan is based on the constant position of the
United Nations on the crisis in Yemen, namely, that it
be based on the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its associated implementation mechanism as well
as the relevant resolutions of the Council, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).
We have great faith in the people of Yemen and
in our Constitution, as well an awareness of our legal
responsibility, in the face of the suffering of our people,
to put an end to the tragedy, which has been taking place
for a year and a half and is the result of a coup d’état
against the legal constitutional Government. That has led
to significant destruction and diminished our country’s
resources, thereby setting back our development.
Over the past few days, we have considered the
ideas put forward by the Special Envoy, in particular
with regard to withdrawal, the need to release all
detainees and re-establishing State authority so that the
political process can resume on the basis of the general
framework. We have also considered the five major
16-18565

21/06/2016

The situation in the Middle East

points on which the Kuwait negotiations are based.
Those negotiations have faced serious significant
challenges that have to do with the lack of seriousness
demonstrated by those who carried out the coup d’état.
They must renounce the unilateral measures that they
continue to undertake.
What we have proposed in Kuwait amounts to a
path to lasting peace, not half measures, which could
lead to a resumption of the crisis in Yemen and result
in the kinds of risks that could threaten the existence
of our country and stability in the Gulf and the
Arabian peninsula. The road map must include the
following elements.
There is a need to withdraw heavy weapons
and return them to State authority in all areas of the
country. The Houthi militias must withdraw and
rejoin the relevant military and security institutions.
All measures adopted in the constitutional statement
following the coup d’état must be rescinded. And State
institutions must be fully re-established. Those are
the preconditions for expanding State authority and
resuming the political process that the Houthi coup
d’état disrupted, so that the transitional period can
resume and we can hold elections to establish a federal
State and usher in a new Yemen.
The peace to which we aspire would mean an end to
the destructive war that has impacted our people. From
the moment the negotiations in Kuwait began, we have
called for a full cessation of hostilities in all of Yemen’s
provinces. Since 10 April, we have sought to promote
the work of the De-escalation and Coordination
Committee. However, the other side has continued to
wage war without pause and to carry out assaults on all
fronts, while the Houthi militias have continued their
attacks in the southern provinces.
On 3 June, I sent the Secretary-General a request
for intervention on behalf of the Government of Yemen
to counter the massacres carried out by the Houthi and
pro-Saleh militias at the public market in Ta’izz, where
60 women and children were killed. The war criminals,
who killed women, children and the elderly in Ta’izz,
will be prosecuted under national and international
law. The perpetrators of these crimes include General
Abdullah Abdul-Malik al-Houthi, the military
commander of the Houthi militias; Brigadier General
Hamoud Ahmed Dahmash, head of the Twenty-Second
Armoured Brigade of the Republican Guard; General
Zakaria Al-Muta’h, Commander of the Republican

S/PV.7721

Guard; and General Hamoud Al-Harithi, Commander
of Central Security Forces.
Since their capture of Sana’a, rebel forces have
worked systematically to destroy the national economy
by wasting approximately $5 billion in foreign currency,
which they stole from the reserves of the Central Bank,
to support their criminal actions against our people.
The rebel forces tried to manipulate the derivatives
prices for oil in order to make money on the black
market. We have undeniable evidence of the earnings
collected by the militias, as well as of the illegal funds
they obtained by using trucks to transport oil under the
pretext of supporting the war effort.
With regard to the fight against terrorism, in May
and June the Houthi and pro-Saleh militias released
some 52 Al-Qaida elements who had been incarcerated
in national prisons. Recently, the remaining prisoners,
terrorist elements who had already been sentenced
to prison, were also released. This clearly illustrates
the close links between Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula and the Houthi and pro-Saleh militias. This
is particularly troubling since Al-Qaida controlled the
port of Al-Mukalla and was involved in the smuggling
of weapons and oil to benefit the militias. The Yemeni
Government, together with the coalition forces and
Yemen’s partners, coordinated the fight against
terrorism in order to carry out fatal attacks against
Al-Qaida in Al-Mukalla and all other positions in
which Al-Qaida was deployed in the southern province
of Yemen. The Yemeni Government will continue to
pursue Al-Qaida and Da’esh forces and will provide
the legal evidence of the link between those forces and
the terrorists.
In conclusion, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to the suffering of the activists, journalists
and politicians who were detained by the Houthi
militias in certain regions under their control. The
militias reject the freedom of expression and their
prisons and detention centres are overflowing with
thousands of prisoners who are subjected to bodily and
psychological torture. Many families do not know where
their sons are detained or the status of their health,
which constitutes a flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
In a gesture of good faith and in order to comply with
the request of the Special Envoy, during the month
of Ramadan the Government released some victims.
We call on the Council to continue to put pressure
on the militias to release Major-General Mahmoud

16-185655/6

S/PV.7721

The situation in the Middle East

al-Subaihi, Minister of Defence of Yemen, and all
individuals under house arrest or arbitrarily detained,
in accordance with sub-paragraph (f) of paragraph 1 of
resolution 2216 (2015).
Lastly, we reaffirm our determination to work
towards achieving a lasting peace in Yemen, based on
the negotiations in Kuwait, which are being conducted
by the Special Envoy. We would also like to thank

6/6

21/06/2016

the Gulf Cooperation Council and in particular the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for its historic position in
support of Yemen.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on this subject.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

16-18565
