S/2014/191

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 March 2014
Original: English

Second report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) and covers developments pertaining to the search for missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including its
national archives, since the issuance of my previous report, dated 11 November
2013 (S/2013/654).
2.
The reporting period witnessed deepening ties between Iraq and Kuwait. On
15 and 16 December, Iraq and Kuwait took part in the third meeting of the Joint
Ministerial Committee, held in Kuwait. Agreements on the protection of investment
and on tourism were signed. On 18 December, I met with the Permanent
Representatives of Iraq and Kuwait to the United Nations, who submitted the
bilateral agreement on joint administration of navigation in the Khor Abdallah
waterway, for registration as a treaty in accordance with Article 102 of the Charter
of the United Nations. In another positive development, on 19 February, the
Government of Iraq informed me that it had distributed approximately $1.4 million
to compensate eligible beneficiaries, pursuant to the agreement between the
Government of Iraq and the United Nations, signed in Baghdad on 26 May 2013,
and to Security Council resolution 899 (1994). From 13 to 15 January, I visited Iraq
and Kuwait and, in my discussions with the leadership of the countries, appreciated
the significant gains made in strengthening their relations.

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, or their remains
3.
With a view to carrying out his responsibilities under resolution 2107 (2013),
my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs at the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) held meetings with relevant Iraqi
interlocutors, including the Minister for Human Rights, Mohammed Shia al -Sudani;
his deputy and head of the Iraqi delegation to the Technical Subcommittee of the
Tripartite Commission, Arkan Saleh; the Ambassador in the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Iraq with responsibility for Iraq-Kuwait issues, Mohammed Hamoud; and
Ambassador Walid Shiltagh, who heads the Iraqi interministeria l committee on
missing Kuwaiti property. In Baghdad, he also met with the Ambassador of Kuwait,
14-26228 (E)

180314

*1426228*

S/2014/191

representatives of the delegation of the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) and members of the diplomatic corps.
4.
My Deputy Special Representative represented UNAMI in an observer
capacity at the meetings of the Iraqi interministerial committee for missing Kuwaiti
nationals, which convened three times, on 13 November and 4 December 2013, and
21 January 2014, under the auspices of the Ministry of Human Rights. The
interministerial committee reviewed progress in accessing, interviewing and
analysing information from witnesses and informants and considered steps to
encourage informants to identify burial sites.
5.
Iraqi interlocutors assured my Deputy Special Representative of the continued
commitment of Iraq to addressing the issues of missing Kuwaiti and third -country
nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including its national archives. They
indicated, however, that there were challenges to that end. With the passage of time,
reliable witnesses have either passed away, live in third countries or wish to
disassociate themselves from their past. Reliable and quality information has become
difficult to obtain, thus increasing dependency on second-hand and often inaccurate
information. Iraqi interlocutors emphasized that, despite those challenges, they looked
forward to suggestions from UNAMI so that their efforts could yield results. They
welcomed the intention of UNAMI to seek observer status in the Tripartite
Commission and its Technical Subcommittee. My Deputy Special Representative
emphasized the readiness of UNAMI to advise and support the relevant Iraqi
ministries in developing a comprehensive road map and innovative methods.
6.
On 25 November, my Deputy Special Representative wrote to the Head of
Operations for the Near and Middle East of ICRC and the Chair of the Tripartite
Commission and its Technical Subcommittee, requesting to facilitate granting
UNAMI observer status in the Commission and its Subcommittee. On 15 January,
the delegation of ICRC in Baghdad advised my Deputy Special Representative that
a consensus could not be reached between the members of the Tripartite
Commission on UNAMI observer status. The Technical Subcommittee met on
20 November and 28 January, and the Tripartite Commission met on 30 January. All
meetings were held in Kuwait.
7.
On 1 and 2 December, my Deputy Special Representative visited Kuwait,
where he met with the Advisor to His Highness the Emir, Mohammad Abdullah
Abulhasan; the Director of the Coordination and Follow-up Department of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Khalid Mohammed al-Maqamis; and the Director of the
International Organizations Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Jasem
al-Mubaraki, in addition to members of the National Committee for Missing Persons
and Prisoners of War Affairs. He also held meetings with the ambassadors of France,
Iraq and the United States of America, the Head of the Political Section of the
Embassy of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the head
of the regional delegation of ICRC.
8.
Kuwaiti officials welcomed my first report (S/2013/654) and appreciated
efforts by UNAMI. They emphasized that the hu manitarian nature of the file of
missing persons required exploration and the use of means that could bring
progress, including persistent work with witnesses. They wished that UNAMI could
visit Kuwait more regularly, intensify contacts with the Kuwaiti si de and bring a
new momentum to the dossier. They asked UNAMI to support relevant Iraqi
ministries in developing a road map and to continue to encourage Iraqi officials to

2/4

14-26228

S/2014/191

carry out their commitments. The members of the National Committee for Missing
Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs reiterated their reservations with regard to
UNAMI becoming an observer in the Tripartite Commission and its Technical
Subcommittee.
9.
From 14 to 17 December, a specialized team from the Ministry of Human
Rights carried out an exploratory mission in the Qaradagh area of the Sulaymaniyah
Governorate. The Ministry continued to search for a map of the “fighting school”,
where alleged executions of prisoners of war took place, and plans to carry out
further exploration in the area. From 3 to 9 January, a specialized team from the
Ministry of Human Rights dug 80 trenches along the road between Muthanna and
al-Salman. Additionally, as requested by Kuwait, 25 test trenches were dug close to
the location of former sites where remains were found in 2003 and 2004. From 2 to
4 February, a specialized team from the Ministry of Human Rights of Iraq undertook
an exploratory mission to locate a fourth site in the al -Tamur area in Karbala
Governorate and collect coordinates based on the infor mation provided by a
witness. Excavations were carried out for several years at three sites where remains
had been found earlier. Nevertheless, all such efforts are yet to produce results.
Plans for excavations in the Salman Pak area in Baghdad Governorate continue to
be hindered by security concerns.
10. During the reporting period, the Kuwaiti National Committee for Missing
Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs used the genetic materials received from Iraq
in September 2013 from an excavation in Muthanna Governorate to verify DNA
profiles in the missing persons database. The results yielded no positive match. On
28 January, the Ministry of Human Rights shared with the Kuwaiti National
Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs another set of genetic
materials from the same site. Again, the analysis yielded no positive match.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
11. On 28 November, my Deputy Special Representative attended in Baghdad a
meeting of the interministerial committee on missing Kuwaiti property, including
national archives. Members of the committee, including the General Secretariat of
the Council of Ministers, the Ministries of the Interior, Defence, Justice, Higher
Education, Finance, Tourism and Antiquities, and the Central Bank, provided an
update on their efforts to locate missing Kuwaiti property. My Deputy Special
Representative suggested searching the archives of the various ministries, given that
the Kuwaiti national archives might have been disaggregated and stored in the
archives of individual ministries.
12. During the visit of my Deputy Special Representative to Kuwait on 1 and
2 December, Kuwaiti officials expressed deep disappointment and concern that there
had been no progress in the search for missing Kuwaiti property, including its
national archives, despite Iraqi announcements of rewards. While they appreciated
Iraqi efforts to find missing Kuwaiti property, they observed that the items found
and returned so far were of no significant sentimental or historical value. They
stressed that the archives had been looted in an organized fashion, which might help
the efforts to break the long impasse on the issue.

14-26228

3/4

S/2014/191

13. On 5 December, the General Secretariat of the Council of Ministers inst ructed
State institutions to forward to the Iraqi interministerial committee on missing
Kuwaiti property any items that had been found and/or any relevant information.
Similar instructions were last issued in January 2012.
14. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs found two paintings with the seal of Kuwait, and
asked Kuwait in December for assistance in ascertaining their authenticity and
ownership. On 13 January, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Kuwait responded that
the paintings had to be examined by the Kuwaiti National Council for Culture and Arts.
15. As regards recent findings, the Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific
Research has collected 100,000 books and scientific journals and 500 theses.
Similarly, the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities has found 247 books, one copper
plate, a painting and publications, and the Ministry of Culture has claimed it is in
possession of a number of books and publications. UNAMI has proposed that the
items be handed over to Kuwait when the two committees on miss ing property meet.
In that regard, my Deputy Special Representative urged his Iraqi and Kuwaiti
interlocutors to convene a joint meeting of their committees, as they have not met
since their first and only meeting in Kuwait on 15 May 2013. Iraqi interlocut ors said
they wished to host the next meeting in Baghdad.

IV. Observations
16. The issue of the repatriation or return of all Kuwaiti and third -country
nationals or their remains, and the return of Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives, is now under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations. My Deputy
Special Representative and UNAMI as a whole have been carrying out all necessary
activities to promote, support and facilitate Iraqi efforts.
17. I realize that Iraq is aware of its obligations under Security Council resolution
2107 (2013) and is determined to live up to expectations. Nevertheless, despite the
enabling climate of cooperation between the two countries, no Kuwaiti remains have
been found since 2004. It is certainly regrettable as, with the passage of time, the
technical and practical difficulties of finding mortal remains increase. Obtaining
precise information that can facilitate the search, as well as tracing, reaching o ut to
and securing the cooperation of reliable witnesses, become a challenge. I urge Iraqi
authorities to redouble their efforts and to explore all possible incentives to persuade
witnesses and informants to come forward.
18. Since their inception, the Tripartite Commission and its Technical
Subcommittee have been helpful in addressing the issue of missing Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals. The steering role of the International Committee of the Red
Cross has been indispensable and praiseworthy. UNAMI has been invested with a
substantial and serious mandate. I trust that all stakeholders will embrace UNAMI
as a full partner for it to play a meaningful role in this humanitarian endeavour.
19. It is disappointing that no tangible progress has also been achieved with respect
to the Kuwaiti national archives. I urge the Government of Iraq to bring innovative
methods to their search. UNAMI stands ready to assist. I am pleased that the Iraqi
interministerial committee has been convening to coordinate the searc h for missing
Kuwaiti property, including its national archives. I also call on both the Iraqi and
Kuwaiti committees on property to work closely and meet together on a regular basis.

4/4

14-26228
