B. APPOINTMENT OF A GOVERNOR OF THE FREE
TERRITORY OF TRIESTE

B. NOMINATION D'UN GOUVERNEUR
DU TERRITOIRE LIBRE DE TRIESTE

Decisions

Decisions

At its 155th meeting (private meeting), on 10 July
1947, the Council, continuing its consideration of the
question of the appointment of a governor of the Free
Territory of Trieste, decided to set up a committee
composed of the representatives of Australia, Colombia
and Poland to collect additional information about the
candidates already suggested, as well as other possible
candidates, and to report to the Security Council.

A sa 155• seance (seance privee), le 10 juillet 1947,
le Conseil, poursuivant ses de.iberations sur la nomination d'un gouverneur du Territoire libre de Trieste,
a decide de constituer un comite compose des representants de l'Australie, de la Colombie et de la
Pologne, qui serait charge de recueLlir des renseignements supplementaires sur Jes candidats deja proposes,
ainsi que sur d'autres candidats possib!es, et de faire
rapport au Conseil.

At its 223rd meeting (private meeting), on 18
December 1947, the Council decided to request the
Governments of Yugoslavia and Italy to consult with
each other in an effort to agree on a candidate for
Governor of the Free Territory of Trieste and report
to the Council not later than 5 January 1948.

A sa 223• seance (seance privee), le 18 decembre
1947, le Conseil a decide de demander aux Gouvernements de la Y ougoslavie et de l'ltalie de sc consulter
pour chercher a se mettre d'accord sur le nom d'un
candidat au poste de gouverneur du Territoire libre
de Trieste et de faire rapport au Conseil le 5 janvier
1948 au plus tard.

THE CORFU CHANNEL INCIDENTS

INCIDENTS SURVENUS
DANS LE DETROIT DE CORFOU

Decision

Decision

At its 95th meeting, on 20 January 1947, having
included in its agenda a letter dated 10 January 1947
from the representative of the United Kingdom addressed to the Secretary-General concerning incidents
in the Corfu Channel,2 the Council decided to invite
the Albanian Government to participate, without r•e,
in the discussion relating to the dispute, on condition
that Albania accepted, for the purposes of the case,
all the obligations which a Member of the United
Nations would have to assume in a similar case.

A sa 95• seance, le 20 janvier 1947, ayant inscrit
a son ordre du jour la lettre, en date du 10 janvier
1947, adressee au Secretaire general par le representant du Royaume-Uni, relative aux incidents survenus
dans le detroit de Corfou 2 , le Conseil a decide d'inviter
le Gouvernement albanais a participer, sans droit de
vote, a la discussion relative au differend, a la condition que l'Albanie accepte en !'occurrence toutc,s Jes
obligations qu'aurait a assumer, en pareil cas, un
Membre des Nations Unies.

19 (1947). Resolution of 27 February 1947

19 (1947). Resolution du 27 fevrier 1947

As a preliminary step in the consideration of the
incidents in the Corfu Channel which are the subject
of a dispute between the United Kingdom and Albania,

A titre de mesure preliminaire en ce qui concerne
l'examen des incidents survenus dans le detroit de Corfou qui font l'objet d'un differend entre le RoyaumeUni et l'Albanie,

2

2

Ibid., Supplement No. 3, annex 8.

2

Ibid, Supplement n° 3, annexe 8.

The Security Council
Resolves to appoint a sub-committee of three members to examine all the available evidence concerning
the above-mentioned incidents and to make a report to
the Security Council, not later than 10 March 1947,
on the facts of the case as disclosed by such evidence.
The sub-committee is empowered to request further
information as it deems necessary from the parties to
the dispute, and the representatives of the United
Kingdom and Albania are requested to give every
assistance to the sub-committee in its work.
Adopted at the 114th meeting by 8 votes to none,
with 3 abstentions (Poland,
Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Le Consei/ de securite
Decide de creer une sous-commission composee de
trois membres et chargee d'examiner tous Jes temoignages dont on dispose sur les incidents en question
et de faire rapport au Conseil de securite, au plus tard
le 10 mars 1947, sur Jes faits qui soot a l'origine du
differend, tels qu'ils se degagent des temoignages dont
on dispose.
La sous-commission pourra demander aux Etats qui
soot parties au differend les nouveaux renseignements
qu'elle jugera necessaires, et les representants du
Royaume-Uni et de l'Albanie soot pries de faciliter
la tache de la sous-commission dans toute la mesure
du possible.
Adoptee a la 114' seance
par 8 voix contre zero,
avec 3 abstentions (Pologne,
Syrie, Union des Rlpubliques socialistes soviitiques).

Decision

Decision

At its 114th meeting, on 27 February 1947, the
Council adopted a proposal by the President that the
members of the sub-committee set up by its resolution
19 (1947) should be Australia, Colombia and Poland.

A sa 114• seance, le 27 fevrier 1947, le Conseil
a adopte une proposition du President tendant a designer l'Australie, la Colombie et la Pologne comme
membres de la sous-commission creee par la resolution
19 (1947).

Adopted by 7 votes to
none, with 3 abstentions
(Australia, Colombia, Poland).3

Adoptee par 7 voix contre
zero, avec 3 abstentions
(Australie, Colombie, Pologne)3.

22 (1947). Resolution of 9 April 1947
[S/324]
The Security Council,
Having considered statements of representatives of
the United Kingdom and of Albania concerning a
dispute between the United Kingdom and Albania
arising out of an incident on 22 October 1946 in the
Straits of Corfu in which two British ships were damaged by mines, with resulting loss of life and injury
to their crews,
Recommends that the United Kingdom and Albanian Governments should immediately refer the dispute
to the International Court of Justice in accordance
with the provisions of the Statute of the Court.

22 (1947). Resolution du 9 avril 1947
[S/324]
Le Conseil de securite,
Ayant examine Jes declarations des representants du
Royaume-Uni et de l'Albanie au sujet d'un differend
existant entre le Royaume-Uni et l'Albanie a la suite
d'un incident survenu le 22 octobre 1946 dans le
detroit de Corfou et au cours duquel deux navires
britanniques ont ete endommages par des mines, ce qui
a fait des morts et des blesses parmi leurs equipages,
Recommande aux Gouvernements du Royaume-Uni
et de l'Albanie de soumettre immediatement ce differend a la Cour internationale de Justice, conformement
aux dispositions du Statut de la Cour.

Adopted at the 127th meeting by 8 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions (Poland,
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics).S

Adoptee a la 127• seance
par 8 voix contre zero, avec
2
abstentions
(Po/ogne,
Union des Republiques socialistes fOVietiques)S.

s Un des membres (Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d1rlande du Nord) n'a pas participe au vote.

3 One member (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland) did not participate in the voting.

3
