United Nations

S/PV.9280

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9280th meeting
Tuesday, 14 March 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Fernandes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Sanchez Izquierdo
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mr. Nanga
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Magosaki
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baumann-Bresolin
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Kelley

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-07475 (E)
*2307475*

S/PV.9280

Threats to international peace and security

compatriots and Russian-speaking people — anyone
who feels that they are Russian or feels connected to
Russia, whether by fate or simply because they have
sympathy for Russia. It justifies having their right to
life, dignity and free movement curtailed.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Kirill
Vyshinsky, Executive Director, Rossiya Segodnya;
Mr. Dmitry Vasilets, Deputy Head, Ukrainian Union of
Law Workers; and Mr. Timothy Snyder, Trade Professor
of History, Yale University.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Vyshinsky.
Mr. Vyshinsky (spoke in Russian): My name is
Kirill Vyshinsky. I was born and raised in Ukraine
and graduated from university in the Ukrainian city of
Dnipropetrovsk as a philologist and teacher of Russian
language and literature. For more than 25 years, I worked
as a journalist in various Ukrainian media outlets. In
2014, I became editor-in-chief of the Ukrainian website
RIA Novosti Ukraine — it was published in Russian. In
2018, I was arrested by the Security Service of Ukraine
on concocted charges, including high treason. I spent
almost a year and a half in jail, after which a Ukrainian
court, which did not confirm any of the charges against
me, released me, which allowed me to leave Ukraine for
Russia in 2019. Today, I still work as a journalist and
am a member of the Russian Council for Civil Society
Development and Human Rights.
I am grateful to the Security Council for the
opportunity to speak at this meeting. What is
Russophobia? Russophobia is a demonstration and an
imposition of hostility and hatred against Russians,
the Russian people, the Russian State and Russian
citizenship. This is done publicly, in media outlets
and on the Internet. Russophobia is a rejection of the
civilizational status of Russia, Russian culture and
carriers of that culture. Russophobia is an ideology
that was created and disseminated artificially and
purposefully. It justifies dehumanization and genocide
of the Russian people, Soviet and Russian citizens,
2/22

14/03/2023

Let me cite just a few of the most egregious examples
of modern Ukrainian Russophobia. In 2022, there were
Russophobic and misanthropic calls on Ukrainian
television. In a live broadcast, a Channel 24 journalist,
Fakhrudin Sharafmal, called for dealing with Russians
by destroying their families and children. “If we have
to slaughter all your families, I will be in the first ranks
to do that. Long live our nation!”, he said, — and it was
broadcast live.
Ukrainian doctor Gennadiy Druzenko, the head of
the mobile hospital project, called for the castration of
Russian prisoners of war because, he claimed, “they
are cockroaches, not people”. At the same time, a socalled “public service announcement video” appeared
in Ukraine with a young girl, wearing a Ukrainian shirt
and a circlet of flowers, cutting the throat of a Russian
soldier with a sickle while saying: “now it’s our turn
to reap a bloody harvest. Every single one of you will
die!”. These statements are being implemented today
in practice. It can be seen in the execution of Russian
prisoners of war by firing squads, in their inhumane
treatment, as well as in the shooting of civilians in the
Russian-speaking Donbas.
Another example is from yesterday, 13 March,
when the Verkhovna Rada — the parliament of
Ukraine — announced a draft bill that offers to
officially define the current political regime in
Russia as “Rashism”. Among the characteristics of
this phenomenon invented in Ukraine, the deputies
included “self-glorification of Russia and the Russian
people with the goal of forced oppression and/or denial
of existence of other nations”.
These apparent lies being told about Russians is
supposed to cause — not only in Ukraine, but also in
other countries — open hostility and hatred towards
Russia and Russians and become an instrument to
awaken and to cultivate Russophobia. Incidentally, that
is already happening in the European Union as well.
In March 2022, the Prime Minister of Poland admitted
that Russophobia is already mainstream today, and that
it is already accepted as an obvious feature of Polish
and European politics.
23-07475

14/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

But let us turn back to Ukraine, where Russians
constitute the second-largest national community, after
Ukrainians. According to the recent census in Ukraine,
Russians families numbered in the millions, and the
Russian language was spoken natively by nearly a third
of the population, or more than 14 million citizens.
According to the only census conducted in Ukraine in
2001, at the time, Russians accounted for over 17 per
cent of the population, or more than 8 million people.
According to the same census, those who called Russian
their native language accounted for nearly a third of the
population, or more than 14 million Ukrainian citizens.
The truth of the linguistic situation is that there are far
more who speak Russian in their everyday lives and
consider it to be their native language. According to
sociological studies undertaken in 2020, more than a
half — 53 per cent — of the population speak Russian
either constantly or often. Russian is the second working
language of the country, after Ukrainian.
However, over the past 20 years, the sphere for
the use of the Russian language has been deliberately
reduced. It began with the 2006 banning of voice-overs
and foreign movies in Russian and discriminatory quotas
against the Russian language introduced in the media
throughout the country, including the Russian-speaking
regions of the east.
That process has logically moved into the sphere
of education. Higher education in Ukraine has been
taught in Ukrainian only since it became mandatory in
2014. In September 2020, all Russian-language schools
in Ukraine changed to Ukrainian as the language of
instruction. That happened after the entry into force of a
law on education.
Starting in 2022, Ukrainian authorities locally
decided on a complete ban on the study of the Russian
language. In November of last year, Kyiv eliminated
Russian from the curriculums of kindergartens and
schools. The same ban took place in Mykolayiv, which
is a major regional centre of the east, and in the Odesa
oblast. The Ministry of Culture of Ukraine is planning
to remove approximately 100 million Russian books
from libraries — of those, 20 million had already been
destroyed by the beginning of 2023. The books are not
being burned defiantly, as the Nazis did in the 1930s in
Germany. Instead, they are being thrown in the garbage
or recycled as commercial packaging.
In October, the Secretary of the National Security
and Defence Council of Ukraine, Oleksiy Danilov, who
heads the body that imposes sanctions against its own

S/PV.9280

citizens without court decisions, said that the Russian
language should disappear altogether from the territory
of Ukraine. That has already begun in a number of
educational facilities, where everyone, including
students, the faculty and even technical specialists, are
not allowed to speak Russian during recess periods or
after working hours. That Russophobic decision was also
taken in January 2023 by the largest institution of higher
education in Kyiv, namely the Kyiv-Mohyla Academy.
It is being supported by the Language Ombudsman of
Ukraine — this position was created in the country after
2014 — who promised to broaden and introduce that
practice into other universities of Ukraine.
I will return to the issue of Russophobia among
Ukrainian authorities, but I would like to first talk
about other inhuman manifestations of Russophobia
in Ukraine. In 2014, after the majority of Russians
and Russian-speakers held a referendum in Crimea
and decided to reunify with Russia, the Ukrainian
authorities completely cut off the supply of fresh
water through the North Crimean Canal. In fact, the
actions of the Kyiv authorities triggered a humanitarian
catastrophe.
Now I will return to systematic Russophobia in
Ukraine in the sphere of culture. Starting in 2014,
Ukraine began the process of the mass renaming of
street names and cities and the destruction of monuments
related to the Russian and Soviet period of Ukraine’s
history. Last June, the Ministry of Culture announced
that a De-Russification Council would be created,
charged with considering the destruction of monuments
to prominent figures from Russian culture, any major
national historical events connected to Russia and the
Russian people, and Soviet soldiers who died during the
Second World War. During that campaign in November
in Mykolayiv, unknown persons blew up a monument
to those who had died in Ukraine during the Second
World War — an obelisk called “The Motherland”.
At the same time, in Uzhhorod, a Second World War
monument, “Ukraine to the Liberators”, which is one of
the world heritage sites of Ukraine and is dedicated to
the Soviet soldiers who freed the city during that same
war, was also destroyed.
In February of this year, a monument to General
Vatutin, who liberated the Ukrainian capital from the
Nazis during the Second World War, was demolished
in Kyiv. People would bring flowers to that monument
every year on the anniversary of the city’s liberation.
Its demolition was an obscene and barbaric act, as the

23-074753/22

S/PV.9280

Threats to international peace and security

monument had been erected on the site of the grave
containing the general’s remains, and their current
location is unknown.
Another manifestation of massive Russophobia in
Ukraine is that monuments to Alexander Pushkin, a
great writer, known to the whole world for his literary
classics, were also destroyed. Pushkin visited many
cities in the east of Ukraine, and a monument was
erected to him in the late nineteenth century. It was
Russian-speaking residents of those cities who had
gathered money for those monuments commemorating
the writer, and now, 100 years later, those monuments
were demolished in Dnipropetrovsk, Zhytomyr
and Kharkiv. In total, monuments to Pushkin were
dismantled in more than 20 cities in various regions of
the country.
Another area with human rights implications
in which the Ukrainian authorities are introducing
Russophobic practices in a very ingenious way is
religion. The largest religious denomination in the
country is the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, which has
the largest number of monasteries and churches and
clergymen, thereby uniting millions of parishioners
all over Ukraine. The Ukrainian Orthodox Church is
a self-governed part of the Russian Orthodox Church
and has great autonomy, but their ties have become the
pretext for systematic attacks on the former.
Since the 1990s the churches of the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church have been regularly seized. Local
authorities in different regions of Ukraine condone
such seizures and ban those churches’ activities at
their level. In addition, monks and clergy belonging
to the Ukrainian Orthodox Church have been forced
to leave the most important holy site of the Russian
and global Orthodox faith, a monastery dating back
almost a thousand years, Kyiv-Pechersk Lavra. On
March 10, a State organization, the National Preserve
“Kyiv-Pechersk Lavra”, governed by the Ministry of
Culture of Ukraine, asked them in writing to leave the
premises, giving them until the end of March to do so.
It was allegedly due to violations of the agreement for
the donated right to use the monastery, but no specific
violations were mentioned by the National Preserve in
any official documents sent to the monastery.
The monastery in question is one of the oldest in
Orthodox Christianity and was founded in the tenth
century. It is where the relics of over a hundred Russian
saints repose, including those of Ilya Muromets, a
4/22

14/03/2023

hero of Russian epic literature, and a monk, Nestor
the Chronicler, the author of the first written source
of Russian history. Today, there are attempts to take
those relics and the monastery itself away from the
Ukrainian Orthodox Church, which is a part of the
Russian Orthodox Church.
I could provide many more facts related to the
Russophobic policies of the Ukrainian authorities,
which have become widespread and reached their peak
in 2022 and 2023, but their underlying message is
evident. Ukraine has recently seen systematic attempts
in various areas — in education, culture, religion and
everyday life in general — to promote an ideology of
hatred for everything Russian: hatred of Russians, of
Russian-speaking people, as well as hatred of anyone
who is somehow linked with Russia. This ideology
has become the basis for broad practical measures in
various spheres and should, as envisioned by its authors,
not only provoke hatred, but also destroy all Russians
and Russian-speaking people, including their families
and their children. A clear call for this outcome is being
made on Ukrainian television, in Ukrainian online
spaces and across social networks.
I sincerely thank the Council for its attention and
for the opportunity to address such a high-level forum.
The President: I thank Mr. Vyshinsky for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Vasilets.
Mr. Vasilets (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Security Council for giving me the opportunity to take
the floor and speak on behalf of the tens of millions of
Russian-speaking citizens in Ukraine. I also thank the
Russian Lawyers’ Association that works with our team
to help refugees who have come to Russia.
My briefing is dedicated to the issue of discrimination
against Russian-speaking Ukrainians. The Ukrainian
Constitution enshrines the right to develop the Russian
language, but the criminal Zelenskyy regime has
placed itself above the law. Following the coup d’état
organized by the United States Embassy in Ukraine
in 2014, the 2012 Languages Law, which regulated the
use of the Russian language in all spheres of public life
in accordance with article 10, part 3, of the Ukrainian
Constitution, was abrogated without repealing any of
guarantees for Ukrainian as the State language.
After the coup d’état, the Poroshenko regime
immediately adopted a new law on language. It was
called “On the functioning of the Ukrainian language
23-07475

14/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

as a State language”. This law affected the Russian
language and national minority languages, all of which
were simply repressed. The entry into force of various
provisions of the law was extended to 2024 with the clear
aim of stifling civil protests against the discrimination
against the Russian language.
Therefore, under the Zelenskyy dictatorship
regime, starting on 1 September 2020, the Russian
language was banned in schools; on 16 January 2021, it
was banned in the sphere of public services; on 16 July
2021, it was banned in theatres and movie theatres;
on 16 January 2022, it was banned in the media and
publishing; and starting on 16 July 2022, the use of
Russian language is now subject to fines. To implement
these fines, a special State structure, the Office of
the Commissioner for the Protection of the Ukrainian
Language, was established. All of this is happening in
the twenty-first century.
Just imagine the Swiss Government fining someone
for using the French language. Or imagine Spain
fining someone for using the Catalonian language.
Imagine Russia fining someone for using the Ukrainian
language. It is impossible to imagine, yet, as we can
see, thanks to the law that was signed by Poroshenko
and that, in fact, has already been implemented by
Zelenskyy, such barbarism is happening in Ukraine
right now.
In 2021 alone, some 300 schools and more than
600 classes with instruction in Russian were dissolved,
despite the fact that, in public surveys, more than 30 per
cent of Ukraine citizens said that they were in favour
of studying the Russian language and over 70 per cent
wanted to see Russian language study in schools. But
the local budgets for 2022–2023 were not funded with
the money to finance Russian classes.
The right to speak in one’s native language is an
inalienable human right. But in Ukraine, as we have seen,
human rights are simply banned. The Russian language
is the native language of millions of Ukrainians, but it
is banned from all aspects of social life in Ukraine. It
is also illegal to teach children and raise them in the
Russian language. It is not permitted to teach Russian
in school. In addition, Russian-speaking people are
subject to persecution, and the language itself is being
discredited by the Zelenskyy regime. These are facts.
In Ukraine, millions of Ukrainians who speak and
think in Russian cannot write correctly in Russian. I
myself was born and raised in Kyiv. In school there

S/PV.9280

simply was no Russian language. I grew up during the
first wave of Ukrainization, so after completing school
and university, I could not, in fact, write properly in
Russian and had to learn to do it later in life.
I ask everybody who is listening to my statement
just to imagine not being able to write in their own
language — in English, French, or Spanish, whatever it
is. This is exactly the situation millions of Ukrainians
are facing today.
Furthermore, I have personally encountered
discrimination against my native Russian language,
when I was defending myself in court. The judges and
the prosecutors told me I had to use the Ukrainian
language, which is not my native language. In this way,
my right to protection was violated.
In Ukraine, in the territory of Ukraine under the
control of NATO and the Zelenskyy regime, in many
instances, we see that even humanitarian assistance is
denied to Ukrainian citizens in need if they do not speak
to those providing humanitarian aid in the Ukrainian
language. Many videos illustrating this situation are
available on the Internet.
Considering all the foregoing, I, as a citizen of
Ukraine, often have to listen to absurd lies — pure
and simple — promoted by the Zelenskyy dictatorship,
namely, that the Russian language is not being subject
to persecution. However, notwithstanding Zelenskyy’s
claim that he himself belongs to the Russian-speaking
population and that there is no discrimination against
the use of the Russian language, in actual fact and under
the law, we are seeing a situation that is diametrically
opposed to that claim.
This is precisely why, in the situation in Ukraine, it
is appropriate to use the term “linguicide”. Linguicide
comprises prohibitive measures or other actions
designed to destroy another language. When drafting
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide, approved by the General Assembly
in 1948 (resolution 260 A (III) of 9 December 1948),
the United Nations recognized linguicide as a special
case. In 1967, the report of the Royal Commission on
Bilingualism and Biculturalism, issued in Ottawa,
Canada, defined linguicide as any act aimed at the full or
partial destruction of a language or of the establishment
of barriers to the natural development of a language or
dialect, such as the physical destruction of members of
a community who speak a certain language or dialect,
the adoption of repressive measures aimed at impeding

23-074755/22

S/PV.9280

Threats to international peace and security

the natural development of a language or a dialect, the
intentional creation of conditions in which a bilingual
society is compelled to switch to monolingualism,
bans on the use of a language in schools and the media
against the will of a specific ethnolinguistic group, or
the failure to provide moral or material assistance to
an ethnolinguistic group in which the members are
attempting to preserve their language and culture.
All of that is happening in Ukraine, not as some sort
of excess, but as the deliberate State policy supported
by the NATO-backed regime of Zelenskyy, who has
betrayed the Ukrainian people. As a result, since 2014,
a civil war has erupted across our territory, with the
language issue playing a central role. Indeed, the
discrimination against the Russian language is one of
the main triggers of armed confrontation, which, after
many years, eventually became a new cold war between
the United States and Russia. Now the hot phase of that
conflict is under way in Ukraine.
As of today, based on the legislation in force, at
least 30 per cent of Ukraine’s citizens are deprived of
the opportunity to use their own language in practically
all areas of daily life. This is a gross violation of the
Constitution of Ukraine. Since 1992, the scope for
the use of the Russian language has been gradually
shrinking. The Russian language has been displaced
from the State authorities and local government,
even in places where Russians and Russian-speaking
citizens were an absolute majority. I am talking about
the Odesa, Mykolaiv, Kherson, Zaporizhzhia, Donetsk,
Luhansk and Kharkiv regions, the Crimea and other
places. Despite parental protests, Russian-speaking
schools were switched to Ukrainian as the language of
instruction. At the same time, the quality of Russianlanguage teaching dropped, as the State discriminated
against teachers using the Russian language by paying
them lower salaries. The Russian language was also
displaced from higher education in the same way.
The logical continuation of that policy was the
adoption of the law on ensuring the use of the Ukrainian
language as the State language. That law has angered
Hungarian, Bulgarian, Romanian, Greek, Czech and
many other ethnic communities in Ukraine. But the
Russian and Russian-speaking communities suffered
the brunt of the law.
The law completely excludes the Russian language
from labour relations, education, science, culture,
television and radio broadcasting, the print media,
6/22

14/03/2023

book publishing, the use of computer programmes
and websites, public events, sport, services,
telecommunications and office work. In other words,
Russian is excluded from all areas of life, leaving
citizens only with the possibility to use Russian in
private communication. At the same time, the law
allows for the use of English and languages of States
members of the European Union in such areas. There
is a deliberate policy of discrimination against the
Russian language. That policy is also fully supported
by NATO countries and, of course, put into effect by
President Poroshenko and now President Zelenskyy.
The use of the Russian language is prohibited
by law. Those who violate the law are subject to
administrative proceedings. They are fined. Fines of
up to $230 are levied for the first offence and up to
$460 for a second violation. Just to give an idea of what
such money means to Ukrainians, I remind Council
members that an average monthly pension in Ukraine
amounts to $60.
The fines are imposed not only on State and local
officials, but also on ordinary citizens. Here is an
example of the latter. A protocol on imposing fines was
made public recently, on 31 January. It was decided
to fine a saleswoman in a perfume shop, who, at the
request of a customer, had the audacity to translate
the Ukrainian inscription on a box into Russian. She
was then insulted by a female customer for having
used Russian. The same customer filed a complaint
with a specifically established repressive body — the
Office of the Ukrainian State Language Protection
Commissioner. The saleswoman was fined $260.
In early February, blogger Ruslana Bortnikova,
who worked as a make-up artist in Odesa, was fined for
Russian-language content on her Instagram. The woman
had been recording her posts for her friends on social
media in Russian, but that did prevent these “language
inspectors” from finding them and fining her.
All that is a sign and manifestation of linguicide.
The Russian language is being systematically destroyed,
creating conditions in which people are forced to
give up communicating in their native language. The
identity of millions of people is being erased. That is
not acceptable in the twenty-first century.
The President: I thank Mr. Vasilets for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Snyder.
23-07475

14/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9280

Mr. Snyder: I am very glad to address the Security
Council. I will try to keep my remarks brief. I speak to
Council members as a historian of the region, a historian
of Eastern Europe and, specifically, as a historian of
mass killing and political atrocity.

is one language, and one can say very little. Ukraine
is a country in which there are two languages, and one
can say what one likes. When I visit Ukraine, people
report to me about Russian war crimes using both
languages — Ukrainian or Russian, as they prefer.

I believe that the discussion that we are having today
about the word Russophobia can clarify something
very important about the character of Russia’s war
of aggression in Ukraine and about the character of
Russia’s illegal occupation of Ukrainian territory. I will
limit myself to two main points.

Fourth is the attack on Russian culture by way
of censoring school books, weakening Russian
culture at home and the destruction of museums and
non-governmental organizations devoted to the memory
of Russian history. All those things are Russian policy.

My first point is that harm to Russians and the
Russian culture is primarily a matter of Russian policy.
If we are concerned about harm to Russians and Russian
culture, we should therefore be concerned about the
policies of the Russian State.
My second point is that, during this war, the term
Russophobia, which we are discussing today, has been a
form of imperial propaganda and imperial justification
for Russian war crimes in Ukraine.
Beginning with the first point, the premise when
we discuss Russophobia is that we are concerned about
harm to Russians. That is a premise that I certainly
share. I share the concern for Russians. I share the
concern for the Russian culture. Let us then think about
the actions of this past year that have caused the most
harm to Russians and the Russian culture. I will briefly
name 10 such actions.
First is forcing the most creative and productive
Russians to emigrate. The Russian invasion of Ukraine
has caused approximately 750,000 Russians to leave
Russia, including some of the most creative and
productive people. That is irreparable harm to the
Russian culture.
Second is the destruction of independent Russian
journalism so that Russians cannot know the world
around them. That, too, is Russian policy and causes
irreparable harm to Russian culture.
Third is general censorship and the repression of the
freedom of speech in Russia in the Russian language.
That is an irony that bears noting. In Ukraine, one can
say what one likes, either in Russian or in Ukrainian. In
Russia, one cannot. If one stands in Russia with a sign
saying “No to war”, one will be arrested and very likely
imprisoned. If one stands in Ukraine with a sign that
says “No to war”, regardless of what language it is in,
nothing will happen. Russia is a country in which there

Fifth is the perversion of the memory of the Great
Fatherland War by fighting a war of aggression in 2014
and 2022, thereby depriving all future generations of
Russians of that heritage. That is Russian policy and
causes great harm to the Russian culture.
Sixth is the downgrading of the Russian culture
around the world and the end of what used to be called
the russkiy mir — the Russian world abroad. It used
to be the case that there were many people who felt
friendly towards Russia and the Russian culture in
Ukraine. That has been brought to an end by the Russian
invasion, and that is Russian policy.
Seventh is the mass killing of Russian speakers in
Ukraine. The Russian war of aggression in Ukraine has
killed more speakers of Russian than any other action
by far. There is no comparison.
Eighth is, of course, the fact that Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine has led to the mass killing of Russian citizens.
Some 200,000 people are dead or maimed, and that is
of course simply Russian policy. It is Russian policy to
send young Russians to die in a war of aggression.
Ninth, this war also means that a generation
of young Russians — those who survive — will be
involved in war crimes and will be wrapped up in
trauma and guilt for the rest of their lives. That is great
harm to Russian culture, and, like all these policies,
that has been achieved by the Russian Government
itself, mostly in the course of the past year. If we were
sincerely concerned about harm to Russians, those are
the things that we would think about.
But perhaps the worst Russian policy with respect
to Russians is the last one — number 10 — which is the
sustained training or education of Russians to believe
that genocide is normal. We see it in the President of
Russia’s repeated claims that Ukraine does not exist.
We see it in genocidal fantasies on Russian State media.
We have seen it in a year of State television reaching

23-074757/22

S/PV.9280

Threats to international peace and security

tens of millions of Russians every day. We see it when
Russian State television presents Ukrainians as pigs,
parasites, worms, satanists or ghouls. We see it when
Russian State television proclaims that Ukrainian
children should be drowned. We see it when Russian
State television proclaims that Ukrainian houses
should be burned with the people inside. We see it
when people appear on Russian State television and
say, “They should not exist at all. We should execute
them by firing squad.” We see it when someone appears
on Russian State television and says “We will kill
1 million. We will kill 5 million. We can exterminate
all of you” — meaning all of the Ukrainians.
If we were sincerely concerned about harm to
Russians, we would be concerned about what Russian
policy is doing to Russians. The claim that Ukrainians
are quote-unquote Russophobes is one more element of
Russian hate speech. In Russian State television, those
other claims about Ukrainians are intermixed with the
claim that Ukrainians are Russophobes. For example,
in the statement in which the speaker claimed that all
Ukrainians should be exterminated, the reason he gave
is that they should all be exterminated because they
are Russophobes.
That brings me to my second point — the claim
that Ukrainians have to be killed because they have
a mental illness known as Russophobia is bad for
Russians because it educates them in genocide. But
of course, such a claim is much worse for Ukrainians.
And this is my second point. The term “Russophobia”
is a rhetorical strategy that we know from the history
of imperialism. When an empire attacks, the empire
claims that it is the victim. The rhetoric that Ukrainians
are somehow Russophobes is used by the Russian
State to justify a war of aggression. But of course, it
is the war of aggression — the setting itself — that
matters. It is the invasion itself, the destruction of
whole Ukrainian cities, the execution of Ukrainian
local leaders, the forced deportation of Ukrainian
children, the displacement of about half of Ukraine’s
population, the destruction of hundreds of hospitals
and thousands of schools and the deliberate targeting
of water and heating supplies during the winter. That is
the setting — that is what is actually happening.
The term “Russophobia” is a claim by the imperial
Power that it is the victim, even as it is carrying out a
war of atrocity. That is historically typical behaviour.
The imperial Power dehumanizes the actual victim
and claims to be the victim. When the victim opposes
8/22

14/03/2023

being attacked, murdered and colonized, the empire
says that is unreasonable, an illness — a phobia. That
claim that the victims are irrational — that they are
phobic and have a phobia — is meant to distract from
the actual experience of the victims in the real world,
which of course is an experience of aggression, war
and atrocity. The term “Russophobia” is an imperial
strategy designed to change the subject from that of an
actual war of aggression and shift it to the feelings of
the aggressors, thereby suppressing the existence and
experience of the people who are most harmed. The
imperialist says, “We are the only people here. We are
the real victims. And our hurt feelings count more than
other people’s lives.”
Russia’s crimes can and will be evaluated under
Ukrainian law, because they are taking place on
Ukrainian territory, as well as by international law.
To the naked eye, we can see that there is a war of
aggression, crimes of humanity and genocide. The use
of the word Russophobia — the claim that Ukrainians
are ill rather than experiencing an atrocity — is colonial
rhetoric and part of a larger practice of hate speech.
That is why today’s meeting is important. In Russia’s
genocidal hate speech, the idea that Ukrainians have
a disease called Russophobia is used as an argument
to destroy them, along with the arguments that they
are vermin, parasites, satanists and so on. Claiming
to be the victim when you are in fact the aggressor
is not part of the defence — it is actually part of the
crime. Hate speech directed against Ukrainians is not
part of the defence of the Russian Federation. It is part
of the crimes that Russian citizens are committing on
Ukrainian territory. In that sense, in calling today’s
meeting, the Russian State has found a new way to
confess to war crimes.
The President: I thank Mr. Snyder for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Kirill Vyshinsky and Dmitry
Vasilets for their briefings. Each of them has a bitter
personal experience of encountering Russophobia
in Ukraine. They have seen with their own eyes and
from the inside how that State was transformed into a
Russophobic anti-Russia.
I would like to hear Mr. Snyder provide examples of
what he lied about so shamelessly today. Where did he
hear those vile epithets on Russian television — whether
23-07475

14/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

State or non-State — with regard to Ukrainian and
Ukrainians that he referenced in the hope that nobody
would verify his claim? They simply do not exist and
are nowhere to be found. Mr. Snyder has long been
known for his historical hoaxes aimed at proving that
Russians supposedly never lived in Ukraine and that it
has an independent, centuries-long if not thousand-year
history. One can only feel for him, because those fables
and attempts to rewrite history crumble easily in the
face of historical facts. Ukrainians in the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries were not a people but
rather adherents of a particular ideology — that of
opposition to Russia and Tsarism — and of course, for
want of anyone else, ethnic Russians living outside the
Russian empire lorded it over the political Ukrainians
at that time. One such was Mykhailo Hrushevsky,
whose pseudo-historical works have become canonical
in Ukraine and today are actively promoted in the
West for political reasons, particularly by Mr. Snyder,
as well as Mykola Mikhnovsky and Dmytro Dontsov,
who formulated the principles of integral Ukrainian
nationalism. Incidentally, those principles are quite
uncomplicated and based, like German Nazi doctrine,
on the superiority of the Ukrainian nation over others.
The main principle that they formulated was the notion
that “Russkies, Hungarians, Polacks and Yids are the
enemies of the Ukrainian people”. That is precisely
the reason why Russophobia so easily became the
core ideology for an independent Ukraine, a process
that has accelerated noticeably since the so-called
Orange Revolution of 2004, and especially since the
anti-constitutional coup d’état of 2014.
This has already been mentioned here, but I will
repeat it without delving into the historical details.
According to the 2001 census, 17.3 per cent of the
population — mostly living in the east and south of
the country — considered themselves to be Russians.
Almost 30 per cent of the population considered Russian
to be their native language. But as the briefer mentioned,
many more people spoke Russian at home and in other
social situations. The fact that in 2004, 95 per cent of
all books published in Ukraine were written in Russian
shows how widespread the language was in Ukraine
at the time of the events mentioned earlier. The then
new nationalist Government immediately launched a
brutal attack on the Russian language and everything
else Russian. Through schools, education, movies
and television, they planted the idea that everything
Russian was foreign. As a result, an entire generation of
Ukrainians were steeped in the doctrine of Mikhnovsky

S/PV.9280

and Dontsov, learning that Russians were the enemy
and that Ukrainians were a superior nation, from whom
the Moskals stole everything, including their religion,
language, literature and culture.
History was rewritten as well, and those who
served the fascists and committed terrible atrocities
became heroes who had promoted an independent
Ukraine. As a result of the 2014 anti-constitutional coup
d’état, Ukraine definitively became anti-Russian ,and
Russophobia was elevated to the status of State policy.
The Maidan activists did not hide their misanthropic
Russophobic views, and their foreign sponsors were
well aware of that. Just a few days after the bloody
regime change, the leader of the extremist Right
Sector, Dmitry Yarosh, declared that de-Russification
was a completely just and necessary development.
Russophobe and Verkhovna Rada deputy Iryna Farion
called all Russian speakers mentally disabled. The
Mayor of Dnepropetrovsk Boris Filatov said that,
“We have to give those scum whatever promises and
guarantees are necessary. We can hang them later”.
I am quoting those words so that members of the
Security Council can understand the rabid Russophobia
of the new Government that Russian-speaking
Ukrainians have faced since the 2014 coup d’état. The
authorities were prepared to kill and burn them, as
was clearly demonstrated when more than 40 Russianspeaking activists were burned alive in the trade union
headquarters in Odesa in May 2014. One of the first
decisions of the new regime was an attempt to repeal
the law on the principles of the State language policy,
under which the Russian language enjoyed the status
of a regional language in 13 of Ukraine’s 24 oblasts.
It was that decision that triggered the separation from
Ukraine of the Crimea, the vast majority of whose
population considers itself to be Russian. The menace
of eradicating the native language and portraying Nazi
collaborators and criminals as heroes was the key reason
for the righteous protest of the residents of Donbas,
where Russian was used in everyday communication
by more than 80 per cent of the inhabitants. It is worth
noting that even the Maidan authorities realized that
the language issue was culturally sensitive and could
lead to the collapse of the country. That is why the
repeal of the law was temporarily delayed. When the
Minsk agreements were signed, Kyiv even agreed to
include the option of linguistic self-determination for
Donbas. However, as we now know, the Kyiv regime
never intended to honour those agreements.

23-074759/22

S/PV.9280

Threats to international peace and security

For nine years, the Ukrainian authorities
systematically destroyed anything that might even
be remotely related to Russia. In doing so, they
undermined the foundations of a society whose culture
and civilizational identity had been joined with our
country for centuries. As the result of six legislative acts
adopted under Petro Poroshenko, the Russian language
was removed from every sphere of public life and strict
language quotas were introduced in the media. Attempts
to discourage the use of Russian through discrimination
in everyday life also increased. Those measures were
enacted in direct violation of not only documented
international norms but also the principles enshrined in
the Constitution of Ukraine, which seek to protect the
linguistic, educational and other rights of citizens and
national minorities.
I will not go into detail about the discriminatory
processes currently under way in Ukraine in relation to
the Russian language and Russian-speaking inhabitants.
Both of the briefers whom we invited informed us about
that in detail. I will focus only on the role of Ukrainian
President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, who promised during
his presidential campaign to review the language laws
that had further divided an already-polarized Ukrainian
society. I would like to cite his words on Ukrainian
television before he became President,
“People in eastern Ukraine and Crimea want to speak
Russian. Leave them alone. You should legally give
them the possibility to speak Russian. Language will
never divide our native country. I have Jewish blood.
I speak Russian, but I am a citizen of Ukraine...
Russia and Ukraine are truly brotherly peoples... We
all understand one another very well”.
Largely thanks to that position and his promises
to bring an end to the civil war in Donbas, 75 per cent
of Ukrainians voted for him in the 2019 presidential
election. However, the new Head of the Ukrainian State
very quickly showed that all such issues, which are
of extreme importance for Ukrainians, were actually
nothing more than empty sound bites. He quickly fell in
line with Kyiv’s patrons, who did not intend to preserve
peace in Ukraine and its good-neighbourly relations
with Russia. In arming his country with Western help
and preparing for war with Russia under the cover of the
Minsk agreements — about which there is today no doubt
thanks to the revelations by former French, German and
United Kingdom leaders — he took a number of steps to
eradicate the Russian language and everything Russian
from the country.
10/22

14/03/2023

In 2020 and 2021, discriminatory laws on
secondary education, the indigenous peoples of
Ukraine and national-patriotic education were adopted.
In September 2021, Zelenskyy called on all residents of
Ukraine who considered themselves Russian to leave
the country. He called that their personal choice. If you
want to live in Ukraine and see a future for your children
and grandchildren there, he said, you must become a
Ukrainian and give up your Russian identity. Those
who did not want to do so, in particular the residents of
Donbas, were intimidated by bombings and shelling or
simply killed. I would also like to emphasize that those
measures were not a response to Russia’s actions, but a
proactive and deliberate attempt to destroy the Russian
language and culture in Ukraine.
The rights of the Russian-speaking population
were therefore flagrantly violated. After February
2022, the fight against the Russian language in Ukraine
took on grotesque proportions in the form of appalling
evocations of Nazism. Ukrainian officials made no
secret of their hatred for everything Russian and their
intention to get rid of the Russian people and the Russian
language. The country’s language ombudsman, Taras
Kremin stated, “Ukraine for the Ukrainians”.
The Secretary of the of the National Security
and Defence Council, Oleksiy Danilov, expressed the
view that the Russian language should disappear from
Ukraine, and he called Russian people “rats” who
should be “poisoned” and “exterminated by any means
possible”. What is currently happening in Ukraine is
essentially a total ban on the Russian language. Since
last fall, a total ban on studying Russian in schools,
even as a foreign language, was added to the laws that
I mentioned earlier. Our former Western partners, who
promote the principles of diversity and the protection
of national and cultural identity only at home, have not
reacted at all to any of that. International mechanisms
that are pro-Western or comprised mostly of Western
representatives have also failed to react. One clear
example of that attitude was the refusal of Ms. Brands
Kehris to brief the Council today. It is clear that it
is not at all convenient for her and her colleagues to
criticize Ukraine against the background of the West’s
anti-Russian frenzy.
The Russophobia that is raging in Ukraine has
many manifestations. Besides those that I have already
mentioned, they include the war on Russian books, which
are now being destroyed just as books were destroyed
in Nazi Germany. There is also the shameful war being
23-07475

14/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

waged on monuments and geographical names related
to Russia, and which our briefers discussed in detail.
Repression in Ukraine can happen today for speaking
a word of Russian, singing a Russian song, reading
Russian news or getting a text message in Russian on
a mobile phone. It is a true linguistic inquisition and
obscurantism because of which completely innocent
people are suffering and dying. And all of that is
happening before the eyes of our Western colleagues,
who incidentally have also not taken such a big step
as they start to ban everything Russian. We can see
that perfectly well and can ascribe it to their carefully
concealed hatred for our country, language, religion
and culture, because no condemnation of our special
military operation can explain the rampant Russophobia
in their countries.
One more issue that I want to draw the Council’s
attention to today is the Kyiv regime’s ongoing war on
the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, which has no formal
relationship to Russia itself. Mr. Vyshinsky spoke
about it today, and we had a recent Security Council
meeting on the topic that I believe many members
will recall (see S/PV.9245). The situation has only
deteriorated since then. On top of the raids and seizures
of Orthodox churches and parishes all over Ukraine,
the Zelenskyy regime is now planning to seize the
country’s most important shrine, the Kyiv-Pechersk
Lavra monastery, on 28 March. That step brings with
it the threat of an unprecedented intra-Ukrainian
fratricidal confrontation, and I wanted our Western
colleagues to hear about it from us today. It is still not
too late to reprimand the Kyiv regime, and they have it
in their power to do so.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that we did
not convene today’s meeting to talk about Ukraine’s
domestic problems. The rampant Russophobic campaign
there unleashed by Zelenskyy and his clique is a direct
threat to international peace and security, because
in the circumstances peace and good-neighbourly
relations with Ukraine are impossible in principle.
What we have always wanted and continue to want from
our Ukrainian neighbours is no more than the respect
for elementary rights and freedoms that our Western
colleagues so zealously pursue at home. But for some
reason they apply different standards for Ukraine. I
have a question for our Swiss neighbours. In order to be
Swiss, do people have to renounce their Italian, French
or German identity? Does that threaten the integrity of
the Swiss nation? And if not, where is their criticism

S/PV.9280

of what the Kyiv authorities are doing to Russians? I
hope that today the members of the Council can make
an honest assessment of their actions. They will never
be able to build long-term, sustainable peace in Europe
on Russophobia, and I want them to realize that.
I also hope that today they will spare us their
arguments claiming that it is we ourselves who are to
blame. As we were all able to understand today, the
Russophobia in Ukraine began evolving long before
24 February 2022. In defending their Kyiv protégés’
despicable acts and presenting them as a response to
ours, they are not only stooping low themselves but
devaluing their own vaunted high standards and values
and risking dragging their societies down to Kyiv’s
level. We would very much like to believe that they can
still avoid that scenario.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): We listened
attentively to our briefers.
Since the beginning of the conflict in Ukraine,
the Council has met almost weekly to discuss various
aspects of the crisis, emphasizing the impact on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine in particular. Last
week, missiles once again struck civilian areas in
various regions, bringing more fatalities and more
destruction of civilian infrastructure. Brazil deplores
the violence and renews its appeal for dialogue and the
cessation of hostilities. So far, however, the Council’s
attention has not produced concrete advances on the
ground. There is no justification under international
law for violating the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
The Charter of the United Nations proscribes war as
an instrument for resolving conflicts. But the belief
in a military solution still prevails. It is a belief that
will continue to take innocent civilians’ lives and make
the prospects for lasting peace ever more distant. We
urge members to reflect on the current dynamics of our
meetings and on the role of the Security Council. The
mere repetition of national positions in a format that
shows clear signs of exhaustion will contribute nothing
to helping to end the conflict.
At the same time, we continue to oppose efforts
to isolate Russia in diplomatic forums and through
unilateral sanctions that are not approved by the
Council. At this point, it would be more productive to
discuss pragmatic ways to achieve peace, a concept that
has been largely absent from our debates. In order not
only to achieve peace but to sustain it, we believe that a
solution must involve tackling the causes of the conflict.

23-0747511/22

S/PV.9280

Threats to international peace and security

The grievances and security concerns on both sides will
have to be addressed when a pragmatic view takes hold
and peace talks begin to be considered. Fortunately, we
see an increasing number of Member States calling for
a peaceful solution. We remain ready to contribute to a
mediation process with a view to achieving lasting peace.
In the next few days, the Black Sea Grain Initiative
will expire. It is a result of successful mediation
efforts and one of the few good developments since the
beginning of the hostilities. We urge the parties to seek a
swift renewal of the agreements in order to prevent any
worsening of the collateral effects of the crisis on the
developing countries that depend on a regular supply of
grain and fertilizer. We encourage all Member States to
avoid actions that could compromise the implementation
of the agreements, including the elimination of barriers
to Russian exports. Sanctions on exports of food and
fertilizer, regardless of their origin, are unacceptable and
contradict the letter and spirit of the Istanbul Initiative,
while disproportionately affecting vulnerable countries,
often in regions far from the conflict.
Mr. Magosaki (Japan): I thank the briefers for
their briefings, in which we heard about various forms
of discrimination, including harmful rhetoric and
incitement related to the war in Ukraine.
We should not tolerate any form of discrimination
against any people, because it harms their dignity
as human beings and could create or exacerbate
divisions in a society. At the same time, no allegations
of discrimination can ever justify any use of force. If
anything, the unlawful Russian invasion of Ukraine
may actually have provoked harmful rhetoric and
incitement towards those aligning themselves with the
unjustifiable aggression.

14/03/2023

The eruption of the war in Ukraine went hand in
hand with the unleashing of hate speech and a verbal
escalation on both sides that appears to have no limits.
Since the beginning of hostilities, combat on the
ground is playing out on social media in a worrisome
fashion, affecting all areas of life, including the sacred.
Beyond the horror of war and beyond the suffering
and the destruction of all types, people in the grips of
conflict are being subjected daily to discrimination,
stigmatization or marginalization. The lack of
prospects for an end to the war in the short or medium
terms does not bode well for the severity of the scars
that will taint every individual, family and community.
There is no doubt that the invisible wounds caused by
this bloody war will persist for years, perhaps even for
several generations.
Recent history has shown us in a stark and
horrifying way the weight of hatred and rejection, as
well as their insidious ability to fuel and exacerbate
generational violence and plunge humankind into the
depths of horror. I wish to call on the parties to show
restraint and to refrain from all provocative behaviours
or incitements to hatred. Any action likely to exacerbate
hatred between peoples contributes to driving parties
away from a political solution because it dangerously
imperils the construction of lasting peace based on the
principle of peaceful coexistence.
In that regard, I wish to underscore the SecretaryGeneral’s ongoing commitment to combat hate speech,
as reflected in his Our Common Agenda (A/75/982)
report, as well as in the United Nations Strategy and
Plan of Action on Hate Speech, launched in 2019.

Mr. Nanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank the briefers for their respective briefings.

I urge the parties to the conflict to take ownership
of and implement these noble goals and to abide by the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, which
prohibit pejorative or discriminatory language targeting
religion, ethnic origin, nationality, race, colour,
ancestry, sex or any other forms of identity. Building
lasting peace is hard to envisage in the absence of those
fundamental values of respect for the human person.

Eighteen days ago, the Security Council met (see
S/PV.9269) to mark the first anniversary of the war
in Ukraine. Around this table we deplored the human
suffering on the ground, marked by the colossal loss
of human life, attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure and the mass displacement of people.

I also recall that in June we held the first
International Day for Countering Hate Speech, and
I also recall the adoption by the General Assembly
of the resolution on the promotion of interreligious
and intercultural dialogue and of tolerance (General
Assembly resolution 75/309). That resolution seeks

As articulated in resolution ES-11/6, we reiterate
our demand for Russia’s immediate, complete and
unconditional withdrawal of all of its military forces
from the territory of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders and call for a cessation of hostilities.

12/22

23-07475

14/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

to fight against discrimination, xenophobia and hate
speech, in accordance with international human
rights law.
In conclusion, I reiterate my country’s constant and
unwavering appeal to the parties to the conflict to come
to the table in order to agree upon a political resolution
to this war. Tomorrow’s peace begins today.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): The
irrational hatred of any group is an exercise in closing
the mind. It strips away our empathy away at a time
when understanding is most needed. I want to make
three points in that regard.
First, the United Arab Emirates has consistently
taken a strong stance against intolerance in all its
forms. Today is no exception. In a country where
more than 200 nationalities coexist, we understand the
importance of promoting tolerance for the benefit of
all. No person should face discrimination or prejudice
based upon their nationality, race or religion. This
month, in Abu Dhabi, we inaugurated the Abrahamic
Family House, an interfaith complex housing a mosque,
a church, my country’s first purpose-built synagogue
and an educational facility. It is a physical expression of
peaceful coexistence and a statement of the high regard
in which we hold interfaith harmony. Actions guided by
the irrational fear and hatred of any group are at odds
with the creation of cohesive, prosperous societies. And
so we believe it is important to address intolerance and
hate speech, whenever and wherever they manifest.
Secondly, we all have a collective responsibility to
ensure that respect for others becomes the global norm.
As has been repeated here today, we continue to see a
rise in the incitement of hate speech globally. Too many
times, the Council has seen intolerance in areas of
conflict taken to the extreme and played out in lives lost,
communities destroyed and histories erased. When the
guns are eventually silenced, intolerance and bigotry
can hamper post-conflict reconciliation and sustainable
peace. To that end, we believe that the Council must
redouble its efforts to address the proliferation of hate
speech and intolerance, including through modern
technology. In conflict zones, the malicious use of
technology to spread hate speech, misinformation and
disinformation poses a particularly difficult challenge.
Thirdly, today’s topic is a reminder that the Council
must prioritize conflict resolution and, ultimately, a
cessation of hostilities in Ukraine. Arriving at a just
and lasting peace must be our objective.

S/PV.9280

We welcome the efforts of all parties towards the
extension of the Black Sea Grain Initiative. Beyond
the positive impact that the Initiative has had on global
food security, its very existence shows the promise of
constructive dialogue even in the midst of conflict.
A worldview that supports xenophobia serves no
one. At times of conflict, it perpetuates the cycle of
violence, demonizing entire cultures, inciting against
civilians and penalizing individuals. We must remain
vigilant against all of its manifestations, in the interest
of building and sustaining peace.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): Russophobia is
one of an ever-growing list of excuses that Russia has
come up with to justify its war in Ukraine. The fact
that they are inventing so many of them is itself a good
indication that they know none of them stands up to
full scrutiny.
But let me be clear anyway, on behalf of the United
Kingdom, and let me say it in Russian:
(spoke in Russian)
We are not Russophobes. There are historical ties
between our countries. We fought together in two world
wars. Our country deeply respects Russia’s rich cultural
heritage. I myself studied the Russian language, its
history and excellent literature for seven years.
(spoke in English)
We do not want Russia to fail as a State, as the
Russian delegation sometimes claims. Quite the opposite,
in fact. We want Russia to be a prosperous and stable
nation — just one that does not try to annex and illegally
invade its neighbours.
What Ukraine wants — what we all want — is
peace in line with the Charter of the United Nations. The
problem in Ukraine today is not caused by Russophobia.
It is caused by President Putin’s desire to annex a
sovereign nation, in breach of the most fundamental
principles of the Charter.
When the Russian State complains about
Russophobia, what they actually object to, very simply,
is Ukraine’s determination to remain an independent
nation and its refusal to bend to Russia’s will and to give
Russia its land. And, in pursuit of Ukraine’s land, the
Russian military has killed and injured many tens of
thousands of Ukrainians and displaced millions. There
have been widespread reports of atrocities, with the
Office of the Prosecutor General of Ukraine recording
more than 70,000 potential war crimes so far.

23-0747513/22

S/PV.9280

Threats to international peace and security

Hundreds of Ukrainian apartment buildings, train
stations, hospitals and schools have been hit. Ukrainian
cultural property has been looted, and cultural heritage
sites destroyed. And more than that: to build domestic
support for his war, Putin’s Government is pushing
out propaganda about Ukraine to dehumanize the
people it is killing and delegitimize the country it is
invading — all while falsely claiming that Russia is
somehow the victim.
In the run up to the invasion, President Putin called
Ukraine an intolerable “anti-Russia” and declared that
it was an “inalienable part of Russia’s own history,
culture and spiritual space”. We have since heard
relentless false claims, including from President Putin,
that the Ukrainian Government are “neo-Nazis”, and
from former President Medvedev that Ukrainians
are “scum and freaks”, “cockroaches” and “grunting
pigs”. The Russian Government may believe that this
propaganda will help justify at home the sacrifice of the
lives of the tens of thousands of Russian soldiers.
But the consequences for innocent civilians, for
Ukraine as a nation State, and for the rest of the world,
are catastrophic.
Russia is not under attack. There is only one
aggressor in this context. Therefore, we must all tell
the Russian Government very clearly to turn off its war
machine, stop the invasion, stop the killing and stop
the propaganda.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the briefers for their briefings.
By convening today’s meeting and by alleging
discrimination, Russia is once again trying to distract us
from the atrocities and abuses it continues to commit in
Ukraine. This strategy is not new. Since the beginning
of its war of aggression, Russia has constantly sought
to distort reality. This propaganda strategy simply
does not work. Russia will not succeed in justifying
its unjustifiable war by cultivating its myth of alleged
Russophobia. These allegations are baseless and as
such are unworthy of further consideration.
The reality is that Russia is waging an illegal and
unjustified war against a sovereign State, Ukraine,
in flagrant violation of international law and the
United Nations Charter. The reality is that there is an
aggressor, Russia, which denies its responsibilities, and
an aggressee, Ukraine, which is defending itself and
seeking to trace a path towards a just and lasting peace
14/22

14/03/2023

and which has proposed a peace plan that we support.
This aggression is accompanied by massive abuses that
constitute war crimes and even crimes against humanity:
indiscriminate bombings, summary executions, acts
of torture, sexual violence used as a weapon of war,
abductions and deportations of Ukrainian children.
Our message today is that our resolve is stronger
than ever and that we will stand by Ukraine for as long
as it takes. There will be no impunity for the crimes
committed by Russian forces and their Wagner Group
supporters in Ukraine. We will continue to make sure
that justice for the victims is done and support the
efforts of the Ukrainian courts and the International
Criminal Court to that end — and because it is an
international security imperative to ensure that these
crimes are not repeated.
Russia must simply withdraw all its troops from
the entire territory of Ukraine and fully respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
Mrs. Sanchez Izquierdo (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): We have listened carefully to the briefers.
My delegation wishes to reiterate its unwavering
rejection of all forms of racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, in any context,
whether it be in situations of peace or conflict, and
regardless of their origin.
I must also reject corrosive narratives that exacerbate
conflict. Such rhetoric is even more deplorable when it
seeks to justify armed violence.
What greater act of xenophobia, contempt or
dehumanization is there than war? In addition to taking
human lives and destroying civilian infrastructure and
means of subsistence, war affects the full enjoyment of
fundamental rights and freedoms and is a loophole for
violations and abuses of those rights.
Finally, so that not one more Ukrainian or Russian
life is lost, Ecuador calls on the Russian Federation to
withdraw its military forces from Ukrainian territory
within its internationally recognized borders and cease
hostilities as required by General Assembly resolution
ES-11/6 on the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations underlying a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in Ukraine, adopted by the General Assembly on
23 February 2023 (see A/ES-11/PV.19).
23-07475

14/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank the briefers for
attending today’s meeting.
In June last year, Albania convened a meeting of the
Security Council on incitement to violence leading to
atrocity crimes (see S/PV.9069). We referred to historical
examples, how language and rhetoric could lead to
massacres, war crimes, crimes against humanity, crimes
of aggression and genocide. The Holocaust perpetrated
against the Jews before and during the Second World War,
the massacres in Rwanda, the genocide in Srebrenica and
the massive crimes and ethnic cleansing in Kosovo did
not come out of nowhere. They were planned through
well-elaborated programmes based on a common
elements: words deliberately chosen to dehumanize the
other, which would then be followed by bloodshed.
Unfortunately, we are still witnessing the same
situation today. Russia’s unprovoked military aggression
in Ukraine is being conducted after years of aggressive
rhetoric from all levels of the Russian State that has
basically asserted that there is no Ukrainian language,
culture or church, that Ukraine has no history and that it
should have no future.
Article II of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide clearly refers to the
“intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national,
ethnical, racial or religious group, as such”.
The calls for de-Ukrainization are an incitement to that
intent, to “destroy, in whole or in part” the Ukrainian
nation. This rhetoric has been followed by atrocities,
crimes against civilians, massive deportations and the
destruction of strategic infrastructure, cultural sites
and heritage.
While wrongful and intentional incitement to
violence has caused irreparable damage and is being used
to justify an unjust war, haters have not succeeded in
their goals. In reality, Ukrainians today are more united
than ever. They have joined in an exemplary national
communion, are heroically defending their country and
have earned worldwide respect and strong solidarity.
The world has been clear in distinguishing the
wrong from the right, the perpetrators from the victims.
Once more, a few weeks ago, 141 States Members of
the United Nations voted in the General Assembly to
condemn the Russian aggression and called for peace
in accordance with the United Nations Charter (General
Assembly resolution ES-11/6).

S/PV.9280

This massive and outright condemnation is not
easy to sell to Russian public opinion, which is fed with
propaganda on steroids with all kinds of conspiracy
theories; the Russian public has been transported into a
parallel reality, where anything that helps it to play the
victim is good. The self-imposed isolation due to wrong
and erratic policies is not the result of any Russophobia.
The world is not ready to accept aggression, annexation
of territory by force, crimes or disrespect for the United
Nations Charter and international law. Anything else,
as we hear, is good for Russian domestic consumption.
Russian propaganda has not managed to convince
anyone of the Russian claimed causes of its war of
choice. Russia is increasingly failing to fool its own
citizens that it is winning. It has only managed to
misuse the Council, its time and resources, in repeated
ways, with empty shells that sound hollow.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): I would like to thank the
three briefers for obliging the Security Council with
their views on the agenda item under consideration
today. We particularly thank them for the manner in
which their unique perspectives have demonstrated
that, given the same set of facts, different people
may interpret those same facts in different ways. We
therefore urge all Council members to remain focused
on the effort to resolve the aggression against Ukraine
and address the concerns of the people of Ukraine, who
today continue to suffer a war that they did not seek and
a war that they cannot cease to fight.
While we do not underrate the potential for
the perceived concerns over Russophobia to be an
underlying driver for the actions of some parties in
the war, our assessments do not lead us to conclude
that there is systematic and widespread State action
against ethnic Russian-speaking citizens of Ukraine or
that there are a set of issues that could collectively be
characterized as Russophobia and which constitute a
threat to international peace and security.
Indeed, in reviewing the chronology of events since
the annexation of Crimea in 2014, the conflict in the
Donbas region of the same year and the launch of a fullscale aggression against Ukraine in February last year,
we have struggled to identify a consistent raison d’être
that could be a basis for justifying all the actions that
have violated the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine and sought to undermine the Charter of the
United Nations.

23-0747515/22

S/PV.9280

Threats to international peace and security

Rather, when we peeled off the veneer of the rolling
arguments that were made to justify such actions, we
came to the reasonable conclusion that what truly lay
beneath was an attempt by a larger neighbour to assert
dominance over its smaller neighbour through force.
As we said in the past, that course of action cannot be
acceptable in pursuing international relations, and our
condemnation of such actions is the same whether it
occurs in the East or in the West.
Indeed, for Ghana, we stand strongly against the
violations of the rights and freedoms of all people and
are firmly of the view that international mechanisms,
such as the Human Rights Council, the Council of
Europe, the International Court of Justice and the
International Criminal Court, provide appropriate
channels for redressing violations of the rights of
any group of people. The recourse to such mandated
bodies is important because it helps to stabilize our
international system and ensures accountability on the
part of perpetrators and justice for affected individuals.
As we all know, and pledged to observe, the
operation of the principles of sovereignty and
non-interference under international law restrain any
State from arrogating to itself the right to interfere in
the internal affairs of another State.
We believe that the Russian Federation’s choice of
force against Ukraine excessively outweighs any threats
that it perceives as arising from ethnic-related attacks
against Russian-speaking people, who, incidentally, are
citizens of Ukraine. Indeed, if that argument were to
be stretched, we can reasonably conceive that, across
most parts of the world, there could be the potential
for further wars. In our view, that cannot be the world
that we desire, or the world that would be helpful to the
people whose interests we seek to protect. As we asserted
in previous Council meetings, there is no justification
for the aggression against the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
We continue to be concerned by the ongoing war,
which is taking place in the context of widespread
human rights violations committed against civilians
and military personnel. Increasing evidence suggests
gross violations, which, in some instances, may
constitute war crimes. The targeted missile strikes
against civilian-populated areas, trafficking of persons,
torture, enforced disappearances and conflict-related
sexual violence, among other forms of violations that
have occurred over the past 13 months, are grave and
16/22

14/03/2023

stand in sharp contrast to our common purpose to
promote and protect human rights and the freedoms of
people everywhere.
We remain gravely concerned about the course of
the war and the heightened hostilities, which further
distance us from the shared aspiration for peace in
Ukraine. While reiterating our call for the immediate
cessation of hostilities and the unconditional withdrawal
of Russian troops, we underscore the principles of human
rights law and international law and the obligations of
the warring parties to fully adhere to them.
We reaffirm our support for the ongoing
investigations and processes that would eventually lead
to the identification of the perpetrators of all violations
in order to hold them to account for their actions, or
inactions. The world cannot afford impunity in the face
of such egregious violations in Ukraine.
We continue to urge the Security Council and
the international community to redouble efforts in
helping the parties to resolve the conflict through the
channels of diplomacy and dialogue. We also reaffirm
our support for the position that a just, peaceful and
comprehensive peace in Ukraine must be founded on
the principles of international law and the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
More than any other factor, it is the continuing
aggression and hostilities that complicate and obliterate
the prospects for a timely solution to the war in Ukraine.
We therefore urge the Russian Federation to reconsider
its military approach to the conflict and remain open to
finding a solution through dialogue and negotiations.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I thank today’s briefers.
Today’s meeting is yet another attempt by the
Russian Federation to divert the focus from the appalling
events occurring in Ukraine and cynically try to justify
the unjustifiable. Malta reiterates its condemnation, in
the strongest possible terms, of the Russian Federation’s
aggression against Ukraine. That brutal, unprovoked
and unjustified war is a blatant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations. It has brought immense suffering,
destruction and misery on Ukraine and its population
for more than a year. Even more disturbing is the fact
that the aggression was initiated with complete disdain
and disregard for international law and the rules-based
order, not to mention the principles that a permanent
member of the Council should uphold.
23-07475

14/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Today we heard more narratives aimed at portraying
the victim as the aggressor and the aggressor as the
victim. However, the facts are clear for all to see. On
24 February 2022, the Russian Federation invaded
its neighbour, violating its sovereignty and territorial
integrity and reigniting war in Europe.
Malta deplores the dissemination of disinformation
and misinformation by Russian media and Russian
leaders in an attempt to justify the war against Ukraine.
Let us be clear: any ideologies that encourage racism,
discrimination, xenophobia and all other forms of
intolerance all received our sternest condemnation on
several occasions. We stress that our position stems
solely from our strong and principled belief that there
is no alternative to multilateralism and the rules-based
international order in the contemporary world.
Furthermore, we urge the full implementation of
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination and other pertinent
human rights treaties. We also call on Russia to
respect the order of the International Court of Justice
on provisional measures, dated April 2017, in the
case concerning the application of the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism and of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
Returning to the humanitarian situation in Ukraine,
we are deeply concerned about the persistent violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. We must redouble our efforts to
ensure accountability for all violations. That must
include justice for the victims of atrocity crimes and
sexual violence, as well as the abductions and forceable
deportation of children. Perpetrators must be brought
to justice and be held to account without delay.
The aggressor must bear the legal consequences
of its internationally wrongful acts, including making
reparation for the injury and damage caused. As a first
step, Malta supports the idea of establishing a register
of damages as a record of evidence and information
regarding claims for damages, losses or injury caused
by Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Malta’s full support
for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
its recognized international borders, its lawful right to
determine its own foreign and security policy and its
diplomatic efforts in international forums, as well as its
right to self-defence. We call on the Russian Federation

S/PV.9280

to stop the war, withdraw its military forces from the
entire territory of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders and turn to dialogue and diplomacy
as the only tools that can restore peace in the region.
Mrs. Baumann-Bresolin (Switzerland) (spoke
in French): We take note of the remarks delivered
by the various briefers today. I would like to start by
discussing the recent developments in Ukraine. Last
week, Ukraine was hit by one of the heaviest missile
and drone attacks since the beginning of the war. Those
strikes claimed additional lives and damaged energy
infrastructure and other facilities in Kyiv and elsewhere
in the country. Switzerland condemns those attacks. We
recall that attacks against civilians and civilian objects,
as well as indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks,
are prohibited under international humanitarian law.
An old saying states that the first casualty of
war is the truth. Switzerland stresses the importance
of refraining from propaganda, hate speech and
deliberately divisive language that creates distrust
between people and Governments in all circumstances.
The disinformation and propaganda in the war against
Ukraine reinforce mistrust, deepen divisions and
increase hostility. We oppose all attempts to justify
Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine, as they
fuel tensions and are used for political purposes. We
recall the General Assembly’s firm position against
the war, as well as the decision of the International
Court of Justice ordering the immediate withdrawal
of Russia’s troops from Ukrainian territory. Our clear
condemnation of the military aggression is based on
the principles of the Charter of United Nations and the
international legal order in force and is not directed
against the Russian people. Switzerland condemns that
serious violation of international law and fully supports
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
With regard to the prospects for finding a peaceful,
just and lasting solution — and restoring confidence in
such a solution — we urge Russia to cease all its combat
operations and withdraw its troops from Ukrainian
territory without delay. Respect for international law,
the pursuit of diplomatic solutions and the obligation to
ensure accountability for all violations of international
law are essential to achieve that goal. Information that
is fabricated and disseminated to cause harm can never
form the basis for frank and constructive dialogue. As
members of the Security Council, we have a special
responsibility to refrain from and oppose any harmful
rhetoric in order to promote peace and cooperation.

23-0747517/22

S/PV.9280

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The briefers have just shared their views about the
phenomenon of Russophobia and its relationship to the
Ukraine crisis. The Ukraine crisis has been dragging on
for more than a year since its outbreak. The increasingly
protracted and expanding nature of the conflict is deeply
worrying. Since day one, China has emphasized that
dialogue and negotiations are the only feasible way to
resolve the crisis. The international community should
stay on the correct course by promoting peace talks and
supporting Russia and Ukraine in resuming dialogue
as soon as possible and without any preconditions in
order to ease and de-escalate the situation, and help
the parties to the conflict to swiftly open the door to a
political settlement of the crisis and jointly maintain
peace in Europe.
China recently issued a paper containing its position
on the political settlement of the Ukraine crisis, which
includes 12 proposals, including proposals on respecting
sovereignty, ceasing hostilities, resuming peace talks
and stopping unilateral sanctions, among other things.
On that basis, we are ready to continue to play a
constructive role in pushing for a political solution to the
Ukraine crisis.
Engraved on the stone wall in front of the UNESCO
Headquarters is a statement in several languages that reads
“Since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds
of men that the defence of peace must be constructed”.
To stop wars, we must eliminate estrangement, prejudice
and hatred, and sow the seeds of peace, solidarity and
friendship in people’s hearts. Regrettably, however,
there are many phobias against a number of countries,
religions and races in the world today. Some of them
stem from a sense of civilizational superiority and a
narrow historical outlook, while others are the products
of geopolitical clashes and ideological confrontations.
Such phobias often become the logical premise and
policy pretext through which certain countries create
imaginary enemies, concoct threat theories, pursue
containment and suppression, and provoke divisions
and confrontation. Driven by such phobias, which
are in any case misguided, differences are magnified
artificially, and disagreements are exaggerated to the
extent that common interests are neglected and tensions
are reinforced and perpetuated. As a result, the world is
dragged into the quagmire of conflicts and disputes.
I would like to take this opportunity to point out that
for some time now, politicians in a certain country seem
to have contracted the condition of Sinophobia. They
18/22

14/03/2023

are full of prejudice and paranoia about China, peddling
anxieties and instigating tensions. Such Sinophobia
constitutes a misunderstanding of China, as well as a
strategic misjudgment and political manipulation. Any
policy towards China that is dominated by such a phobia
of China will only harden the zero-sum game mentality,
perpetuate the policy of containment and suppression,
and lead to conflicts and confrontations. The world has
already been thrown into chaos by the Ukraine crisis.
Does it want to create another crisis to change the world
beyond recognition?
With human society having developed to the point
at which it is today, we should be mature enough to be
able to listen to different voices and embrace different
ideas and civilizations. The world is big enough for all
countries to grow and achieve progress together. We
believe that humans are wise and capable enough to
overcome many such phobias, find a way to get along with
one another through dialogue instead of confrontations
and embrace inclusiveness instead of exclusion.
Together, we can build a new paradigm for international
relations based on mutual respect, fairness, justice and
win-win cooperation. China is ready to spare no effort in
cooperation with all other countries to achieve that goal.
Mr. Kelley (United States of America): We listened
carefully to the briefers, and we would like to thank
Mr. Snyder for his thoughtful presentation today.
The United States welcomes serious discussions
on the detrimental impacts of hate speech and harmful
rhetoric — and we regret that today’s meeting is a missed
opportunity to do so. The Russian delegation called this
meeting today by claiming that Russophobia is “one of
the most gruesome and repulsing aspects of the Ukrainian
crisis”. Are we to take that statement seriously, as
Russian missiles rain down on Ukrainian cities and kill
civilians, and as Russian forces have committed crimes
against humanity, including the systematic rape, murder
and torture of civilians? In English, there is a better word
to describe such a statement — and it also includes the
claim made by Russia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Sergei Lavrov, at a Group of 20 meeting earlier this
month, when he said that this war was somehow launched
against Russia, and not the other way around — and that
word is “gaslighting”.
Over the past year, the world has endured a parade
of Russia’s excuses and absurd justifications for its
war of choice against Ukraine. We have heard claims
by Russia that it is not the aggressor, that it is trying
23-07475

14/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

to stop the genocide in eastern Ukraine, that it must
de-Nazify the Government of Ukraine and that it must
fight against drug addicts and Satanists.
No matter what today’s obfuscating excuses are,
they cannot hide the fact that Russia is not the victim it
pretends to be. The evidence is plain to see in Bahkmut,
Kharkiv, Mariupol, Bucha and many other Ukrainian
cities. If the Russian delegation were serious about
highlighting the most gruesome and repulsive aspects
of its brutal invasion of a sovereign United Nations
Member State, it should call a meeting to discuss the
many war crimes, crimes against humanity and other
abuses committed by its forces. It should explain to
the Council why its forces have deported hundreds of
thousands of Ukrainians, including children, to Russia.
It should explain why its forces have tortured civilians
in detention through beatings, electric shocks and mock
executions. And it should explain why its forces have
raped civilians and committed execution-style killings
of Ukrainian men, women and children.
Russia has created a string of propaganda to try
to justify its war to the Council over the past year,
including some truly ridiculous conspiracy theories.
Each excuse is intended to mask its true goal: to erase
the sovereign independent State of Ukraine from the
map and violently subjugate its people. Putin has said
as much, denying that Ukraine is a State and calling
for the return of so-called lost territories. Ukraine’s
self-defence is an appropriate and necessary reaction to
Russia’s malign, destabilizing and dangerous invasion.
It is a needed response to an illegal war of aggression
that violates the Charter of the United Nations and has
caused the unspeakable suffering of, and abuses against,
the people of Ukraine. This is not the first and will not
be the last time Russia seeks to abuse its Council seat
to spout disinformation and vitriol. Much like what
happened at the meeting of the Group of 20 earlier this
month, it convinces no one. Each excuse will not hide
the fact that Russia seeks to destroy its neighbour and
fulfil its imperialist expansionist ambitions. The people
of Ukraine, a sovereign, independent State that is part
of the United Nations community, will continue its
brave defence of their country. And the United States
will stand with them for as long as it takes.

S/PV.9280

Once again we find ourselves in this Chamber
discussing the root causes of the conflict in Ukraine
and its ramifications, as the conflict rumbles into its
second year. Mozambique once again expresses its
concern about the continued escalation of the conflict.
Given its global visibility and impact, the all-toocommon charged rhetoric risks normalizing hatred and
incitement in other parts of the globe. The toxic rhetoric
justifying violence and disregard of the other not only
creates an atmosphere of fear and distrust but also adds
fuel to an already acrimonious and destructive conflict.
That makes it difficult to achieve a negotiated solution,
and renders the prospects for peaceful coexistence
even more remote. The world simply cannot allow the
situation to escalate further.
Mozambique would like to remind all parties
that harmful rhetoric and incitement not only violate
international law but also breach various related United
Nations and Security Council resolutions. Mozambique
calls on all parties to refrain from using language that
incites violence, discrimination or hostility against
individuals or groups, and urges them to promote a
culture of tolerance, respect and understanding. The
Secretary-General, who just returned from Ukraine,
said, “we must reject hate speech, incitement and the
manipulation of truth that underpin so many divisions
in our world”.
All of us in this Chamber agree that war cannot be
the solution. We therefore urge the respective leaders to
fully commit to a peaceful resolution of the conflict, in
line with the tenets of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mozambique reiterates its call on all parties involved in
the conflict and the international community at large to
work together to find a peaceful and negotiated solution
to the Ukrainian conflict. It is imperative that we
support all diplomatic efforts to end the war in Ukraine.
In conclusion, Mozambique calls on the Security
Council to stand united in the search for peace and
stability in the world and to commit itself to be a
guardian against the politics of division and hate,
whenever and wherever they manifest themselves.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Mozambique.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I begin by thanking Mr. Vyshinsky, Mr. Vasilets
and Mr. Snyder for their briefings.

The representative of Russian Federation has asked
for the floor to make a further statement.

23-0747519/22

S/PV.9280

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to make a few brief comments
with regard to what we heard today.
Some of our colleagues made an energetic but
unconvincing attempt to cite examples of hate speech
about Ukraine and Ukrainians in the Russian media.
The emotional statements of some of our political
scientists are, first, their personal position, and
secondly, they do not apply to Ukrainians in general
but to nationalists and neo-Nazis and are a response to
their Russophobic views. The references and citations
do not apply because they do not refer to Ukrainians
but to the Kyiv authorities. I would like to ask: when
has there been a single call by Russia or by Russian
officials for the de-Ukrainianization of Ukraine or its
disappearance from the map? No one has heard such a
call today. We are not defending ourselves or diverting
attention, as was said earlier. We are not worried about
ourselves, but about the Ukrainians, and are trying
to explain what the current criminal Kyiv regime has
brought about for them. That happened long before
February 2022.
I hope that the members of the Security Council will
not equate the opinions of political analysts with the
statements of Ukraine’s top leadership and its official
representatives — the President, the Secretary of the
National Security and Defence Council, the leaders
of foreign policy organizations, the diplomats and the
governors. If we were to look closely at the statements
made by Ukrainian political scientists and experts,
what we could cite would hardly be permissible in this
Chamber owing to their vile and hateful nature.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Dvornyk (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Professor Snyder for a perfect explanation of the
imperfect purpose of the initiator of today’s meeting.
I also recognize the representative of Russia in the
permanent seat of the Soviet Union.
On Sunday, following a very careful identification
process, the Ukrainian authorities finally confirmed
the identity of a captured Ukrainian soldier, whose
brutal execution by Russians immediately after he
said the words “Glory to Ukraine” had been found
and circulated on the Internet last week. I would like
his name to be pronounced in the Chamber loud and
clear — Oleksandr Matsievskyi of the Chernihiv region.
He was a symbol of devotion to his country and dignity
20/22

14/03/2023

in the face of death. Dignity, which is the very essence
of the Ukrainian spirit now, is also a term whose Russian
equivalent should definitely be marked as archaic in the
current editions of Russian diplomatic vocabularies.
Horrific footage of the execution-style killing has
again reminded us of how hatred kills. It is real hatred
that has been deliberately fuelled for decades — not
the fabricated stories to which we have been obliged to
listen at today’s meeting. That hatred towards the entire
nation of Ukraine has served as a trigger for invading
a sovereign country and committing war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
We will discuss the recent developments on the
ground at a meeting to be held on Friday, which was
requested well in advance to ensure proper preparation
and substantive discussion. It is a matter of regret,
although it is not a surprise, that Russia has again
responded with spamming and a denial-of-service
attack on the Security Council. In the cyber domain,
that is malicious activity aimed at overloading and
thereby immobilizing a system by flooding it with
superfluous requests. It is a very precise description of
what the Russian delegation does. Russia’s spamming
manifests its weakness and lack of credible arguments.
It is also prompted by the fear of accountability for
the crimes that it has committed and the realization
that accountability is imminent. Bucha, Irpin, Izyum,
Mariupol and dozens of other places with mass graves
of innocent people are the proof of the power of the
Russian propaganda of war in dehumanizing Ukrainians
and removing any moral safeguards from the mindset
of Russian soldiers.
Ukraine reiterates that war propaganda and
national hatred, which constitute incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence, are profoundly
harmful and are prohibited under article 20 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
The history of the past contains powerful reminders
of what happened when one nation, poisoned with
propaganda inciting hatred, waged a war of elimination
against other nations and peoples. In 1945, the Second
World War ended with the military defeat of the Nazi
regime and the process of ensuring accountability. Nazi
high officials, military commanders and diplomats
were not the only ones prosecuted at the Nuremberg
tribunal — so, too, were propagandists. As the tribunal
established in its judgment against Julius Streicher, the
top Nazi propagandist,
23-07475

14/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

“In his speeches and articles, week after week,
month after month, he infected the German mind
with a virus of anti-Semitism and incited the
German people to acts of persecution”.
The Nazis made allegations of oppression against
Germans abroad one of the centrepieces of their
propaganda. False claims about the discrimination
against Germans were used as a justification for
aggressive expansionism, annexation and atrocities.
The many similarities with the Russian course of
action, including in the Security Council, make it clear
that the Kremlin criminal regime should also find itself
in the docks after its military defeat in Ukraine. It will
be up to a future tribunal to establish the accountability
of all those responsible for issuing criminal orders,
for implementing those orders and for whitewashing
them for internal and international audiences. That
tribunal should also facilitate in Russia a process of
moral penance and deep reflection on the role of that
country and its army in the atrocities committed in
Ukraine. If underpinned with trials, remembrance,
education and reparations, that reflection would result
in Russia’s return to the family of civilized nations and
its commitment to never repeat the horrors of the war
against Ukraine. For that to happen, we should ensure
that those responsible for the crime of aggression,
war crimes and crimes against humanity do not
escape justice.
In that regard, Ukraine calls upon all Member
States to engage actively in the process of ensuring
justice for all victims of Russia’s aggression and to hold
perpetrators accountable.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Snyder
to respond to comments.
Mr. Snyder: It has been a pleasure to be with you,
Mr. President, and among diplomats.
The Russian representative saw fit to ask me
about sources, and I am very happy to oblige. If we
are concerned about the sources of statements of high
officials of the Russian Federation, I refer the Russian
representative to the website of the President of the
Russian Federation, on which he will find speeches
by the President of the Russian Federation, denying
that Ukraine exists on the grounds that Ukraine was
invented by Nazis and communists and that a Viking
baptized himself 1,000 years ago. I do not comment on
the historical validity of those arguments. I simply point
out that they are a matter of public record and are the

S/PV.9280

statements of the President of the Russian Federation.
Similarly, Dmitry Medvedev, a member of the Russian
Security Council, repeatedly makes on his Telegram
channel the kinds of directly genocidal remarks that
have been discussed today.
With respect to Russian State television, it is
very important to note that I simply quoted Russian
State television, which is an organ of the Russian
State. As the President of the Russian Federation has
himself said, it represents Russian national interests.
The statements made on Russian State television are
therefore significant not only as expressions of Russian
policy but also, as has been said, as a mark of genocidal
motivation for the Russian population. That is true to
such an extent that the presenters on Russian television
have themselves expressed their concerns about the
possibility that they could be prosecuted for war crimes.
I refer the representative of the Russian Federation to
the video archives of Russia’s State television channels.
For those who do not speak Russian, I refer them to the
excellent work of Julia Davis, who has assembled an
archive of relevant Russian video material.
With respect to the sources concerning actual
Russian atrocities in Ukraine, the simplest thing to
do would be to allow Russian journalists to report
freely from Ukraine. For everyone else, the simplest
thing to do would be to visit Ukraine, a land that has
a democratically elected bilingual President, who
represents a national minority, and ask the people of
Ukraine about the war in either Ukrainian or Russian.
Ukrainians speak both languages and can answer in
both languages.
The representative of the Russian Federation saw
fit to attack my qualifications. I take that as a badge
of pride and as a very small element in a larger attack
on Russian culture. My work has been devoted,
among other things, to chronicling the mass murder of
Russians, including at the siege of Leningrad. I have
been proud over the course of my career to learn from
historians of Ukraine, Poland and Europe in general, as
well as from historians of Russia. It is unfortunate that
the best historians of Russia — and the best scholars of
Russia in general — are not allowed to practice their
own disciplines now. It is unfortunate that organizations
such as Memorial, which has done heroic work in
Russian history, are now criminalized in Russia. It is
unfortunate that memory laws in Russia prevent the
open discussion of Russian history. It is unfortunate
that the word “Ukraine” has been banned from Russian

23-0747521/22

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9280

school books. As a historian of Russia, I look forward
to the day when there can be free discussion of Russia’s
fascinating history.
Speaking of history, the Russian representative
denied that there was such a thing. I would refer him to
excellent works by historians who know both languages,
such as my colleague, Serhii Plokhy, at Harvard. I would
refer people, in general, to my open class at Yale, which
makes the point about Ukrainian history more eloquently
than I can here.
But more fundamentally, I would like to thank the
Russian representative for helping me to make the point
that I was trying to make in my earlier presentation. It is
not for the representative of a larger country to say that
the representative of a smaller country has no history.
What the Russian representative said is that whenever
Ukrainians — in history or at present — claim that they
exist, that is Russophobia. As I have been trying to say,
that is a colonial attitude. The big Power does not have
the right to say that the small Power has no history. The
claim that a country has no history is genocidal hate
speech. In that sense, I think, and in that sense only, this
meeting has been useful.
The President:
his clarifications.

I

thank

Mr.

Snyder

for

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am not going to engage in a dispute with
Professor Snyder.
That is because, first, he did not respond to the
questions that I asked. He simply gave another briefing.
By the way, I want to let Professor Snyder know that I have
read Serhii Plokhy’s books. But once the record of our
meeting is ready, I will note the questions that he refused
to answer and his remarks that not only puzzled me but
also revolted me when I first heard them. Let us not turn
this into a dispute between me and Professor Snyder. We
will find a different way to answer Professor Snyder.

22/22

14/03/2023

The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Vasilets
to respond to comments.
Mr. Vasilets (spoke in Russian): Mr. Snyder asked
for a comment from a representative of Ukraine.
I am representative of the Ukrainian people, i am a
Ukrainian citizen. I am the head of a political party that
consists of tens of thousands of Ukrainians — a party
that was banned by Zelenskyy’s regime because it is an
opposition party that stands for peace and unity with
Slavic peoples.
Apparently, Mr. Snyder represents the countries
of NATO, which, regrettably, are also a party to the
conflict in Ukraine.
He spoke a lot about Bucha, Irpin and Borodyanka.
I simply wish to remind Mr. Snyder that Bucha, Irpin
and Borodyanka are the cities that suffered as a result
of shelling by the artillery provided by NATO countries
while the Russian forces were there. Bucha, Irpin
and Borodyanka were regularly shelled using NATO
projectiles and weapons. Of course, as a result of
this, people suffered, and there was mass destruction.
Very often, the many Western politicians who came to
Bucha, Irpin and Borodyanka for photo opportunities
talked about how they were going to rebuild those cities.
Somehow a year has passed, but not a single cent has
been allocated. Of course, people in Bucha, Irpin and
Borodyanka are now erecting barriers on the roads so
that those European, American and British politicians
remember them — but, for some reason, nobody is
listening to them. And for some reason, everyone is
saying that it was not NATO artillery that was used to
shell those cities. This is, certainly, a pure lie. That is
just a comment from a Ukrainian citizen.
The President:
his clarifications.

I

thank

Mr.

Vasilets

for

The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

23-07475
