United Nations

S/PV.9228

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9228

th meeting
Tuesday, 20 December 2022, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Raguttahalli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Gallagher
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2022/688)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-76299 (E)
*2276299*

S/PV.9228

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.

envisaged, with the ultimate goal of contributing to
sustainable peace in the region.

Adoption of the agenda

In late October, the Armenian and Azerbaijani
leaders met again in Sochi, hosted by the President of
the Russian Federation, where they agreed, inter alia, to
refrain from the use of force or threating force.

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the
Permanent Representative of Armenia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2022/688)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Armenia and Azerbaijan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General for Europe, Central
Asia and the Americas, Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Jenča.
Mr. Jenča: I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting and for providing me this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on recent developments
in the South Caucasus, specifically on the situation
between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
Since my previous briefing (see S/PV.9132), on
15 September, the situation has remained fragile, with
the sides regularly trading accusations of ceasefire
violations. Nevertheless, despite the sporadic incidents,
a glimmer of hope for progress in the ongoing diplomatic
efforts has appeared following the renewed violence
on mid-September. We have indeed witnessed several
high-level diplomatic initiatives in recent months.
In early October, the Prime Minister of the
Republic of Armenia and the President of the Republic
of Azerbaijan met in Prague on the margins of the
first European Political Community meeting, at the
invitation of the President of the French Republic and
the President of the European Council. The meeting
resulted in an agreement to deploy the European Union
(EU) monitoring capacity in Armenia, whose mandate
ended yesterday. In that regard, we note reports that a
possible longer-term EU mission in Armenia is being
2/15

20/12/2022

In addition to leader-level talks, several meetings
at the level of Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime
Minister took place in recent months. For instance,
the Armenian and Azerbaijani Foreign Ministers met
in New York in September under the auspices of the
United States Secretary of State.
In various forums, the sides have also been
discussing elements for a possible negotiated settlement,
including the critical issues of border delimitation
and demarcation within the framework of mutual
recognition of their territorial integrity and sovereignty.
We commend all those ongoing engagements and
mediation efforts and encourage their close coordination
to ensure maximum effectiveness.
In addition to the mission by the European Union
agreed by both sides, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, as well as the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, at the request of
Armenia, also deployed technical missions to Armenia.
For his part, during his bilateral meetings with
Prime Minister Pashinyan of Armenia and Foreign
Minister Bayramov of Azerbaijan on the margins of
the General Assembly’s high-level week at its seventyseventh session, the Secretary-General urged progress
towards a peaceful settlement. He repeated his message
during last week’s meeting with Armenian Foreign
Minister Mirzoyan. The United Nations will continue
to remain in close contact with all relevant actors and
the parties concerned and stands ready to support the
ongoing peace efforts as needed. At the invitation of the
host Governments, the United Nations country teams
in Armenia and Azerbaijan also continue to undertake
various inter-agency needs and programmatic
assessments, including to accessible conflict-impacted
areas, as needed.
Regrettably, despite those promising diplomatic
engagements, the tensions both on the ArmeniaAzerbaijan border and around areas under the control
of the Russian peacekeeping forces have not abated
as hoped, with various incidents being reported. On
12 December, in the latest sign of escalating tensions,
22-76299

20/12/2022

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

reports emerged of protests near a Russian peacekeeping
post on the Lachin road, which is a vital artery for the
people living in the area. It has been reported that the
protests were against what they claim is the illegal
exploitation of mineral resources and its environmental
impact on the surrounding area. The United Nations,
which is present neither in the Lachin corridor nor in the
areas under the mandate of the Russian peacekeepers,
is not in a position to verify or confirm the various
claims and allegations. We understand that as we are
meeting, the protests are continuing.
In the past few days both Armenia and Azerbaijan
have written to the Secretary-General and to the
Security Council regarding the recent events, each
alleging violations of agreed commitments by the
other side and challenging each other’s claims. Their
accounts of the developments and the situation differ
widely. Each side has accused the other of violating
the trilateral statement of 9 November 2020 signed by
the leaders of Armenia, Azerbaijan and the Russian
Federation. Media reports and statements from the
Russian peacekeepers in the area have indicated that
some humanitarian and medical goods and supplies
have been able to get through. It is imperative that the
population, particularly those in need, be allowed to
travel freely and have access to basic services. In that
regard, we welcome the Russian peacekeeping forces’
commitment to facilitating and ensuring safe passage
through the corridor.
On 14 December, the Secretary-General noted that
he was following the ongoing developments around
the Lachin corridor with concern. He urged both sides
to de-escalate tensions and to ensure freedom and
security of movement along the corridor, in line with
the previously reached agreements. He also reiterated
his support to the ongoing mediation efforts in the
region. The United Nations country teams in both
Armenia and Azerbaijan continue to maintain open
channels with the authorities and stand prepared to
respond to emerging humanitarian needs, if requested
and as conditions allow.
As we have seen time and time again, and most
recently in September, the potential human toll of a
resumption of the conflict could be considerable. Any
renewed conflict would not only impact the people
of Armenia and Azerbaijan but also likely those in
the wider South Caucasus region and beyond. The
international community must not let that happen. The
parties must abide by their obligation to fully implement

S/PV.9228

the trilateral statement on the ceasefire of 9 November
2020 and the subsequent agreed statements and
commitments, as well as to redouble their diplomatic
efforts to achieve a negotiated, lasting and peaceful
settlement before it is too late.
The President: I thank Mr. Jenča for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Mr. Jenča for his briefing. The
events that have taken place over the past few days are
very worrying. In that regard, I would like to stress
two points.
First, it is unacceptable that the flow of traffic
though the road corridor connecting Nagorno-Karabakh
with Armenia has been blocked since 12 December. The
blocking of the Lachin corridor has resulted directly in
the isolation of the population of Nagorno-Karabakh
and has had humanitarian consequences that are getting
worse by the day. France calls for the unconditional
reopening of the Lachin corridor to traffic and for the
delivery of supplies to Nagorno-Karabakh, while also
ensuring respect for the rights of the people living there.
France calls for the implementation of the
commitments made in the framework of the trilateral
statement of 9 November 2020. We also note that
as Azerbaijan has undertaken to ensure, the safe
movement of people, vehicles and goods along the
Lachin corridor in both directions must be guaranteed.
We also call for immediate, free and unhindered
access for humanitarian organizations and United
Nations agencies, in particular the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, to the populations
concerned, including through the Lachin corridor. We
note that the first convoys of International Committee
of the Red Cross have successfully passed through
the corridor.
Secondly, France calls on Armenia and Azerbaijan
to foster an environment that is conducive both to the
successful conclusion of the ongoing negotiations and
to achieving progress, exclusively through dialogue
and without any use of force, in order to settle every
outstanding issue, including that of rights and
guarantees for the population of Nagorno-Karabakh.
France, together with the European Union, will
continue to contribute to efforts to promote dialogue
between Armenia and Azerbaijan. We support

22-762993/15

S/PV.9228

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

20/12/2022

the efforts to make progress on all the subjects
under negotiation, including the draft peace treaty,
delimitation of the border, humanitarian issues and
the opening of communication channels, in order
to achieve a lasting peace in the region. As has been
mentioned in the Security Council today, the meeting in
Prague on 6 October between the President of France,
the President of the European Council, the President of
Azerbaijan and the Prime Minister of Armenia brought
significant progress. France stands ready to support the
parties in contributing to those objectives, in concert
with all partners and stakeholders. We have released a
draft press statement that is open for comments until
10 a.m. tomorrow, and I thank everyone in advance for
their input.

dialogue and peaceful coexistence. The United Arab
Emirates will continue to support all efforts to that end.

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for his briefing.

We recognize the importance of ensuring the
freedom and security of movement along the corridor, in
line with the previous agreements reached between the
two countries. These agreements should be respected
and implemented by both sides. The free movement
of goods and people in the Lachin corridor is of great
importance to the populations living in and around the
area. As agreed by both sides, the Russian peacekeeping
contingent currently deployed in the area is in charge of
the organization of the movement of people, goods and
vehicles around the road.

Like other members of the Security Council, the
United Arab Emirates is concerned about the recent
increase in tensions between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
We continue to stress the importance of de-escalation and
restraint. All sides should refrain from exacerbating the
situation through escalatory action or rhetoric, not least
in view of the potential humanitarian consequences.
It is important to ease the situation of civilians and to
refrain from making their lives more precarious.
We echo the Secretary-General’s 14 December
statement on ensuring freedom and security of
movement along the Lachin corridor, in line with the
trilateral statement of 9 November 2020 by Armenia,
Azerbaijan and the Russian Federation. These latest
developments reinforce the need to find a comprehensive
and sustainable settlement that builds on the progress
that has already been made. In that regard, we underline
the importance of the trilateral statements, including
those of 11 January 2021, 26 November 2021 and
31 October 2022. The United Arab Emirates reiterates
its principled position that there can be no lasting
military solution to conflicts. We continue to urge the
parties to resolve their differences through peaceful
and diplomatic means, in line with international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. We encourage
the two parties to engage constructively and in good
faith with mediation efforts in order to achieve longterm peace in the region.
At a time of regional and geopolitical uncertainty,
we, the members of the Council and the international
community, must do our utmost to bolster stability,
4/15

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Jenča for his briefing.
We have taken note of the letters from Armenia
to the President of the Security Council (S/2022/688)
and from Azerbaijan to the Secretary-General
(S/2022/885). Although with contrasting perspectives,
the information provided helps us understand the
developments on the ground, their dynamics and the
impact on the populations. Despite the different views
on certain matters, we appreciate the fact that both sides
are committed to the dialogue and a peaceful resolution
of all issues.

As to concerns about the exploitation of the natural
resources, we call on both sides to fully engage in talks
in order to find mutually agreed solutions. Dialogue is
the best way to deal with every issue. In this context,
we recall the meeting of the Armenian and Azerbaijani
leaders at the margins of the European Political
Community summit in Prague in early October, where
it was agreed to send a mission of European observers
to the Armenia-Azerbaijan border. Other important
meetings have happened, as we heard from Assistant
Secretary-General Jenča. It is the right course to take,
and we welcome such developments.
It is of particular importance to point out that both
sides have expressed their commitment to signing a
peace treaty as soon as possible. We could not highlight
more the importance of that not only for the stability of
the border area but for the overall peaceful resolution of
all pending issues. There is no alternative to a peaceful
negotiated solution through the path of diplomacy,
which we hope will lead to a peace treaty. The sooner
Armenia and Azerbaijan will move to this direction,
the better it will be for the people of those two countries
and the region.
22-76299

20/12/2022

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for
his briefing.
China has taken note of the recent letters from
Armenia to the President of the Security Council
(S/2022/688) and from Azerbaijan to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/885) on the situation in Lachin corridor
and expresses concern over the current situation and its
humanitarian impact. We believe the relevant disputes
surrounding the Lachin corridor should be resolved
through dialogue and consultations. Russia has done
a lot of work to this end with positive progress, which
China welcomes. We hope that, with the good offices of
Russia and other parties concerned, the disputes between
Armenia and Azerbaijan over the Lachin corridor will
be resolved as soon as possible.
Armenia and Azerbaijan are close neighbours, and
achieving shared security and development through
cooperation is in the fundamental interests of both
countries. In recent years, Armenia, Azerbaijan and
Russia have issued four trilateral statements, making
arrangements on the cessation of hostilities, economic
and transportation cooperation and border issues,
respectively, demonstrating the political will of the
two countries to resolve disputes through political and
diplomatic means.
We encourage Armenia and Azerbaijan, on the basis
of those four trilateral statements and with the good offices
of Russia and other parties concerned, to meet each other
half way and properly resolve disputes between the two
countries based on universally recognized international
law and norms governing international relations. China
supports any diplomatic effort that contributes to this
goal and will also play a constructive role to this end.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I would also
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for his
briefing today.
The United States is deeply concerned by the
ongoing impediments to use of the Lachin corridor
and the growing humanitarian implications of the
situation. Let me be clear: impediments to the use of the
Lachin corridor set the peace process back, undermine
international confidence in this process and carry
potential severe humanitarian implications.
We call on the Government of Azerbaijan and
others responsible for the corridor’s security to restore
free movement, including for humanitarian and

S/PV.9228

commercial use, as soon as possible. We are encouraged
by the restoration of gas supplies to the people of
Nagorno-Karabakh. Any attempt to cut off services
essential to the civilian population of Nagorno-Karabakh
is unacceptable. The United States will continue to call
on all sides to exercise restraint, immediately cease
activities that undermine the peace process and observe
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
Outstanding
grievances
between
Armenia
and Azerbaijan must be solved through peaceful
negotiations. Negotiations are the only way to achieve
lasting peace. The international community must do its
part and remain engaged in efforts to diplomatically
broker a lasting peace.
As time has shown, there can be no one sided or
military solution to this conflict. Both parties must
recommit to the diplomatic process and re-establish
direct lines of communication across diplomatic
channels. All parties must intensify their diplomatic
engagement and make progress towards normalizing
their relations through a comprehensive and sustainable
peace agreement.
There must be a negotiated comprehensive
settlement of all remaining issues. The United States
remains dedicated to a sustainable ceasefire and a
peaceful resolution to this conflict. We remain actively
engaged bilaterally, multilaterally and with partners as
we work toward that shared goal. We remain ready to
facilitate dialogue between Armenia and Azerbaijan
bilaterally, trilaterally and in coordination with such
partners as the European Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, so as to
achieve a long-term political settlement to the conflict
in accordance with international law, including the
United Nations Charter and the Helsinki Final Act.
I want to close by once again reaffirming the
importance of a negotiated comprehensive settlement of
all remaining issues between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Miroslav Jenča for his briefing. We also note
the participation in our meeting today of the Permanent
Representatives of Armenia and Azerbaijan.
We are concerned by the information we have
received about the blocking of Lachin corridor, which
has resulted from disagreements on the development
of the ore deposits in the region. The Lachin corridor

22-762995/15

S/PV.9228

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

ensures a link between Nagorno-Karabakh and
Armenia. According to the statement made by
the leaders of Russia, Azerbaijan and Armenia on
9 November 2020, the Lachin corridor is under the
control of the Russian peacekeeping contingent, which
remains a guarantor of stability in the region and is
carrying out its objectives effectively.
It is important to note that when the 9 November 2020
statement was signed, the sides undertook commitments
that need to be strictly abided by, inter alia, to ensure
that there are no issues or difficulties for the lives of
civilians. We expect the full transport connection to
be restored in the very near future. Over the course
of recent days, the Russian side, through its Ministry
of Defence, its peacekeeping-contingent command
in the area and the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, has
been undertaking all necessary efforts to resolve the
situation in the Lachin corridor as soon as possible.
We have organized regular contacts with our
Azerbaijan and Armenian partners, as a result of which
we have managed to obtain the resumption of the supply
of gas to Nagorno-Karabakh and the partial reopening
of the Lachin corridor to traffic. Parameters for the
visit of Azerbaijani environmental experts to the ore
deposits in Nagorno-Karabakh are being agreed upon.
We expect that all of the agreements arrived at with
Russian mediation on the ceasefire and the non-use of
force will be implemented. We call upon Azerbaijan
and Armenia to exercise restraint, refrain from the
kinds of steps that could increase tensions and abide by
agreements reached in the trilateral statements made
by the leaders of Russia, Azerbaijan and Armenia on
9 November 2020, 11 January and 26 November 2021,
and 31 October 2022.
We are convinced that the complete and full
implementation of the provisions of these statements
is the most sustainable way to normalize relations
between Baku and Yerevan. All four documents are
comprehensive in nature and inextricably linked.
Their provisions stem from each other, and their
implementation will ensure that we have the conditions
for sustainable peace in the South Caucasus, which is
in the interest of not just the countries in the region, but
all of their neighbours as well.
We intend to continue extending all necessary
assistance to Baku and Yerevan to make sure that the
agreements are implemented in formats and scope that
are acceptable to both sides.
6/15

20/12/2022

The trilateral working group on unblocking
economic and transport links in the region continues
its work, co-chaired by the Deputy Prime Ministers
of Russia, Azerbaijan and Armenia. The group’s most
recent meeting was held on 6 December.
In addition, together with the Armenian and
Azerbaijani sides, we continue to work on the
preparation of a peace treaty. It is our view that all
disputes between Armenia and Azerbaijan should be
resolved exclusively through political and diplomatic
means and, when it comes to border issues, within the
framework of the work of the bilateral Commission on
the delimitation of the Armenian-Azerbaijani border,
with the advisory assistance of Russia.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Jenča for his very helpful update.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the recent closure of the Lachin corridor. We
are pleased that the gas supply to the region has been
reinstated, but we continue to call for the immediate
reopening of the corridor. The Lachin corridor is the
only means by which daily necessities can be delivered
to the region. The closure of the corridor for over
a week raises the potential for severe humanitarian
consequences — especially in the winter. We also note
with concern the civilians who have been stranded
by the closure and urge that their unimpeded return
be prioritized.
We are in touch with the Governments of both
Armenia and Azerbaijan. It is only through diplomacy,
in line with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, that lasting peace can be achieved. The United
Kingdom continues to support the internationally led
negotiation efforts that seek to secure stability and
peace in the region.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča for his briefing.
Brazil received with concern the reports of
restrictions on freedom of movement in the Lachin
corridor. The right of passage on the road is one of the
pillars of the trilateral statement of 9 November 2020.
Any obstructions, regardless of the pretext, jeopardize
the well-being of the people of Nagorno-Karabakh and
threaten the reconciliation process between Armenia
and Azerbaijan, in a conflict that has already cost
thousands of human lives.
22-76299

20/12/2022

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

Fortunately, the tensions of the past few days have
not translated into episodes of violence. We encourage
the parties to show similar restraint in their rhetoric, so
that the harshness of their words is not interpreted as
incitement to renewed hostilities. It is essential to keep
channels of dialogue open and adopt confidence-building
measures in order to objectively clarify the facts and find
pragmatic solutions.
We take note of the mediation efforts of the Russian
Federation, which have contributed to the resumption
of the gas supply to the region. We encourage other
members to act in an equally constructive way in order
to prevent the crisis from escalating and to avert the
dangers of a worsening humanitarian situation.
The 9 November 2020 declaration offers an initial
road map for peacebuilding. It is essential that the parties
refrain from actions that could characterize violations
of its terms in order to ensure the conditions for the
commission established to demarcate the bilateral border
to carry out its mandate successfully.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Miroslav Jenča for his briefing.
Kenya is deeply concerned about reports of
ongoing blockades along the Lachin corridor, which,
we understand, is critical for humanitarian access to
the Nagorno-Karabakh region. We call on both sides
to de-escalate the current tensions and cooperate in
ensuring freedom and security of movement along the
corridor, in line with the previously reached agreements.
We underscore the need for the parties to exercise
maximum restraint and refrain from any action that
could escalate the situation. In particular, they should
refrain from engaging in misinformation and disinformation, including through social media, as it could spark
panic among the people and undermine efforts to contain the situation and restore calm and understanding.
There cannot be a military solution to any conflict,
including this one. But the deployment of tools available in the Charter of the United Nations for the pacific
settlement of disputes, including consultations and negotiations, offer the best chances for a sustainable outcome.
We therefore encourage the stakeholders to
continue to work with the two sides in order to find a
comprehensive and sustainable settlement to the conflict
and to achieve the normalization of relations based
on mutual recognition and respect for each other’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity within their borders.

S/PV.9228

Let me reiterate that dialogue should be pursued
as the primary and most viable option in resolving
conflicts. The two countries need to engage in it in
good faith. With political will and determination, such
engagement will, in time, yield tangible results that
will be of benefit to both countries and their peoples.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I echo the previous speakers in thanking
Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for the information
he has shared with the Council and welcome the
representatives of Armenia and Azerbaijan to
the Council.
Mexico has been following with concern the
heightened tensions surrounding the situation in the
Lachin corridor. The possible humanitarian implications
that could arise in winter conditions if transit blockages
of vehicles and people continue are alarming. We call
for free movement along the corridor, in line with the
provisions of the 9 November 2020 agreement, and for
respect for international law, in particular international
humanitarian law.
Furthermore, Mexico reiterates its call on the
parties to respect and fully implement all the provisions
of the aforementioned agreement and to resolve their
differences through dialogue with a view to concluding
a peace agreement, which would significantly
contribute to regional stability. We call on international
actors with the capacity to engage in dialogue with the
parties to urge them to resolve their differences through
diplomatic channels.
Above all, we call on the parties to avoid any action
that could raise tensions or trigger escalation. The
human cost in past crises has been extremely high, and
any situation that could put the civilian population at
risk must be avoided.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Jenča for his briefing.
We regret the fact that tensions have been on the rise
in recent weeks. Norway is particularly concerned about
developments in the Lachin corridor and the potential
for further destabilization in the region. The blockage
of the corridor has already had severe humanitarian
implications. Medical supplies and medical evacuations
have been interrupted. Any disruption to the supply of
essential goods and services harms the most vulnerable
groups first. That can and must be avoided.

22-762997/15

S/PV.9228

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

We call on all parties to adhere to the agreements
expressed in the trilateral statement of 9 November
2020. In particular, we call on Azerbaijan to guarantee
safe movement along the Lachin corridor. It is in no
one’s interest to trigger an avoidable humanitarian
situation in Nagorno-Karabakh. Solutions should be
sought through dialogue and diplomatic initiatives. We
urge the parties to show maximum restraint, take steps
to de-escalate the situation and return to the negotiating
table in good faith and without preconditions.
We welcome the fact that the Security Council is
taking up the issue today. The international community
cannot just weather the storm in the hope that it will go
away. We reiterate our support for the ongoing mediation
efforts in the region and welcome the efforts of the
international community to help advance negotiations.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): I would like to begin by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča
for his briefing on the prevailing security situation
between Armenia and Azerbaijan, focusing on the
recent developments in the Lachin corridor. I reaffirm
Ghana’s support for the United Nations efforts to help
to find a lasting solution to the long-standing conflict
between the two neighbouring countries.
I also welcome the representatives of Armenia and
Azerbaijan, who are participating in today’s meeting
under rule 37.
My delegation has taken due note of the concerns
expressed by Armenia in its letter dated 18 December,
as well as of the corresponding letter by Azerbaijan,
dated 19 December, addressed to the Council. We
encourage the parties to set aside mutual blame and
stay engaged through dialogue as a means to resolve
all concerns.
As friends of Armenia and Azerbaijan, Ghana
continues to be concerned about the seething
tensions that have engulfed the two countries for
centuries and have intermittently erupted into armed
conflict, resulting in civilian and military casualties,
as well as the destruction of infrastructure. The
permanency of the ethnic, cultural and historical
identities of the people, which, as we know, have
largely influenced the conflict, demands of the two
sides and the international community to continue
to work together to devise ways for the peaceful
coexistence of the two peoples within the modern
conceptualization of the State, under international law.
8/15

20/12/2022

In contributing to today’s briefing, I wish to make
the following four points. First, we reiterate our call
for the de-escalation of tensions and strongly urge
the two sides to refrain from all unilateral actions
and inflammatory rhetoric, which have proved in the
past to easily degenerate into armed hostilities. While
State authorities endeavour to forge peace through the
implementation of existing ceasefire arrangements, the
communities must themselves be equally committed
to resolving, through dialogue and constructive
actions, any emerging disputes in relation to the
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. We urge local leaders
and civil society to be supportive of peace efforts by
facilitating intercommunal discourse and avoiding
divisive action.
Secondly, we reiterate our call on the parties to
remain committed to the full implementation of all
trilateral statements, which, in our view, constitute
important steps towards the complete cessation of
hostilities, a progressive resolution of the conflict
and the normalization of relations between Armenia
and Azerbaijan. All sides must ensure the consistent
implementation of their responsibilities, in accordance
with the terms of the trilateral statement of 9 November
2020, including the terms of paragraph 6, relating to the
Lachin corridor.
It is also important for the process of the delineation
and delimitation of borders to be undertaken on the
basis of the established norms of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations, with particular regard
to the principles of mutual recognition of territorial
integrity, the non-use of force or threat of force in
the acquisition of territory and the pacific settlement
of disputes.
Thirdly, we urge international support for the
normalization of relations between the two countries.
With the European continent already facing much
upheaval from the war in Ukraine, as well as other volatile
situations, it stands in the interest of international peace
and security to ensure the de-escalation of tensions in the
South Caucasus. Implementing confidence- and trustbuilding measures would help to strengthen the fragile
peace that currently prevails between the two sides.
The international community must also play a role
in facilitating negotiations geared towards the complete
resolution of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and a
future Armenia-Azerbaijan peace treaty. We remain
supportive of ongoing international mediatory efforts by
the Russian peacekeeping force, as well as engagements
22-76299

20/12/2022

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

by the Council of the European Union, the co-Chairs
of the Minsk Group of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization.
To fully realize the benefits of those efforts, they
must be coherent, coordinated and centred on the
principles of international law and the United Nations
Charter. We further urge the two sides to remain open
and committed to the various mediatory efforts geared
towards achieving lasting peace, which has eluded
their peoples.
Fourthly, we emphasize the need for both sides
to prioritize the humanitarian interests of civilian
populations. Both sides must ensure that actions that
could inadvertently violate the fundamental human
rights of the people, including the right to freedom of
movement, are avoided. Any real or perceived blockage
to the Lachin corridor must be addressed as a matter of
urgency to ensure the uninterrupted and safe movement
of all persons and commercial goods.
Finally, allow me to reaffirm Ghana’s commitment
to the Council’s collective aspiration for peace, security
and stability between Armenia and Azerbaijan and in the
wider Caucasus region.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for his briefing.
Like others, Ireland is seriously concerned about
the ongoing obstruction of the Lachin corridor, which
began on 12 December, and has severe implications
for the local population. Without the free movement of
people, goods, food and medical supplies through that
vital corridor, the people of Nagorno-Karabakh will
surely face a humanitarian crisis this winter. As Council
members, we must do everything we can to avoid that and
to prevent another man-made catastrophe from emerging
on our watch. Ireland therefore calls on the Azerbaijani
authorities to immediately and unconditionally
restore freedom and security of movement along the
Lachin corridor, in line with the trilateral statement of
9 November 2020.
As States parties to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, Armenia and Azerbaijan have
an obligation to ensure the right to peaceful assembly.
Any legitimate exercise of that right should be respected,
while also ensuring that it does not compromise public
safety, public health and the rights and freedoms
of others.

S/PV.9228

Now is the time for restraint and de-escalation. It
is time to moderate rhetoric and to refrain from threats
and provocation. It is time to continue important
reconciliation efforts to prevent further unnecessary
loss of life. Concerns can and, indeed, should be
addressed through dialogue and consultations with the
parties involved. We welcome the steps undertaken by
the leaders of Armenia and Azerbaijan to overcome
their differences and reach a durable and sustainable
peace in the region.
Ireland supports a negotiated, comprehensive and
sustainable settlement of the conflict, including on the
long-term status of Nagorno-Karabakh. We maintain
our full support to the international format of the Minsk
Group of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe to pursue that objective. We strongly support
the continued, active engagement of the European
Union to support the sides in their important work to
peacefully resolve remaining issues, including through
the Brussels dialogue process.
Together with our European Union partners,
Ireland supports the common goal of a South Caucasus
where people can live in peace, security and prosperity.
I encourage all of us around the table to do the same.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča
for the clarity of his briefing on the situation along the
Lachin corridor and the tensions between Armenia
and Azerbaijan.
We are concerned about the reports of a blockade of
the Lachin corridor since 12 December, which could lead
to a humanitarian crisis. The right of passage through
the corridor must absolutely be guaranteed. It is vital
that we learn from the large-scale clashes in September
on the direct border between the two countries, which
resulted in many casualties on both sides. We call on
the parties to refrain from provocative rhetoric that
could fuel antagonism. The parties should adhere to the
ceasefire agreement of 10 September 2020.
We take note of the position expressed by the
Azerbaijani authorities, who deny any intention to block
the Lachin corridor, pointing out the environmental
risks arising from the exploitation of natural resources
in the area. In any case, an independent investigation
must be carried out to establish the facts and enlighten
the Security Council on the reality of the situation
along that route, which is vital and essential to
supplying the population. We reiterate the importance

22-762999/15

S/PV.9228

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

of continuing negotiations based on the framework set
out in the tripartite agreement, with a view to achieving
a settlement of the crucial outstanding issues, including
the signing of a peace treaty and the delimitation of
borders. We call on both parties to de-escalate and do
everything possible to calm the situation and improve
the daily lives of the populations concerned, especially
now, in winter.
In view of the fragile situation on the ground, the
international community must mobilize to promote
dialogue with a view to finding a solution that will
advance the cause of the two countries’ peaceful
coexistence. We encourage all regional initiatives that
favour the building of a lasting peace.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for
updating us on latest developments related to the
situation at the Armenia-Azerbaijan border. Reports
regarding a blockade of the Lachin corridor indicate
adverse implications for the supply of essential items
such as food and medicine to Nagorno-Karabakh. That
is a matter of deep concern and has the potential to
morph into a humanitarian crisis. We join the SecretaryGeneral in calling for de-escalating tensions and
ensuring freedom and security of movement along the
corridor in line with previously reached agreements. We
reaffirm our support for the ongoing mediation efforts
in the region. It has been our consistent position that
such disputes should be settled through diplomacy and
dialogue. We encourage both sides to pursue diplomatic
paths to arrive at a lasting peaceful solution.
We continue to reiterate that the global order is
anchored in international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and respect for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of all States.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I would like to express
our appreciation to the Indian presidency for convening
today’s emergency meeting.
The urgency of the matter is due to the evolving
humanitarian crisis created by Azerbaijan as a result of
its imposition of an illegal blockade on the population
of Nagorno-Karabakh in direct breach of its existing
10/15

20/12/2022

commitments — in particular, the trilateral statement
of 9 November 2020 — as well as its international
obligations based on the fundamental principles of
international human rights and humanitarian law.
Since 12 December, the safe passage of people, food
and medicine to the population of Nagorno-Karabakh
has essentially been denied as Azerbaijan has initiated
a massive campaign of State-sponsored protests along
the Lachin corridor, blocking the one and only supply
route in and out of Nagorno-Karabakh. Azerbaijan’s
actions constitute a direct violation of paragraph 6
of the trilateral statement, which stipulates that the
Lachin corridor shall provide a connection between
Nagorno-Karabakh and Armenia remaining under the
control of Russian Federation peacekeeping forces, and
that Azerbaijan shall “guarantee the safety of citizens,
vehicles and goods travelling along the Lachin corridor
in both directions.”
By orchestrating an unlawful blockade of the
Lachin corridor on a fabricated pretext of environmental
concerns, Azerbaijan has effectively targeted a
population of 120,000 people by isolating them in
precarious humanitarian conditions during the winter
season. The blockade of that critical humanitarian
lifeline has resulted in multiple disruptions and adverse
experiences. At least 1,100 civilians have been stranded
along the blocked highway for the past week, unable to
return to their homes. Children have been separated from
their families. The provision of health care and social
services has been obstructed, causing life-threatening
situations and human suffering. The transfer of patients
for urgent treatment in Armenian hospitals has become
impossible and has already resulted in the death of a
critically ill patient. Since 12 December, there has been
a single case of transferring one patient in an operation
that required cooperation among multiple stakeholders,
including peacekeepers and the International Committee
of the Red Cross. That clearly indicates that the corridor
remains closed to the population, and not otherwise, as
the Azerbaijani side has suggested. Shortages of food
and other essential goods have already been reported,
as 4,000 tons of supplies have still not been delivered to
their destination. This medieval siege of the people of
Nagorno-Karabakh was exacerbated by the disruption
of the gas supply for three consecutive days in severe
winter conditions. The lack of heating effectively
disrupted the schools, depriving children of their basic
right to education.
22-76299

20/12/2022

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

S/PV.9228

The alarming situation in Nagorno-Karabakh is
close to becoming a humanitarian catastrophe. Despite
the efforts of the peacekeeping forces on the ground,
the negotiations between the Nagorno-Karabakh
authorities and the Azerbaijani side, aimed at restoring
the safe and unhindered operation of the corridor,
have so far yielded no results. The coordinated
nature of Azerbaijan’s actions, including earlier
incidents targeting the civilian population and critical
infrastructure, constitute yet more evidence that the
closure of the Lachin corridor is in fact a pre-planned
operation being implemented by the Azerbaijani
authorities with the intention of inflicting harm on
the civilian population and creating a large-scale
humanitarian crisis in Nagorno-Karabakh. The claims
made by the Azerbaijani authorities that no restrictions
have been placed on the Lachin corridor are simply
false, and reflect Azerbaijan’s usual victim-blaming
approach in an attempt to deny its responsibility for its
grave violations of existing international obligations.
Any reference to environmental concerns of any sort is
nothing but a bogus pretext to justify further depriving
the population of Nagorno-Karabakh of their means of
subsistence and denying them their fundamental rights,
in grave violation of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, along with other
fundamental international instruments.

lasted for several weeks, in harsh weather conditions.
We also brought to the attention of the members of the
Council that Azerbaijan has been consistently resorting
to violence targeting Armenian civilians, including
those performing agricultural activities, as well as of
the psychological pressure imposed on the population
of border communities with the use of loudspeakers and
State-sponsored cyberattacks. Furthermore, as a result
of the Azerbaijani offensive operation, the Parukh
village of Nagorno-Karabakh has been effectively
ethnically cleansed.

Ironically, it is a well-established fact that, when
it comes to matters of civil and political liberties,
Azerbaijan’s democratic record is one of the lowest
ranked in the world, with a proven track record of
repressions of protests and of detaining dozens of
political prisoners to punish them for exercising their
right to assemble. The suggestion that there could be
civil-society activists out there capable of launching a
campaign of a similar size and scope without the direct
guidance and supervision of the State authorities is
therefore implausible to say the least. In fact the socalled protesters under the environmental pretext are
on record as raising demands that are incompatible with
the 9 November 2020 trilateral statement.

Indeed, had Azerbaijan been genuinely interested
in a comprehensive assessment of the situation in
Nagorno-Karabakh, it would not be denying the
international community access to the region. I would
like to recall that, both during and in the aftermath
of the large-scale aggression by Azerbaijan against
Nagorno-Karabakh in the fall of 2020, both Armenia
and Nagorno-Karabakh supported the visit of the United
Nations mission led by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, with the involvement of
other agencies, to provide the United Nations as well
as the international community with a comprehensive
picture of the humanitarian, security and human rights
situation in Nagorno-Karabakh.

It should be noted that the ongoing blockade of the
Lachin corridor is not just a single isolated case but
yet another demonstration of the systematic violence
masterminded by the Azerbaijani authorities with the
aim of subjecting the people of Nagorno-Karabakh
to ethnic cleansing. Earlier this year, we informed
Member States about the deliberate disruption of the
gas supply to Nagorno-Karabakh by Azerbaijan, which

To this day, the obstruction of safe and unimpeded access for the international community to Nagorno-Karabakh has served the sole purpose of creating
a conducive atmosphere in which lies and fabrications
can be conveniently sustained and cultivated. Once
again, I would like to reconfirm Armenia’s readiness to
facilitate humanitarian access to dispatch fact-finding
missions on the ground.

To pre-empt the upcoming batch of counteraccusations from the representative of Azerbaijan
regarding the so-called environmental concerns, if
Azerbaijan is interested in an independent assessment
of the environmental situation, then consideration could
be given to deploying a United Nations fact-finding
mission to look into the issue.
As far as the issue of landmines is concerned,
I would like to note that mining activity, if any, has
been limited to the territory of Armenia, strictly for
defensive purposes, as Azerbaijan not only threatens
on a regular basis to use force against Armenia, but it
also continues to keep under illegal occupation more
than 140 square kilometres of the sovereign territory of
my country.

22-7629911/15

S/PV.9228

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

20/12/2022

The collective pledge to leave no one behind is yet
to be fulfilled for the people of Nagorno-Karabakh.
As we speak, a population of 120,000 people,
including women, children and elderly persons, are
being held hostage by Azerbaijan through a policy
of State-sponsored intimidation of civilians. Their
representative is here today to offer a new serving of
lies and accusations to cover up the gross and massive
human rights violations under the pretext of protests
organized by so-called civil society activists.

in Europe. We are also aware that, because of the
growing energy challenges, some members of the
international community opt to engage more closely
with the hydrocarbon-exporting State of Azerbaijan.
We are convinced, however, that such engagement
cannot, and should not, put the values and principles
of justice, humanity, dignity and freedom on the line,
and therefore cannot be conducted at the expense of the
fundamental human rights and physical security of the
people of Nagorno-Karabakh.

Azerbaijan continues to disregard the provisional
measures order of the International Court of Justice
issued against Azerbaijan in December 2021, under the
Convention on Elimination of Racial Discrimination
in relation to the humanitarian obligations vis-à-vis
Armenian prisoners of war, as well as on the need to
address the pervasive anti-Armenian rhetoric, including
at the level of public officials and institutions, among
other measures.

Under the current circumstances, we urge the
Security Council to take actions to demand Azerbaijan
to fully respect the provisions of the trilateral
statement of 9 November 2020 and to immediately
and unconditionally unblock the Lachin corridor by
removing all obstacles for safe, secure and unimpeded
transport and communication; deploy a fact-finding
mission to Nagorno-Karabakh and the Lachin corridor
to assess the humanitarian situation on the ground;
and ensure unimpeded humanitarian access for United
Nations agencies to Nagorno-Karabakh.

The unabated provocations and aggressive actions
of Azerbaijan have come to demonstrate that, in the
absence of strong accountability measures, including
the application of sanctions, the aggressor will be
encouraged to continue testing the resilience and
determination of the international community and of the
Council in upholding its primary responsibility under
the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance
of international peace and security.
The claims of Azerbaijan that it has resolved
the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict by massive use of
force, abolished all collective rights of the people
of Nagorno-Karabakh and even eliminated the
very name of this land populated by Armenians
for millenniums constitute clear warning signs of a
premeditated genocidal policy. Azerbaijan claims
that the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, which has been
on the international agenda for the past 30 years, has
become an internal issue on which they can deliver
domestically. The facts emanating from Azerbaijan’s
actions, including the imposition and infliction of
collective punishment on the entire population of
Nagorno-Karabakh, are an indication of the opposite. Th
continued involvement of the international community
is the only possible way of guaranteeing the rights and
security of the people of Nagorno-Karabakh.
We are cognizant of the fact that there are
deep-running disagreements among the members
of the Council related to the major ongoing crisis
12/15

Armenia calls on the Security Council to uphold
its responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, to take the appropriate measures
and to strongly condemn the aggressive actions of
Azerbaijan, which pose an existential threat to the
people of Nagorno-Karabakh and their right to live
freely and in dignity without fear of outside oppression.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): Azerbaijan expresses its
profound regret over the exploitation of the Security
Council by Armenia for a State-led campaign of
manipulation, distortion and falsification. This body
was established as a guardian of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. Respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
non-interference in their domestic affairs are the
cornerstones in that regard. Yet it is utterly unacceptable
that this body continues to be abused by certain forces to
encroach upon the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of my country.
I would like to start with some important
clarifications with regard to terminology, as its
accurate use is essential for ensuring proper respect for
the sovereign rights and responsibilities of States under
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
22-76299

20/12/2022

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

First, it is undeniable that only geographical
names established by legitimate and competent
national authorities in relation to their sovereign
territory must be recognized and used at the United
Nations. Therefore, it is pertinent to recall that what
Armenia and some Council members erroneously call
“Nagorno-Karabakh” is the internationally recognized
sovereign territory of Azerbaijan, which was under
unlawful Armenian occupation for nearly 30 years — I
underline, nearly 30 years of Armenian occupation. That
was consistently reaffirmed in resolutions 822 (1993),
853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993). The legal
name of this area of Azerbaijan is now the Karabakh
Economic Region or, in its shortened equivalent, the
Karabakh region.
Secondly, when it comes to the situation around
the Lachin road, Azerbaijan resolutely rejects all of
Armenia’s claims as completely false, null and void.
The Lachin road is situated entirely in Azerbaijan
within its Lachin district, which was invaded and
occupied by the armed forces of Armenia in May 1992.
The population of Lachin, over 77,000 residents, was
forced to leave their homes and properties, and the town
and its surrounding villages were looted and burned by
Armenian troops. Following the 44-day war two years
ago, in accordance with paragraph 6 of the trilateral
statement of 10 November 2020, the Lachin district was
returned to Azerbaijan, while Azerbaijan committed to
guarantee the security of persons, vehicles and cargo
moving along the Lachin road. Neither the Government
of Azerbaijan nor the protesting activists have blocked
the Lachin road. The regime for the movement of
citizens, goods and vehicles along the road remains
unchanged, with peacekeepers continuing to perform
their duties to protect the route. Video clips shared
on social media show unimpeded passage of the
various types of vehicles, including ambulances and
humanitarian convoys.
The claims regarding alleged humanitarian
consequences of the situation are equally false. This
is nothing but another manifestation of reckless
manipulation by Armenia of the situation for obvious
malign political purposes. There is no impediment
whatsoever as to the supply of goods for the use of
local residents, or in terms of the delivery of essential
medical services.

S/PV.9228

Since the matter was brought to the attention of the
Council, I would like to take this opportunity to inform
its members about the course of events that eventually
led to a civil society group holding a demonstration on
the Lachin road.
In violation of paragraph 4 of the 10 November
2020 trilateral statement, over more than two years
ago, Armenia has been refusing to fully withdraw its
armed forces and illegal armed formations from, and
continuing illegal military activities in, the territory of
Azerbaijan where the Russian peacekeeping contingent
is temporarily deployed.
While speculating on the humanitarian importance
of the Lachin road, at the same time Armenia has actively
used it for military purposes, including for the rotation
of armed forces personnel and the transfer of weapons
to the territory, in clear violation of international law
and paragraph 6 of the trilateral statement.
Apart from that, in violation of paragraph 1 of
the trilateral statement, which committed the sides
to terminate all hostilities, Armenia not only refuses
to share a complete set of maps of the hundreds of
thousands of mines it indiscriminately laid on the
territories of Azerbaijan during their occupation, but
has planted new mines on the territory of my country in
the post-conflict period.
Since August of this year, more than 2,700 mines
produced in Armenia in 2021 have been detected in the
sovereign territories of Azerbaijan. Evidently, those
mines were transferred from Armenia via the Lachin
“humanitarian” road. Last Wednesday, seven people
were injured and one killed by a mine explosion in
the Kalbajar district of Azerbaijan. The area where
the incident took place was far from the former line
of contact, and the mines were planted there during
the withdrawal of the armed forces of Armenia from
the Kalbajar district under the terms of paragraph 6
of the trilateral statement. In total, after the signing
of the trilateral statement, 276 citizens of Azerbaijan
have become mine victims — 46 of them were killed,
including 35 civilians. The conclusion is clear: Armenia
tries to inflict the maximum human losses possible
in order to impede Azerbaijan’s major reconstruction
projects in the liberated territories and the return of
hundreds of thousands of internally displaced persons
to their homes.

22-7629913/15

S/PV.9228

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

Furthermore, the Lachin road has also been misused
for illicit trafficking in minerals and other resources
from the territories of Azerbaijan where the Russian
peacekeeping contingent is deployed. This problem
is not new. Azerbaijan has repeatedly brought to the
attention of the international community irrefutable,
well-documented evidence attesting to large-scale
unlawful economic activities in the formerly occupied
territories of Azerbaijan, in flagrant violation of
international law.
As a matter of fact, out of the 151 mineral deposits
identified in those territories prior to the occupation,
52 sites were exploited for the first time in the period
between 1993 and 2020. Furthermore, several of the
pre-conflict mining operations were expanded and
intensified. Besides being an illegal act of exploitation
of the natural resources of a sovereign State, mining and
quarrying operations were conducted with inadequate
environmental oversight and supervision, including
a lack of effluent treatment and site rehabilitation,
in gross disregard for environment-related technical
standards. That has created environmental impacts,
such as deforestation and land degradation; suspended
sediment pollution, or turbidity, in rivers; and chemical
pollution of water, soil and biota.
For the entire Azerbaijani public therefore, the
pillage and plundering of our sovereign natural wealth,
as well as the harsh environmental consequences, are a
legitimate source of serious concern. Since November
2020, the illegal exploitation of mineral deposits in the
area of the temporary deployment of peacekeepers,
especially in the Gyzylbulag gold and Demirli copper
molybdenum deposits, has not stopped, on the contrary,
it has expanded even further. In addition to being
illegal per se, those activities cause serious damage to
the environment, polluting the area and destroying the
fragile ecosystem.
Unfortunately, despite the fact that a road map
was agreed with the command of the peacekeeping
contingent, 10 days ago a group of unidentified persons
prevented officials from the Ministry of Ecology and
Natural Resources of Azerbaijan, the State Service for
Real Estate Affairs under the Ministry of Economy
of Azerbaijan and the AzerGold Closed Joint Stock
Company from conducting on-site inspections of the
mineral deposits of concern and assessing the potential
14/15

20/12/2022

environmental damage and risks, including the impact
on underground and surface water resources. That
incident caused justified indignation among the public
and led to peaceful protests by eco-activists on the
Lachin-Shusha road, which continue to date, as the
relevant State organs of Azerbaijan are still denied
access to the sites in question.
Under the trilateral statement, the Lachin road
is envisaged to be used exclusively for humanitarian
purposes. The abuse of the road for any other purposes,
not least for illegal military activities, such as the
planting of mines, or illegal trafficking in Azerbaijan’s
natural resources, constitutes a material breach of the
trilateral statement and cannot be tolerated. Azerbaijan
will continue defending its sovereignty and territorial
integrity and the rights and safety of its citizens by all
available means, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.
On a particular note, Azerbaijan is keen to
guarantee to its citizens of Armenian origin the
rights and freedoms enjoyed by all the citizens of
Azerbaijan on an equal and non-discriminatory basis,
in accordance with its Constitution, legislation and
international obligations. This is a domestic matter, in
which Azerbaijan will not allow external interference.
Azerbaijan has taken consistent steps towards
fostering dialogue with local Armenian residents,
as was the case during the construction of a new
Lachin road and in relation to the exploitation of
the Sarsang water reservoir. Such contacts need to
be further supported and encouraged. However,
apparently Armenia and some third countries are
becoming increasingly uncomfortable with the positive
developments on the ground and resort to all kinds of
provocations to raise tensions and undermine the fragile
normalization process. The recent appointment of a
notorious businessman — Ruben Vardanyan — to the
Karabakh region of Azerbaijan, who has no connection
to the region and is directly involved in the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of Azerbaijan,
along with intensified destabilizing actions by some
external actors, is a clear manifestation of this.
Azerbaijan is committed to regional peace,
stability and development. The establishment of goodneighbourly relations between Armenia and Azerbaijan
is key for building a secure, stable and prosperous South
Caucasus through full-fledged regional normalization.
Azerbaijan’s position in that regard is clear, principled
22-76299

20/12/2022

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

and consistent and is based on international law and
established international practice. It was Azerbaijan
that, right after the end of the conflict, initiated the
process of the normalization of inter-State relations
with Armenia based on mutual recognition and respect
for each other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
within their internationally recognized borders,
including through the signing of a peace treaty based
on those principles.
We reiterate our call on the international community
to persuade Armenia to reciprocate the offer of
Azerbaijan, abide by its international obligations, put

S/PV.9228

an end to its illegal activities, cease territorial claims
and political and military provocations, abandon its
aggressive rhetoric and actions, redress the harm
caused to Azerbaijan and engage in good faith in direct
negotiations to find peaceful diplomatic solutions to
all issues pertaining to inter-State relations between
Azerbaijan and Armenia. We once again urge third
parties to refrain from one-sided actions and statements
emboldening revanchism in Armenia to the detriment
of emerging perspectives of regional normalization.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

22-7629915/15
