asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6950

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6950th meeting
Wednesday, 24 April 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gasana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Rwanda)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Mrs. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-30970 (E)

*1330970*

S/PV.6950

could bring about a new and democratic Syria. This
is a moment of increased risk and instability across
the Middle East, and there is a need for quick and
concerted action to address the humanitarian situation,
both inside and outside Syria. Lebanon and Jordan are
on the front line and must be supported effectively.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bahrain, Botswana, Brazil, Djibouti,
Egypt, Iceland, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Japan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Nicaragua, Norway,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, the
United Arab Emirates and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to
participate in this meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate
in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Ahmed Fathalla, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States, to participate
international in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Abdou Salam Diallo, Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas MayrHarting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: Last week, the Council heard
briefings that described in grim detail the tragedy
unfolding inside Syria and its dramatic humanitarian
consequences in the absence of a political solution that

2

Action must also be taken on the Israeli-Palestinian
issue. The fragile hope triggered by the renewed United
States engagement must be sustained and translated
into serious efforts on the part of the parties. The desire
for peace needs to be cultivated by early measures to
reverse negative trends on the ground and build trust.
Last month’s visit of United States President Obama
marked an important opening. Secretary Kerry’s
subsequent trips and continued engagement with the
parties and regional leaders demonstrate a serious
commitment to breaking the political deadlock. It was
in support of these efforts for renewed meaningful talks
that the Secretary-General met with President Obama on
11 April. The two agreed that there is at least a window
of opportunity for Israelis and Palestinians to resume
negotiations. The Secretary-General reconfirmed the
United Nations commitment to supporting, including
through the Quartet, a substantive initiative with
a defined political horizon to achieve a two-state
solution. He spoke to the urgency of making progress
towards peace.
In the margins of the Group of Eight meeting
on 10 April, ministers recommitted themselves to a
just, lasting, and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East. They further agreed on the need for a major
international effort, involving regional parties and the
Quartet, to drive the peace process forward. Now is
the time for the international community to work in a
concerted manner and without delay. During the recent
Doha Summit, Arab leaders reconfirmed their intention
to send a ministerial delegation to Washington, D.C., on
28 April to discuss the peace process.
Of course, much depends on whether the
parties have the political will and exercise the bold
leadership required to create conditions conducive
to the resumption of a political process, despite the
considerable differences between them and the risk
that events on the ground could overtake new efforts at
engagement.
In a development of note, on 13 April President
Abbas accepted the resignation of Prime Minister
Fayyad. The Prime Minister is expected to continue

13-30970

S/PV.6950

carrying out his functions as caretaker until a new
Prime Minister is announced. The United Nations
recognizes that Prime Minister Fayyad had to contend
with circumstances that kept constraining the success of
the statebuilding agenda he led together with President
Abbas and which is now, in the absence of a credible
political horizon, at serious risk. We remain committed
to working with our Palestinian partners, under the
leadership of President Abbas, towards statebuilding
and development, and to achieving the long overdue
negotiated two-State solution.
In an encouraging development Israel and
Palestine, with the facilitation of several parties,
reached an important agreement on 23 April at a
meeting of UNESCO’s Executive Board, which allows
for an experts mission to the old city of Jerusalem in
mid-May. The parties also agreed on the postponement
of five resolutions taken by UNESCO’s Executive
Board. This agreement exemplifies how cooperation
and dialogue can be beneficial to all Member States and
also conducive to maintaining stability on the ground.
The financial viability of the Palestinian Authority
remains at stake, and we continue to call for donors to
step up their financial support. The budget approved by
the Palestinian Cabinet on 28 March for the 2013 fiscal
year reflects fiscal discipline, yet reveals the Palestinian
Authority’s continued and increased dependence on
external aid to cover its expenditures in the short-term.
The Palestinian Authority’s efforts to expand its tax
base and enhance collection will result in increased
net revenue of $2.5 billion, and total expenditure will
amount to $18 billion, more than half of which is for
wages, even with the implementation of a net hiring
freeze. This expenditure includes some $350 million
planned for development projects, most of them to be
financed externally and dedicated to rural communities
in Area C. International assistance amounting to close
to $1.4 billion will be required to cover the deficit. The
most recent meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
in March forecasted a worsening economic outlook for
the current year, with slower growth rates than in 2012,
and a growing financing gap for the new budget should
foreign aid continue to decline.
The reporting period witnessed a considerable
increase in Palestinian casualties, mostly as result
of new clashes with Israeli security forces during
Palestinians demonstrations that grew violent. On the
occasion of Palestinian Prisoners Day on 17 April,
some 3,000 prisoners went on hunger strike for the

13-30970

day and demonstrations were held in main West Bank
cities, resulting in 11 Palestinians being injured by
rubber-coated bullets fired by Israeli security forces.
The issue of Palestinian prisoners has fueled much of
the unrest, especially following the terminal illness and
death of Maysara Abu Hamdiyeh in prison on 2 April.
During the clashes that ensued, Israeli security forces
killed two Palestinian teenagers and injured two more
with live ammunition at a checkpoint near Tulkarem
alter they allegedly threw Molotov cocktails at the
checkpoint. The case is under investigation by the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF), and we look forward to a timely
and public announcement of its conclusion.
We welcome the resolution in the case of Samer
Issawi, who has reportedly suspended his hunger strike
following a court ruling on 23 April that provides he
will be freed to his Jerusalem home after he serves an
additional eight months. We continue to call for a swift
resolution to his case based on humanitarian grounds.
The United Nations remains closely involved on the
ground, and the Secretary-General has urged that a
solution be reached without delay in order to end the
prisoners’ plight and to preserve calm. We cannot but
recall that other fundamental issues incorporated in the
May 2012 agreement remain unresolved.
Wide demonstrations were also organized
throughout the West Bank on the occasion of Land Day
on 30 March, but violence was relatively contained
compared to previous years. Some 22 Palestinian
protesters and four Israeli soldiers were injured
on that day. Protests continued against the barrier,
which deviates from the Green Line in contravention
to the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice. We reiterate that demonstrations must remain
non-violent. We also urge the Israeli security forces
to show the utmost restraint and to ensure the right of
Palestinians to demonstrate peacefully and freely.
In all, incursions by Israeli security forces in the
occupied West Bank remained at approximately the
same level — a total of 303 operations compared to
186 in the previous reporting period. But the levels
of violence have nearly doubled, with Israeli security
operations resulting in two Palestinian teenagers dead
and 724 people injured, including 352 children and
six women. A total of 354 Palestinians were arrested,
including a number of Hamas and Islamic jihad leaders.
Thirty-five Israeli soldiers were also reportedly injured
by protesters in the clashes during the period.

3

S/PV.6950

Clashes between Israeli settlers and Palestinians
have also continued. A total of 13 Palestinians, including
six children, were injured by settlers, and over 600
trees belonging to Palestinians were vandalized. On
7 April, Israeli settlers reportedly spray-painted racist
slogans on the walls of two mosques in a village near
Bethlehem. In two instances, Israeli security forces
arrested a total of six settlers, among them a serving
soldier, suspected of involvement in so-called price-tag
activities. Palestinian attacks on Israeli settlers in the
occupied West Bank resulted in ten injuries, including
one child and one woman, and extensive damage to
Israeli vehicles as the result of stone-throwing.
The reporting period registered continued
demolitions and related displacements in Area C and
East Jerusalem. As compared to the monthly average of
50 demolitions in 2012, 29 Palestinian-owned structures
were demolished between 25 March and 23 April 2013,
including 16 structures demolished yesterday, leading
to the displacement of 40 Palestinians.
We remain deeply troubled by the continued
developments with respect to settlement activity. Let
me reiterate unequivocally the consistent position
of the United Nations that settlement activity
violates international law. Settlement activity further
undermines Palestinians’ confidence in the viability
of the two-State solution. The Secretary-General is
particularly worried about reports suggesting that
the Israeli Minister of Housing and Construction has
predicted the construction within a year and a half
of housing units in the El area of the West Bank.
Separately, initial approval was granted on 9 April to
begin a new construction project in a settlement that is
part of occupied East Jerusalem.
We are also concerned about the potentially
negative impact on Palestinians of the continuing
expansion of the Sderot Begin Highway through parts
of the neighbourhood of Beit Safafa, occupied by the
Israelis in 1967. Such actions are counterproductive to
creating the right environment for peace.
The situation in Gaza has become increasingly
fragile. The calm that followed the ceasefire on
21 November 2012 has been challenged, and there has
been little progress on the more substantive underlying
issues that formed part of that understanding. In an
alarming development, over the last month, a total
of 20 rockets, including three Grad rockets and four
mortar shells, were fired from Gaza into Israel and

4

towards the sea, albeit without causing injuries or
damage. Explosive ordnance placed along the border
fence hit an Israeli patrol, causing physical damages to
the vehicles but no injuries during the reporting period.
Israel conducted four incursions and two airstrikes into
the Gaza Strip. Two Palestinian civilians were injured
on 5 and 16 April by Israeli fire while approaching the
border fence. In reaction to the shooting of rockets,
Israel again closed the Kerem Shalom crossing from 8 to
11 April. Since 26 February, the crossing, which is the
only passage for goods from Israel into Gaza, has been
closed for 29 out of 56 days. The off-shore fishing limit
has remained reduced from six to three nautical miles
since 21 March, well below the 20-mile limit agreed
by the Israelis and Palestinians in the 1995 IsraeliPalestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip, which remains in force and should be
respected. The movement of Palestinians across Erez
has been further restricted to humanitarian cases with
special permits for several periods since 26 February.
In another development, on 17 April two Grad
rockets fired from Egypt’s Sinai peninsula exploded in
open areas of the Israeli Red Sea resort of Eilat, causing
no casualties or damage. The attack, claimed by the
Salafist jihadist group, Mujahideen Shura Council, was
the first such rocket-firing at Eilat in a year. The same
group has previously claimed responsibility for rocket
attacks from Gaza into Sderot on 21 March.
We continue to strongly condemn the fi ring of rockets
into Israel. Those rockets, which are indiscriminate, are
intended to sow fear and cause civilian casualties, and
can trigger cycles of violence difficult to stop. We also
call on Israel to act with restraint. At the same time, we
remain seriously concerned about the impact of Israeli
restrictions on the vulnerable civilian population in
Gaza. The United Nations continues to support Egypt’s
efforts to fully implement the ceasefire understanding
it brokered between the parties. In that regard, we
continue to call for preservation of the calm, with
crossings into Israel remaining open and the fishing
limit line to be expanded in full implementation of the
November understanding. The United Nations will also
continue to work for the relief of the Gaza population,
including by stepping up reconstruction efforts.
Demonstrations and sit-ins took place all over the
Gaza Strip in front of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) facilities on 4 April, protesting against cuts to
its cash-assistance programme, which were necessitated

13-30970

S/PV.6950

by budget shortfalls. Protests grew aggressive when a
group of demonstrators entered UNRWA offices and
threatened staff members, forcing UNRWA to close its
offices until 9 April, thus preventing the Agency from
providing necessary assistance to Palestine refugees.
Meanwhile, efforts to achieve Palestinian
reconciliation continue. Hamas and Fatah have
resumed informal working-level meetings but have
not advanced in their discussions. On 2 April, Khaled
Meshaal was re-elected Chief of the Hamas Political
Bureau. A day earlier, President Abbas reiterated his
position, in accordance with the Doha understanding of
February 2012, that he was prepared to lead a technical
interim Government, which would prepare for elections
90 days into its term. On 12 April the Chair of the
Central Election Commission (CEC) handed a copy of
the updated voter register to the Palestinian President
and informed him that the CEC is technically ready
to organize any election, once so decided. The voter
register now includes over 1.8 million electors, both
in the West Bank and Gaza, representing over 80 per
cent of the total Palestinian adult population, of which
48.2 per cent are female. The CEC continues to organize
the complementary municipal elections scheduled for
1 June 2013 in the West Bank.

in their efforts to accommodate unprecedented flows of
refugees from Syria.
As concerns the United Nations fact-finding
mission to investigate the alleged use of chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, we are still in
discussions with the Government of Syria on the scope
and modalities of the mission. In line with his authority
under General Assembly resolution 42/37 C and Security
Council resolution 620 (1988), the Secretary-General
intends to ensure that all credible allegations brought
to his attention by Member States are considered and,
if it is deemed necessary, investigated. The SecretaryGeneral’s position is that, at this time, the mission
should investigate the allegations about incidents in
Aleppo and Homs. While awaiting access to the Syrian
territory, the experts of the mission are studying the
information on the alleged incidents involving the use
of chemical weapons provided to them by Member
States. They remain ready to deploy to Syria within
24 to 48 hours following the Syrian Government’s
acceptance of the modality and scope of the mission.

On the Syrian Arab Republic, I will keep my
remarks short, as the Security Council was already
briefed in-depth only five days ago by the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States for Syria. Mr. Brahimi emphasized the need
for a political solution along the lines of the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex) and warned against
the growing militarization and radicalization inside
Syria. He reiterated the Secretary-General’s call to stop
the flow of arms to either side in Syria and called on the
Council to consider an arms embargo.

The situation in the Golan remains unstable, with
sporadic clashes between Syrian armed forces and
armed members of the opposition continuing on a daily
basis. The military activities in the area of separation
have the potential to escalate the situation between
Israel and Syria and to jeopardize the ceasefire between
the two countries, as has been highlighted by recent
incidents. On two occasions, on 2 and 12 April, the IDF
fired tank rounds and missiles in what they described
as retaliation for gunfire aimed from the Bravo side at
IDF patrols across the ceasefire line. Syrian authorities
reported to the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force that the missiles fired by the IDF on 12 April
caused one fatality and injured several members of
Syrian security forces.

The Security Council also heard detailed
presentations on the humanitarian and refugee situation,
as well as on sexual violence and children in the context
of the Syrian conflict, by Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs Amos, High Commissioner
for Refugees Guterres, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
Bangura, and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict Zerrougui. The
meeting provided an opportunity for the Council to hear
directly about the challenges faced by the neighbouring
countries most affected by the humanitarian spillover
of the Syrian conflict, particularly Lebanon and Jordan,

The spillover of the conflict in Syria continues to
be felt in Lebanon, particularly in northeastern border
areas. On 21 April, at least seven rockets from the
Syrian side fell on Lebanese soil in the villages of Dora,
Aysh, Sahlat Al-Miyah and the town of Hermel, causing
only material damage; no casualties were reported.
The Lebanese Armed Forces deployed heavily in the
area. In a statement, President Sleiman denounced the
missile attacks on Lebanon and stressed Lebanon’s
role in hosting Syrian refugees. He stated that Lebanon
is working on controlling the border in accordance
with the Baabda Declaration, and that the Army and
relevant authorities were instructed to take measures

13-30970

5

S/PV.6950

to prevent attacks on Lebanon and protect the safety
of its citizens. There were reports of three further
airstrikes on Lebanese territory on 3, 4 and 11 April by
Syrian military aircraft, none of which caused injury.
On 8 April, the Lebanese Foreign Ministry raised the
issue of the violations of Lebanese sovereignty to the
Syrian authorities. On 14 April, two Lebanese civilians
were killed and two injured in shelling from across
the border in Syria. I take this opportunity to reiterate
the concern of the United Nations that the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Lebanon should be fully
respected by all parties.
On 6 April, President Sleiman designated
Tamam Salam the next Prime Minister, following
the resignation of Prime Minister Mikati last month.
Mr. Salam, whose designation received near-unanimous
parliamentary support, has stated that he will form a
Government to hold parliamentary elections and that
he is in consultations with the parties regarding the
character and composition of his future cabinet. It is
critical that Lebanese leaders use this opportunity
to continue to engage positively to ensure the early
formation of a Government. The Secretary-General
also calls on all Lebanese parties to respect President
Sleiman’s wise and courageous disassociation policy,
designed to help protect Lebanon from spillover from
Syria. The Secretary-General, concerned about reports
that there are Lebanese fighting in Syria, both on the
side of the regime and the side of the opposition, hopes
the new Government will find ways to promote better
compliance with the disassociation policy by all sides
in Lebanon.
On 6 April, President Sleiman signed a decree
postponing the parliamentary elections by one week
to 16 June. On 10 April, Parliament voted to amend
the current election law, suspending the candidate
registration process until 19 May, so as to give the parties
a longer period in which to agree on a new electoral
framework. I echo Council members’ call for swift
progress to be made in ensuring speedy agreement on
the electoral law, so that timely parliamentary elections
take place on a consensual basis within the legal and
constitutional framework.
Meanwhile, the situation in the area of operations
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and
along the Blue Line has remained generally calm. Twice
this month, President Sleiman publicly condemned
Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace as breaches of
resolution 1701 (2006).

6

In conclusion, allow me to make the following
observations. As the situation inside Syria continues
to deteriorate, it is more vital than ever that everyone
collectively works towards preserving regional stability.
Advancing the Middle East peace process remains
central to ensuring that the region is not at further risk
of destabilization. Let me repeat what the SecretaryGeneral has stated at every opportunity: there is now an
opening to develop a meaningful initiative to achieve
the negotiated two-State solution that will best serve
the interests, rights and aspirations of both Israelis and
Palestinians. But it is not an overstatement to suggest
that we are about to reach a critical point in the viability
of the peace process. Whether that prospect solidifies
or vanishes will depend on the direction that leaders on
both sides choose to take, and on the level of regional
and international support for new efforts.
Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas
have reiterated the right commitments. The choice
ultimately rests in their hands not to disappoint their
people and to offer them, at last, real prospects for
peace and security. The international community also
bears a unique responsibility to help them move forward
together. The United Nations welcomes the renewed
attention that the United States is giving to the peace
process. We stand ready to contribute to a return to
meaningful negotiations in the period ahead, including
through the Quartet and through broader engagement
with all relevant partners. Despite the difficult regional
context and the challenges on the ground between
Israel and Palestine, we believe that this is a moment of
opportunity that we cannot afford to lose.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Mr. President, I am
honoured to address the Security Council today, and
I congratulate you and your friendly country Rwanda
on your presidency and skilled leadership. We would
also like to express our appreciation to the Russian
Federation for its leadership of the Council in March.
And I thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his briefing on
developments in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and in the region.
We are already four months into this year and the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem — the territory that constitutes the State
of Palestine — remains precarious, as the political

13-30970

S/PV.6950

impasse persists and conditions on the ground continue
to worsen. While many, in speaking of that impasse,
have referred to the status quo and its unsustainability,
we must face reality. There is no status quo. The situation
has in fact never ceased to change, and regrettably not
for the better.
Israel continues to pursue illegal policies aimed
at altering the demography, character and geographic
nature of the territory, directly endangering the
viability and the very possibility of a two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders. That is being
done systematically and deliberately, in grave breach
of international law. As land confiscations, settlement
construction and human rights violations continue, the
prospects for achieving that solution are diminishing.
At the same time, the belief that peace can soon be
realized is also diminishing, as expressed in growing
Palestinian civilian protests against the occupation.
Israel’s violent suppression of peaceful protests
continues to cause casualties, further aggravating the
situation, as do ongoing Israeli settler terror and havoc
against Palestinian civilians and their land.
The combination is highly toxic and requires
immediate remedy. Urgent action is needed to salvage
the prospects for achieving a peaceful solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict – based on the longstanding parameters that are well known to everyone
in the Chamber, parameters that form the foundation
of the two-State solution and the essence of a historic
compromise, which the Palestinian leadership has
committed itself to and the international community
widely supports. With each passing day, an opportunity
is lost to reverse the damage done by Israel’s nearly
46-year military occupation and to instead promote
genuine peace, security and coexistence between the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples.
The Palestinian leadership has therefore welcomed
recent efforts by concerned parties to revive the path
of peace, including the important visit of United States
President Barack Obama to the region in March. We
welcome the priority accorded to resolving the conflict,
the renewed commitment to a just peace and the efforts
to create an atmosphere conducive to progress. We have
repeatedly proven, in word and deed, our commitment
to finding a political path forward for the achievement
of peace. We have thus sincerely engaged in follow-up
meetings with United States Secretary of State John
Kerry, as well as meetings with the Arab ministerial
follow-up committee, including at the Arab Summit in

13-30970

Doha. In that regard, the Arab commitment to peace,
reaffirmed for over a decade in the context of the Arab
Peace Initiative, is unquestionable.
Yet, we know that intention alone cannot overcome
the serious obstacles posed by Israel, the occupying
Power, which have repeatedly undermined and actually
sabotaged past efforts for peace. We thus believe the
following elements are imperative for facilitating a
meaningful political process and the success of any
forthcoming initiative. Israeli settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including in
and around East Jerusalem, must cease. That would
constitute a serious signal from Israel that it is ready
to negotiate in good faith an end to the occupation.
There is a global consensus on the illegality of
Israel’s settlement campaign. Moreover, everyone
is in agreement — colonization, expansionism and
annexation are entirely incompatible with ending
occupation and making peace.
Israel’s leaders must realize that peace cannot
just be spoken of from lofty podiums to appease
the international community, while the occupation
continues to be entrenched. They must demonstrate
they are ready for peace and act to make it a reality.
That requires a halt to all settlement activities and
acceptance of the principle of withdrawal from the lands
forcibly seized in 1967, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. Accordingly, Israel
must also accept the global consensus that negotiations
begin on the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders and
that only by negotiation can that border be adjusted
between the two sides. Those steps would contribute to
diffusing the situation, building the necessary trust and
fostering the appropriate atmosphere for the launch of
negotiations.
A further imperative is the release of Palestinian
political prisoners and detainees in conformity with
prior agreements and consistent with international law
and humanitarian principles. As indicated in our letters
to the President of the Council in past months, their
plight remains a priority for the Palestinian people and
their leadership, with 17 April recently commemorated
as “Prisoners Day”. Sensitivities surrounding that issue
are high, not least because of the illegality of their
capture and the occupying Power’s inhumane treatment.
Currently, 4,900 Palestinians are in Israeli
captivity, among them are 235 children, 1,200 persons
needing urgent medical treatment and 168 persons held
under administrative detention without charge or trial.
7

S/PV.6950

Dozens more Palestinians continue to be arrested and
detained every week in Israeli military raids throughout
the country. The brutality of their imprisonment has
drastically raised tensions, particularly following
the torture killing of Arafat Jaradat in detention in
February and the death of Maysara Abu Hamdiyeh due
to medical neglect last month, prompting widespread
civilian protests.
Likewise, the plight of Samer Issawi, whose hunger
strike has lasted for over 260 days in protest of his
re-arrest and detention without charge, has galvanized
Palestinian sentiments and remains of high concern.
We salute from this podium Issawi’s courage, victory
and brave resilience in demanding his freedom and
the resilience of all Palestinian prisoners in Israeli
prisons and detention centres. While noting yesterday’s
positive developments in the case of Issawi, we reiterate
our appeal to the Secretary-General and all concerned
members of the international community, including the
European Union, the Russian Federation and the United
States as the other members of the Quartet, to continue
their efforts to compel Israel to release Issawi. He and
all other Palestinian prisoners and detainees should be
released and returned to their families and communities
and not be exiled from Palestine.
Also, we reiterate our call for an end to Israel’s
blockade of the Gaza Strip, which continues to debilitate
and disfigure the Palestinian society, inflicting severe
socioeconomic and humanitarian hardship, isolation
and repression on our people, as recently highlighted
by the humanitarian coordinator in the occupied
Palestinian territory and others. While recognizing
the global financial crisis affecting all, that blockade
is totally obstructing Palestinian economic subsistence
and must end. It is an unjust situation for our people
to bear, as well as for the donor community, which is
constantly asked to pay the price for Israel’s illegal
occupation measures.
Partial or temporary remedies will not help; all
of those critical issues require a political solution. As
stated at the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians, convened in March 2013, by Norway’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs, efforts to solve Palestine’s
acute economic problems are essential, but will only be
meaningful within the framework of a negotiated twoState solution. That is true of all the problems and crises
that persist and are symptoms of the larger problem: the

8

continuation of the conflict and the absence of a just
solution.
The basis for that solution is clear and present in
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map. What is needed is
the political will to take action on that basis in order to
overcome the prevailing obstacles and to advance serious
negotiations so as to resolve all core issues within a set
time frame. For that to happen, Israel cannot continue
to be absolved of its legal obligations. It must be held
accountable. The tangible efforts of the international
community to compel Israel to abide by the law are
long overdue and should not be considered optional.
They are vital to stabilizing the situation and to giving
peace a chance. The political impasse is unsustainable.
Efforts to simply manage the conflict are unacceptable,
as evidenced by the mounting pressure and protests in
the occupied Palestinian territory against the backdrop
of instability in the region.
We strongly hope that Secretary of State Kerry
succeeds in his efforts, along with other regional and
international partners, to launch a credible peace
process. Those efforts must include the Security Council.
The Council cannot remain passively on the sidelines,
abdicating its responsibilities vis-à-vis the achievement
of a lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
and the establishment of peace and security in our
region. Furthermore, in that context, we support the
efforts of the Arab ministerial delegation that will soon
visit various capitals, including Washington, D.C., with
the aim of promoting a political horizon.
For our part, I once again in this Chamber reaffirm
the commitment of the Palestinian leadership to a
peaceful settlement in accordance with the two-State
solution. However, I must stress that at the core of that
commitment is our obligation to preserve the dignity of
the Palestinian people and to ensure justice for them.
Essential to that is the fulfilment of their national
aspirations and rights, including the right of our
refugees to return and the right to self-determination in
our independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
Before concluding, I wish to refer to two additional
issues. On the internal Palestinian front, we continue to
strive for an end to the political division. Active efforts
are being made, under the leadership of President
Abbas with regional support, to achieve reconciliation.
We are grateful for the international community’s
13-30970

S/PV.6950

support of unity, which is a national interest of the
Palestinian people and which we hope can soon be
realized. Furthermore, we are hopeful that elections
can soon take place in continuation of the democratic
path that we have chosen. In that regard, although Prime
Minister Fayyad has resigned, while commending him
for his laudable and serious work at the helm of the
Government over the past years, we wish to reassure
the international community and to ask for its support
as we undergo that transition.
Today, I must also express our grave concerns about
the situation of the Palestinian refugees in Syria. As
has been made clear in briefings over the past week, the
violent conflict raging there continues to claim many
civilian lives, including those of Palestinian refugees,
hundreds of thousands of whom have fled Syria,
again suffering displacement. That crisis underscores
the ongoing plight of the Palestinian refugees and the
need for a just, comprehensive and lasting solution
to the question of Palestine in all its aspects, as well
as the urgency of a political solution to the tragic
conflict in Syria. We appeal to the international
community, including the Security Council, to uphold
its responsibilities in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Before I begin, I would like
to extend our condolences to the people of France
following yesterday’s bombing of its embassy in Libya.
We also extend our condolences to the American people
following the attack in Boston last week. Our prayers
are with the victims, families and citizens of both
countries.
I want to congratulate His Excellency Ambassador
Eugène-Richard Gasana and the delegation of Rwanda
on their leadership of the Security Council this month.
Last Tuesday, the State of Israel marked 65 years
as the free and independent homeland of the Jewish
people. On that historic day, six and a half decades ago,
the leaders of the new Jewish State issued a declaration
of independence. It affirmed:
“We offer peace and unity to all the
neighbouring States and their peoples, and invite
them to cooperate with the independent Jewish
nation for the common good of all.”
Israel wants peace. Not a day has gone by in the
past 65 years on which the people of Israel have not

13-30970

yearned for peace. Last month, during his visit to
Israel, President Obama said “I know Israel has taken
risks for peace. … I believe that the Israeli people do
want peace”.
The Jewish tradition teaches that the world is
sustained on three pillars: truth, justice and peace.
Today, I would like to speak about the three pillars
upon which a true and lasting peace in our region
must stand. Those pillars of peace are the foundation
that must remain standing in the shifting sands of the
Middle East. Anything less would be a peace based on
illusions and delusions that is bound to crumble.
The first pillar is that peace must be built on a
foundation of education for tolerance and coexistence.
Peace should be fostered in homes, taught in schools,
nourished by leaders and woven into the very fabric
of society. The Charter of the United Nations urges
nations to “practice tolerance and live together in peace
with one another as good neighbours”.
It does not take an urban planner to realize that
the Palestinians are missing the blueprints to build a
peaceful neighbourhood. From cradles to kindergarten
classrooms and from the fields of summer camps to the
fields of football stadiums, messages of intolerance fill
Palestinian society.
Under the Palestinian Authority, students learn
history from textbooks that glorify terrorists. They
learn geography from atlases that erase Israel from the
map. Gaza kindergarten graduations feature terrorist
dress-up. Five-year-old children stage plays that glorify
jihadists and suicide bombers. Instead of learning their
ABCs, Palestinian children are being taught hate.
Flip through the channels of Palestinian Authority
television and one might find a children’s programme
featuring a young girl reciting a poem that calls Jews
“Allah’s enemies, the sons of pigs [who] rap[e] women
in city squares”. Apparently, that is what passes
for “educational television” under the Palestinian
Authority.
How can we expect children in Gaza to learn
tolerance when their own leaders repress them day in
and day out? Hamas has banned co-education, arrested
women for riding bicycles and prohibited women from
appearing in public with their hair uncovered. Earlier
this month, the Hamas police pulled dozens of young
men off the streets and brutally beat them for the
so-called “offence” of wearing trousers that were too

9

S/PV.6950

tight. I would say that that is taking the phrase “fashion
police” to a completely new level.

somehow managed to find the funds to triple — to
triple — the monthly payment to terrorists.

Month after month, the Council meets to discuss
what is wrong in the Middle East. Where are the
concerned voices in that debate for all the hate being
taught to Palestinian children? Where are the cries
denouncing the incitement that poisons the wells of
peace?

So while President Abbas speaks about peace, he
continues to publicly embrace Hamas. Abbas recently
renewed his efforts to create a unity deal with Hamas, a
terrorist organization dedicated to Israel’s destruction.
In an interview last month with the Russian network
RT, Abbas went so far as to say that he did not see
much difference between the policies of the Palestinian
Authority and Hamas. Let me remind Mr. Abbas of
a simple truth. Hamas and its extremist ideology are
the enemies of peace. Their ideas do not empower
Palestinians to build a brighter future; they enslave
them in a darkened past. There will be no peace until
our neighbours recognize Israel as a Jewish State that
is here to stay.

The second pillar is that peace must be built on a
clear recognition that Israel is the nation-State of the
Jewish people. Since King David laid the cornerstone of
a palace in Jerusalem 3,000 years ago, Jews have lived
continuously in the land of Israel. They saw the rise
and fall of the Babylonian and Roman Empires. They
endured crusades and pogroms until the the Jewish
State was re-established.
I have said it before and I will say it again — Israel
is committed to two States for two peoples. In 1947,
we readily accepted the United Nations plan to create
two States in the region, an Arab State and a Jewish
State. At the time, Arab leaders rejected the existence
of a Jewish State. Sixty-five years later, one still never
hears Palestinian leaders speak about two States for
two peoples.
While President Abbas claims to march steadily
towards peace, his actions fail to fall in step. Last
November, the Palestinian Authority built a monument
in a central square in Bethlehem depicting the
boundaries of a Palestinian State. That State extended
from the Mediterranean Sea to the Jordan River.
Israel was literally wiped off the map. Conveniently
enough — surprise, surprise — when foreign
dignitaries visit Bethlehem, the monument is removed
from its position and taken in for so-called repairs. As
the old saying goes, “You can fool some of the people
some of the time, but you cannot fool all the people all
of the time”.
The Observer of the State of Palestine just now
cited things about Norway’s aid to the Palestinian
Authority. Surprisingly enough, according to Norway’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Palestinian Authority
misled Oslo when it claimed Norwegian aid money
had not been used to provide salaries for convicted
terrorists in Israeli prisons. The Palestinian Authority
has been using those types of underhanded tactics to
funnel money to convicted murderers with blood on
their hands. Last year, as the Palestinian Authority
was threatening to delay paying its civil servants, it

10

Pillar number three holds that peace must be built
on security. At present, the cities and communities of
southern Israel remain under fire from terrorists in
Gaza, despite the fact that there has not been a single
Israeli settlement in Gaza since 2005. After 10 years
and more than 12,000 rockets, the Security Council has
not said one word to condemn the perpetrators. Israeli
citizens want real assurances for their security. The
situation in Gaza provides us with a valuable lesson
concerning any future arrangement in the West Bank.
As rockets are flying out of Gaza, new and more
sophisticated weapons are flowing in. Just this month,
security forces detained a vessel off the southern
coast of the Sinai peninsula carrying 60,000 rifles,
RPG launchers, machine guns, hand grenades and
ammunition. Ships like those routinely smuggle arms
to Gaza and to Sinai-based terrorist groups.
It is no secret that Iran is the primary supplier of
weapons and the greatest sponsor of terrorism in the
Middle East. Yet earlier this month, the representative
of Iran stood in front of the General Assembly to share
Iran’s so-called concerns with the Arms Trade Treaty.
He had the audacity to say that the transfer of arms to
the Middle East has gravely affected the security and
welfare of the people of this region and led to many lost
lives in recent years (see A/67/PV.71). That is quite an
interesting statement to hear from a representative of
Iran. It is like the Mafia complaining that the crime rate
in New York is too high.
The Iranian regime spins lies almost as quickly as it
is spinning centrifuges. The ayatollahs are threatening
to combine their extremist ideology with missiles and

13-30970

S/PV.6950

nuclear weapons. Make no mistake — Iran’s ambition
for nuclear weapons is the single greatest threat to the
Middle East and the entire world.
The Iranian nuclear programme continues
to advance at the speed of an express train. The
international community’s efforts to stop it are moving
at the pace of a local train, pausing at every stop for some
nations to get off and others to get on. Last month, there
was yet another round of negotiations to reason with
Iran and convince it to abandon its nuclear programme.
Just days after negotiations ended, Iran announced two
key infrastructure projects. Surprise, surprise — both
of them expanded Iran’s ability to process uranium.
At the same time that Iran is advancing its nuclear
ambitions, it is providing guidance to Bashar Al-Assad
to increasingly effectively butcher the Syrian people.
As we speak, Iran is sending Hizbullah fighters to
Syria to help execute their bloody plans on the ground.
In Lebanon, Hizbullah is building an army
equipped with 50,000 missiles — more than many
NATO members possess. They may now have access
to one of the largest stockpiles of chemical weapons in
the world. Hizbullah’s leader, Hassan Nasrallah, claims
that he needs such an army to defend Lebanon against
Israel. The truth is that Nasrallah wants an army to
more effectively butcher his Arab brothers and sisters.
Hizbullah does not feel the need to limit its brand
of terrorism exclusively to the Middle East. Last month,
a court in Cyprus jailed a member of Hizbullah for
planning terrorist attacks against civilians. Yet that
still is not enough for some European Union members
to call Hizbullah what it is — a terrorist organization.
It operates with impunity on European soil, yet some
European lawmakers continue to insist it is a social
services organization. It does not take a Sherlock
Holmes to understand the obvious facts of the case.
The foregoing are just some of the threats Israel
faces in the region. Any peace agreement must be
based on reassurances for the security and safety of the
citizens of the world’s only Jewish State.
Since Israel was born 65 years ago, we have been
forced to fight six wars in six decades to defend our
very existence. We know peace comes at a price. We
want peace, but not at any cost. We will not turn a blind
eye in the face of the threats that surround us. Now is
the time to put aside the distracting sideshows of the
debate and focus on how we can lay the foundation for
a genuine, lasting peace. It is naive to think that peace
13-30970

can come from grand statements and vague promises.
It would be like trying to build a new house on a
shaky foundation — the whole structure is at risk of
collapsing.
For all those who believed that the so-called
Arab Spring would result in the blossoming of a new
Middle East, take note — democracy has not taken
root. Instead, what we have seen is more bloodshed and
more violence. To truly establish peace, we must build a
structure that can withstand the rough winds of change
that are sweeping the region.
Winston Churchill said, “We shape our buildings;
thereafter they shape us.” The architecture of peace has
never been clearer. As we face historic challenges in
the Middle East, it has never been more important to
strengthen the pillars of tolerance, mutual recognition
and security. Those are the blueprints that need to be
followed by Israelis and Palestinians, and indeed by all
people in the Middle East, if we are to live in peace,
security and prosperity.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing.
We are witnessing a rapid deterioration in an
already devastating situation in Syria, where at least
70,000 Syrians have been killed and millions displaced.
The Syrian people continue to face deplorable attacks
and massacres by regime forces, including the use of
heavy weapons, aircraft and ballistic missiles.
We are outraged by horrific reports that hundreds of
Syrians were killed over the weekend in the Damascus
suburb of Jdeidet Al-Fadel. Those actions dramatize the
Al-Assad regime’s complete disregard for the lives of
Syria’s citizens, including its children. There must be
full accountability for those crimes, and we urge the
Syrian authorities to permit free and unfettered access
to the commission of inquiry to investigate atrocities,
as called for by the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council.
The exponential surge in the number of refugees
is among the clearest signs of this dire situation. More
than 400,000 Syrians have fled in the last seven weeks
alone, and Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey and United Nations
humanitarian agencies are approaching a saturation
point. We applaud the generosity of the Governments
and peoples that are hosting that exploding number

11

S/PV.6950

of refugees. We count on all of Syria’s neighbours to
continue to keep their borders open so that those fleeing
the conflict can find safety. We call on all countries to
fulfil their commitments to the United Nations Syria
appeals and to consider what more they can do as the
United Nations prepares to launch a new appeal next
month.
We are deeply grateful to the Government of
Kuwait for having fulfilled its generous contribution
of $300 million to United Nations agencies and other
international organizations.
The United States is providing more than
$409 million in humanitarian assistance to meet health,
water, sanitation and hygiene needs. We are also
providing food aid, including enough wheat to provide
a four-month supply of flour to more than 1 million
people.
We commend the Syrian opposition coalition for its
bold declaration of principles in Istanbul last weekend
highlighting its commitment to protect the rights and
interests of minorities, reject extremism, seek a political
solution to the conflict, prevent the use or transfer of
chemical weapons and preserve State institutions.
Secretary of State Kerry underscored the firm
support of the United States for the coalition’s
commitment to a political solution of an inclusive,
tolerant vision for Syria by announcing the doubling
of our non-lethal support to the Syrian opposition to
$250 million, to assist local opposition councils in
building the capacity of civilian activists and link
Syrian citizens with the Syrian opposition coalition and
local coordinating councils.
We continue to support a negotiated solution to the
conflict based on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523,
annex). We remain in close consultation with a number
of countries to consider what more we can do to change
Al-Assad’s calculus and facilitate an orderly end to the
conflict. We urge Member States to press the Al-Assad
regime to commit to credible negotiations based on the
framework agreed in Geneva, which calls for Al-Assad
to transfer his full executive authority to a transitional
governing body.
The presence of violent extremists in Syria,
including the al-Nusra Front, and the dangers posed by
chemical weapons are very real and deeply concerning.
The Syrian people recognize the threat that Al-Qaidalinked extremists pose to their revolution, a revolution
that otherwise stands for dignity and respect for human
12

rights. They have been clear that foreign extremist
ideology is not compatible with the democratic and
inclusive vision for Syria for which many brave Syrians
are fighting and dying.
We support the Secretary-General’s efforts to
investigate any and all credible allegations of the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. Having explicitly requested
a United Nations investigation, the Syrian authorities
should give the team that the Secretary-General has
assembled full and unfettered access so as to enable it
to conduct its work comprehensively.
As the Council has long recognized, the conflict
in Syria threatens the stability of its neighbours,
particularly Lebanon, as demonstrated by the recent
attacks in Hermel and Al-Qasr. Hizbullah not only
continues to undermine Lebanon from within by
violating the Government’s policy of disassociation, but
actively enables Al-Assad to wage war on the Syrian
people by providing money, weapons and expertise to
the regime, in close coordination with Iran.
The United States strongly supports Lebanon’s
sovereignty, independence and stability. We appreciate
President Michel Sleiman’s leadership during this
turbulent period. We congratulate Tamam Salam as
Lebanon’s Prime Minister-designate. That nomination
is a positive first step towards forming a new
Government, a process that must remain Lebanese-led.
We encourage Lebanon’s leaders to adhere to the
legal and constitutional framework for holding timely
parliamentary elections.
Turning to Middle East peace, President Obama’s
trip to the region has led to a series of constructive talks
with Israeli and Palestinian leaders. The United States
remains committed to trying to bring both sides back to
direct negotiations, and our conversations have focused
on crating the necessary climate.
The parties have agreed to engage in new efforts
to promote economic development for the Palestinian
people by removing some of the barriers to commerce
in the West Bank and expanding private-sector
investment in the West Bank. That is no substitute for
serious negotiations, but we hope that those measures
will increase the chances for successful talks.
The United States will work closely with both Israeli
and Palestinian officials and Quartet representative
Tony Blair to help move the process forward.

13-30970

S/PV.6950

As President Obama said in Jerusalem, despite
the evident challenges, “Peace is necessary, peace is
just, and peace is possible”. The United States will
continue to support the Palestinian people and their
efforts to build the foundations of a future State. We
have recently provided $695.7 million in assistance,
including $200 million in budget support to the
Palestinian Authority. The United States remains the
largest bilateral donor to United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
providing more than $233 million in fiscal year 2012
and $113 million thus far in fiscal year 2013.

States shares that sense of urgency and has responded,
and we are resolved to support their efforts to bring
about a resumption of the peace process. We hope that
that will result in the two parties returning to direct
negotiations without preconditions and on a credible
basis, with a view to reaching a lasting settlement
addressing the full range of final status issues. Creating
a viable political environment for such negotiations
will include adopting confidence-building measures
that will make it possible to end the cycle of distrust
between the parties and prove to their peoples that a
better future is possible through negotiation.

We continue to support Palestinian aspirations to
the establishment of a viable, independent Palestinian
State. We look to the Palestinian Authority to sustain
its work, revitalize the Palestinian economy and reform
institutions to better serve the Palestinian people.

In that regard, we are concerned about the situation
of Palestinian prisoners and the tensions that have
resulted. Beyond the humanitarian aspect, which
the Israeli authorities must be aware of and which
should compel them to take speedy and appropriate
measures, we call on them to respect the full range of
their international obligations concerning Palestinian
detainees, regardless of their status. Equally,
Palestine’s economic development must be encouraged,
a task that the former Prime Minister, Mr. Salam
Fayyad, particularly devoted himself to, and we have
commended his decisive actions aimed at building the
institutions necessary for a future Palestinian State.
We attach great importance to the continuation of such
good governance practices aimed at strengthening the
Palestinian State’s credibility, which have brought it the
recognition and trust of the international community.
It should therefore be possible to go beyond the project
stage and promote development in Zone C for the
benefit of the Palestinian people.

We must all reinvigorate our common pursuit
of a two-State solution and comprehensive peace,
recognizing that, of course, challenges remain. Rockets
launched by extremists from Gaza and the Sinai into
Israel continue to undermine those efforts and threaten
the safety and security of ordinary Israeli citizens. As
President Obama made very clear in his recent remarks
to both Israelis and Palestinians, we all know how
tensions and provocations on the ground can escalate
and damage efforts to achieve a two-State solution.
We urge leaders to refrain from provocations that
complicate the resumption of peace negotiations and
Israeli-Palestinian cooperation.
Progress towards peace is urgently needed, not only
for Israelis and Palestinians but across the region and
the world. That goal remains at the core of our efforts.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should like
at the outset to thank Mr. Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs; the Permanent Observer
of Palestine, Mr. Riyad Mansour; and the Permanent
Representative of Israel, Mr. Ron Prosor, for their
statements.
This spring, the Middle East has been racked by
two crises that require an urgent response on the part of
the international community.
First, the urgency of the question of the IsraeliPalestinian peace process has been emphasized on
numerous occasions and is based on the threat that the
issue poses to the two-State solution, which is clearly
the only fair and potentially lasting way to settle that
conflict. We naturally welcome the fact that the United
13-30970

Moreover, ending the activities aimed at demolition
and confiscation is clearly a humanitarian imperative,
and we greatly regret the 16 demolitions that took place
in the course of a single day only yesterday, as reported
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Activities. Furthermore, nothing can be achieved
without the parties’ willingness to work towards
advancing genuine peace. We welcome the responsible
attitude shown by the Israeli and Palestinian leaders
and by their statement supporting a two-State solution.
That statement must be backed by actions: unilateral
measures, particularly settlement activities, which
are ongoing and violate international law, undermine
prospects for peace and must therefore be stopped. As
for the Palestinian Authority, we expect to see it make
constructive use of its new status here at the United
Nations. In connection with the prospect of a two-State
solution, the issue of Palestinian unity remains a matter
13

S/PV.6950

of concern. We support President Abbas’s efforts and
call on regional actors to support them so that progress
towards reconciliation under his authority can be made,
and in keeping with international commitments made
by the Palestinian Liberation Organization.
Changing Israeli policy with regard to the Gaza
Strip and ending the blockade are also prerequisites for
progress in that regard. Such changes will strengthen
those who support peace on behalf of a population that
today ruled exclusively by Hamas. At the same time,
of course, we need to bear in mind Israel’s security
requirements; we continue to condemn the rockets
being fired on Israel and call for strict compliance with
the truce.
I would once again like to reiterate France’s
readiness to contribute to a lasting solution, particularly
in cooperation with our European partners. That faint
hope must be nourished by the jointly agreed support of
the international community, particularly on the part of
regional actors, who must be involved in the quest for
a solution in the context of the Arab Peace Initiative.
In Syria, it is difficult to detect any glimmer
of hope. We heard only recently about hundreds of
civilians, women and children, who were massacred
by the regime and its militias in the Jdeidet Al-Fadel
area. Four and a half million Syrians have now been
displaced; one and a half million have sought refuge
in neighbouring countries. The human scale of the
crisis now stands at some 100,000 dead, the majority of
them civilians, as well as tens of thousands who have
disappeared. The question therefore arises as to when
the Security Council is going to take the measures
necessary to put an end to the suffering. We know
what those measures are, as we have tried to get them
adopted in this forum.
The first of them would be to refer the issue to
the International Criminal Court in order to put on
trial the war crimes and crimes against humanity
that have been perpetrated in Syria, for which the
responsibility falls first and foremost on the Bashar
Al-Assad regime. Secondly, we should exert increased
humanitarian pressure with a view to ending the
indiscriminate violence being inflicted on civilians,
such as the bombing of civilian districts by the regime
so as to enable access for all those in need by ensuring
cross-border access for humanitarian assistance and
authorize competent non-governmental organizations
to provide such assistance. The Security Council’s

14

message regarding those issues has, however, remained
inadequate. Such assistance is essential to containing
the flow of refugees, who are putting intolerable
pressure on neighbouring countries, particularly Jordan
and Lebanon, and thereby undermining the already
compromised stability of those countries. We can only
continue to commend their efforts to ensure that the
borders remain open. We must listen to Mr. Guterres’s
plea for the international community to mobilize and
lend its support to the host countries; similarly, donors
must also mobilize to rapidly make good on the pledges
of aid made at the Kuwait Conference.
However, what is necessary, first and foremost, is
a political transition that clearly marks a break with
the past and responds to the Syrian people’s legitimate
aspirations to choose their own destiny in a democratic
manner. In order to accomplish that, we have the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex) and the necessary
clarifications that have been made by the Joint Special
Representative, Mr. Brahimi, in addressing the Council.
Above all, we must ensure that presidential powers are
transferred in full to a transitional Government. That is
the sequence of events that can lead to the establishment
of a transitional Government, with full executive
powers and able to organize elections, a Government
that we are prepared to work with in order to do what
has to be done.
Unfortunately, we have not yet reached that stage;
only last week President Al-Assad reiterated his
rejection of it in a statement that ignores the reality
of the Syrian crisis. The only glimmer of hope is to
be found with the opposition, which we continue to
support. As the result of a bold initiative by Mr. Moaz
Al-Khateeb, which we commended, the coalition has
recognized the principle of political transition and is
committed to it, as was stated in Istanbul. We call on
the international community to back that initiative, in
order to give support to the only force that is ready to
prepare the way for political transition. We sought a
viable interlocutor, and now we have one, recognized
by the Arab League and a majority of the international
community; one engaged in establishing a Government
that seeks to unite the various components of Syrian
society. Such an actor is indispensable to the creation
of the conditions for a political transition, and we in the
United Nations must also take that into account.
Before concluding, I would like to touch on
Lebanon, which is caught in the middle of this storm.
We welcome the efforts adopted by the Lebanese

13-30970

S/PV.6950

Government, under President Sleiman, to implement the
so-called disassociation policy, the only policy that can
protect Lebanon from relapsing into civil war. While
events on the border continue to increase in number and
violations by Syria of Lebanon’s borders are growing,
we appeal to the Lebanese people to continue to uphold
the principles agreed on in the Baabda Declaration, in
the interests of their country’s stability. We welcome the
fact that agreement was rapidly reached on nominating
Mr. Tamam Salam as Prime Minister, as well as the
efforts to ensure a speedy agreement on the composition
of the new Government, and the organization of
parliamentary elections on a consensus-based approach
and within the constitutional time frame.
In conclusion, this is a region that is on the brink of
disaster as a result of the Syrian crisis, as a result of the
burden represented by the refugees, which is creating
sociopolitical problems, and the problem of radical
terrorism, which is spreading, as we feared, over the
slaughterhouse that Syria has become. We cannot
afford to ignore this region, which is strategically so
crucial to global peace and security and which will,
without our prompt action, spiral into a chaos that will
spill over beyond the Middle East. We face a choice:
either we support the resolute action of the international
community by backing the United States in ensuring
that the peace process between the Israelis and the
Palestinians can move forward and produce a lasting
settlement, or we do not. We must display similar
enthusiasm in tackling the Syrian situation in our
search for a political transition, an enthusiasm that we
have so far failed to display, thus allowing the region to
plunge ever more deeply into the abyss.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I would
to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for
his briefing. I also thank the Permanent Observer of
Palestine and the Permanent Representative of Israel
for their statements.
Luxembourg fully associates itself with the
statement to be made by the observer of the European
Union during this debate.
First, I would like to address the peace process
in the Middle East. Today, we have an opportunity
to develop a serious political initiative to achieve
a negotiated two-State solution based on the 1967
borders. Recent visits to the region by President Obama
and Secretary of State Kerry are important milestones
in the relaunching of the peace process. It is crucial
that, for the sake of Israelis and Palestinians alike, both
13-30970

parties now make a genuine commitment to overcoming
the stalemate, resuming negotiations and developing an
action plan with a clear timetable. There is an urgent
need to move forward. In the current context, doing
nothing is tantamount to regressing.
Recent remarks by Israeli authorities reiterating
their commitment to the two-State solution are a first
step in the right direction. The new Israeli Government
must now translate those words into action and adopt
measures conducive to the resumption of talks by
stopping all settlement activity and respecting the
agreements reached with the Palestinians.
Luxembourg is indeed deeply concerned by the
settlement policy. We deplore the initial authorization,
granted at the beginning of April, for a new construction
project, the pursuit of existing settlement projects
and the demolition of Palestinian infrastructure. We
also deplore the statements made last week by some
members of the new Israeli Government in support of
efforts to strengthen the settlements, including in the
E-1 sector.
No one in Palestine will believe that the peace
efforts can succeed if settlement activities continue,
if the blockade of Gaza continues, if the construction
of settler roads increases, if the wall of separation
continues to tear Palestinians from their lands, and if
administrative detentions continue. Such illegal actions
only exacerbate tensions and suffering and undermine
confidence in the future of the peace process. It must be
emphasized that such actions are contrary to the vision
of two States coexisting in peace and security.
Palestinians, too, must of course create conditions
conducive to the resumption of talks by meeting
their commitments, observing the Quartet principles
and continuing their efforts to combat terrorism. We
condemn, in this context, the rocket fire of recent weeks
that has targeted civilians in southern Israel. Nothing
justifies violence. Those attacks are unacceptable.
It is with regret that we learned of the resignation
of Mr. Salam Fayyad as Prime Minister of Palestine.
We take this opportunity to thank him for his service
to his people in that difficult position, particularly
with regard to the establishment and strengthening of
Palestinian State institutions. It is important that his
work be continued at this crucial time for the peace
process.
Indeed, 2013 will be a decisive year. It is no longer
time to listen, or even to talk. It is time for action, and, for
15

S/PV.6950

the umpteenth time, we must avoid giving rise to bitter
disappointment and the anger and violence that follow.
With its partners in the European Union, Luxembourg
is ready to actively contribute to the efforts to revive
the peace process, in close cooperation with key actors,
the Quartet and the countries of the region.

a first step; we must now go further. If we want the
Council to fulfil its primary responsibility under the
Charter, we must overcome our divisions and work to
bring the parties back into dialogue as soon as possible
and to reach a political solution, considering the gravity
of the humanitarian situation.

I now turn to Syria. While the situation is worsening
by the day, words can no longer describe the horrors
experienced by the Syrian people, including the use of
missiles and cluster munitions, torture, sexual violence
and the recruitment of children for military aims. It
would be difficult to provide an exhaustive list of all
the crimes committed on a daily basis. Like others, we
are gravely concerned by the possible use of chemical
weapons. It is urgent that the commission of inquiry
set up by the Secretary-General be able to visit Syria
and given full access in order to shed light on all the
credible allegations of the use of chemical weapons.

The Syrian National Coalition is a legitimate
interlocutor on the opposition side. We must give
it our full support, encourage it to increase its
representativeness and inclusiveness, and focus its
efforts on a common vision of the political transition
so that it can ensure a political solution for the future
of Syria and build on the proposals for dialogue made
by Mr. Moaz al-Khateeb. President Al-Assad must
realize that he cannot prevail on the battlefield or cling
to power indefinitely. He cannot claim to represent the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.

The list of crimes condemned by human conscience,
unfortunately, grows ever longer. Those crimes must not
go unpunished. We said it in January, and we repeat it
today forcefully — in the absence of a credible process
of accountability at the national level, a referral to the
International Criminal Court is essential.
The Joint Special Representative of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, and the Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Ms. Valerie Amos, told the Council last week
(see S/PV.6949) that Syria is nearing the breaking
point — the point of no return. Syria is collapsing. It is
therefore urgent for the Security Council to act before
it is too late.

The conflict has overflowed Syria’s borders. No
neighbouring country has been spared the security
and humanitarian impact of the war in Syria. It is no
exaggeration to say that Lebanon and Jordan face an
existential threat. We once again express our gratitude
to the neighbouring countries for the solidarity with
which they continue to host refugees fleeing Syria.
In this tragic situation, it is now more important than
ever to deliver on the pledges made at the Kuwait City
conference on 30 January.
For its part, Luxembourg has fulfilled its
commitments and transferred the funds promised to
United Nations agencies and programmes. Given the
growing needs, our Government decided last week to
make an additional contribution of humanitarian aid
amounting to €1 million.

This past Thursday, the Council was able to take a
first step in agreeing on a message calling for the lifting
of restrictions on humanitarian access and to facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian aid across borders. It
is absolutely unacceptable that the work of United
Nations agencies in Syria should be hindered and that
humanitarian convoys should be the target of attacks.
All parties to the conflict must respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including access
for humanitarian and medical personnel and the
protection of humanitarian workers.

I will conclude my remarks by urging the Syrian
authorities to stop the cross-border firing, and to fully
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon and other neighbouring countries. We welcome
the continued efforts of President Michel Sleiman to
preserve the unity and stability of Lebanon. We call on
all parties to respect the policy of dissociation adopted
by Lebanon. In general, everything must be done
to prevent the Syrian conflict from spreading to the
regional level.

At the same time, the Council called on all parties
to the conflict to cease armed violence and stressed
the need for a political process leading to a political
transition on the basis of the Geneva communiqué of
30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex). That message was

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing this
morning, and the Permanent Representative of Israel
and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for their
important statements.

16

13-30970

S/PV.6950

The Middle East peace process remains central to
events in the wider region. As President Obama said
in Jerusalem last month, peace is necessary, just and
possible. We welcome the efforts already undertaken
by Secretary Kerry and the good will with which they
have been received by the parties themselves. The
United Kingdom stands ready to mobilize the European
Union behind any decisive moves for peace. We share
the vision of a world where the Israeli people live in
safety and security alongside the Palestinian people,
who have a sovereign, viable State of their own.
But if that vision is to be realized, both parties must
urgently take steps to rebuild confidence and faith.
Events this month present a mixed picture. We welcome
reports of an agreement to end the hunger strike by
Palestinian prisoner Samer Issawi. However, the
United Kingdom remains concerned at the continued
widespread use of administrative detention by Israel,
particularly given Israel’s agreement in May 2012 to
limit its use.
The continued use of live fire by the Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) resulted in the deaths of two Palestinian
teenagers. On the other side, Molotov cocktails were
reportedly used against the IDF during clashes in
Tulkarem earlier this month. My Government has called
for an investigation into these clashes. There has also
been a worrying number of rockets fired from Gaza into
Israel over the past month. We condemn such actions.
The period of calm since November has been welcome,
and we call on all those responsible to respect in full the
ceasefire. Lastly, the disturbing trend of settler violence
continues. We welcome the investigations launched so
far by the Government of Israel, and look forward to all
perpetrators of such acts being held to account.
Economic and political stability is key to creating
the conditions for peace. As my Foreign Secretary
said on 14 April, we regret the news of Mr. Salam
Fayyad’s resignation as Palestinian Prime Minister.
His dedication and energy allowed the Palestinian
Authority to take great strides forward in building the
institutions necessary for a future Palestinian State.
We must continue to support these institutions. In this
context, we welcome Israel’s decision of 25 March to
resume the transfer of tax revenues to the Palestinian
Authority, in line with its international obligations,
and we expect this to continue. The United Kingdom
remains a strong supporter of and a major financial
donor to the Palestinian Authority.

13-30970

As I said in January’s debate (see S/PV.6906),
we want 2013 to be a year of peace for the Israelis
and Palestinians. This will require Prime Minister
Netanyahu and President Abbas to show the bold and
decisive leadership needed to achieve the lasting peace
that the people of the region deserve. We hope that they
wil live up to our expectations.
Turning now to Syria, I would like to start by
expressing outrage at this week’s reports of the killings
by Syrian Government forces of hundreds of people,
including numerous women and children, in the suburbs
of Damascus. As my Foreign Secretary said on Monday,
this was yet another reminder of the callous brutality
of the Al-Assad regime and the terrible climate of
impunity inside Syria.
Our primary and urgent goal remains a political
settlement to the conflict. We remain steadfast in our
support for the efforts of Joint Special Representative
Brahimi, but his room for manoeuvre is shrinking
rapidly. The Al-Assad’s regime’s violence, fueled by
the few countries that still support it, is becoming
increasingly extreme, from the use of Scud missiles
against civilians to the regime’s alleged use of chemical
weapons. We strongly support the Secretary-General’s
investigation into all allegations of chemical weapons
usage, and urge the Syrian authorities to provide full,
unfettered and immediate access to the investigation
team.
The catastrophe caused by Al-Assad’s brutal
regime is rapidly becoming the biggest humanitarian
disaster of the twenty-first century. Ten million
people — half of Syria’s population — are likely to be
in need of humanitarian assistance by the end of this
year. This includes up to 4 million refugees, whom the
United Nations assesses will have fled Syria by the end
of 2013. More than 50,000 more people have died since
the last draft resolution on Syria was vetoed in July
2012, yet action by the Council remains conspicuous
in its absence.
With our partners, the United Kingdom will do
everything we can to support the moderate opposition
in order to build pressure for a political settlement for
a free and democratic Syria. Last weekend in Istanbul,
Foreign Ministers from the Friends of Syria core group
met with the National Coalition. In their declaration,
the Coalition underlined its commitment to a political
solution and transition, to guaranteeing the rights and
participation of minorities in shaping Syria’s future, to

17

S/PV.6950

rejecting terrorism and to guaranteeing the safety of
chemical weapons, and reiterated its commitment to
human rights and international humanitarian law.
In return, the core group of 11 countries reiterated
their support for a political solution, agreed to increase
significantly their support to the Coalition, and to
channel all practical assistance through the Supreme
Military Council. They urged the international
community to provide more support to countries
hosting Syrian refugees.
The United Kingdom commends Jordan, Lebanon,
Turkey and Iraq for their generosity in offering vital
sanctuary to those fleeing Syria. Despite the strain
on their resources, we urge them to continue to keep
their borders open. The devastating impact of the
crisis on regional stability underlines the urgent need
for a political solution. There can be no doubt that
the situation poses a clear and immediate threat to
international peace and security.
But neighbouring countries cannot shoulder
the refugee burden alone. The United Kingdom has
provided $260 million in humanitarian funding, and
has delivered fully on the pledges we made at the
Kuwait donor conference. We call on all States to do
likewise, and immediately translate pledges into actual
financial contributions. Doing so will enable the United
Nations to scale up its response. We hope that those
countries that have yet to make financial commitments
will reconsider their position.
The Syrian Government and other parties to the
conflict must immediately remove all impediments to
the delivery of aid. The situation outlined by UnderSecretary-General Valerie Amos to the Council last
week (see S/PV.6949) is totally unacceptable. Every
truck needing a permit has to be signed off on by
two ministers. As many as 10 notes verbales are
needed for one aid convoy. The number of approved
non-governmental organizations has been reduced
from 110 to 29.
All parties in Syria must ensure that humanitarian
agencies can deliver life-saving aid effectively, safely,
fully and without impediments, in line with their
obligations under international humanitarian law. We
call on the Syrian Government to urgently facilitate free
and unfettered access to all areas of Syria, including to
agencies delivering assistance across lines and across
borders from neighbouring countries. The Security
Council must address this issue urgently.

18

Finally, those who commit human rights abuses
must be held to account. We call on the Syrian authorities
to grant the commission of inquiry immediate, full
and unfettered access throughout Syria. We strongly
support calls for the Security Council to refer Syrian to
the International Criminal Court. The United Kingdom
remains at the forefront of international efforts to
ensure that those who commit war crimes and crimes
against humanity feel the full weight of international
justice.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The situation with regard to the settlement
of the crises in the Middle East remains quite fragile.
That was confirmed yet again by the renewed tension
in early April when Palestinian fighters from Gaza
fired rockets at Israeli territory, and the Israeli Air
Force, in response, struck the Gaza Strip. In recent
days, the situation in the West Bank deteriorated quite
seriously when demonstrations, following the death
of a Palestinian detainee, led to clashes with Israeli
soldiers. Fortunately, that did not turn into yet another
large-scale wave of violence.
That fragile situation, of course, is grounds for
our deep concern. We affirm our condemnation of
all terrorist manifestations, including the firing of
rockets at the south of Israel. We agree that terrorism
should be fought mercilessly. However, the use of force
against civilians, the violation of human rights and the
violation of international humanitarian law are also
unacceptable. We restate our conviction of the principle
that active assistance is needed to get negotiations and
contacts between Israelis and Palestinians to resume.
Negotiations must be resumed without preconditions,
but on the well-known internationally recognized basis
that is spelled out, inter alia, in the statement of the
Quartet of international mediators dated 23 September
2011, which was reaffirmed in the statement following
the outcome of the Group of Eight Summit in London
on 11 April of this year.
Renewed armed confrontation and violence are
all deadly for any resumption of Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations. We urge all interested parties to abide
by the November 2012 ceasefire agreements between
the Israelis and the groups active in Gaza, and on
that basis, to move towards a complete lifting of the
blockade on the Gaza Strip. It is important to avoid
any steps impeding the search for ways to unblock the
Palestinian-Israeli settlement process as a whole. At the
same time, the parties must make efforts to restore and

13-30970

S/PV.6950

strengthen mutual trust. Especially important in that
regard is, in our view, the halting of settlement activities
and the resolution of pressing humanitarian issues,
including those related to the violation of international
humanitarian law with regard to Palestinian detainees
and prisoners.
We welcome the agreements achieved leading to
the suspension of the hunger strike by a Palestinian
detainee. We note the substantial contribution of the
departing Prime Minister of the Palestinian Authority,
Mr. Salam Fayyad, who was working to establish
Palestinian statehood. The international community
must remember that economic progress simply is not
sustainable as a result of continuing occupation and
the dangerous impasse around the Middle Eastern
settlement.
In regard to the restoration of Palestinian unity,
based on the Palestine Liberation Organization
platform, that is not only an important factor for success
in the negotiations process, but it is also a guarantee
for the implementation of possible peace agreements.
We are convinced that the relaunch of the negotiations
process and transcending the accumulated mistrust
can be served by a ministerial meeting of the Quartet,
preferably with the involvement of Arab States and
with the participation of Israelis and Palestinians.
The events in the Syrian Arab Republic have been
unfolding according to a tragic scenario. We decisively
condemn the siege by armed opposition fighters of the
Aleppo metropolitan bishops of the Greek and Syrian
Orthodox Churches. That criminal provocation again
confirms the extremists’ designs to fan the flames of
ethnic and religious division. That was done just two
days following the national coalitions in Istanbul, which
presented a declaration guaranteeing equal rights for
minorities, including religious minorities. That bears
witness to nothing more than the fact that either its
leaders are simply untrustworthy or they simply do not
control the situation. After all, the incident took place
along the Turkish border in the so-called liberated
territory, which have been receiving generous outside
assistance.
We are puzzled by the European Union’s decision
to allow the import of oil and oil products from those
territories, regardless of how hard the authors of the
dangerous decision — disregarding the norms of
international law and the principle of international
sovereignty — try to present their actions as a gesture of

13-30970

support for moderate opposition. There is no need to be
a prophet to understand that the money will invariably
flow to the strongest armed groups, and that those are the
radicals and extremists, including terrorists affiliated
with Al-Qaida, namely Jabhat Al-Nusra, which holds
a great many of the oil-rich areas outside Syrian
Government control. Also alarming is the readiness of
number of States to supply illegal groups in Syria with
arms, which, after all, risk ending up in the hands of
terrorists raging around the territory of the country. If
the idea of all-out war to the bitterest of ends, fueled by
an aggressive minority of the international community,
prevails, that will only further degrade the situation
and lead to the growth in terrorist activity, including in
neighbouring countries.
In contravention of the objective of initiating
political dialogue, a number of allies of the armed
opposition have been secretly pushing an extremely
harmful draft resolution on Syria in the General
Assembly. We also urge Members not to yield to
attempts to sidestep, on the basis of various pretexts,
the investigation requested by the Syrian authorities
regarding the alleged use of chemical weapons near
Aleppo on 19 March. Unfortunately, the Secretariat has
not shown the requisite consistency and transparency
here. The increasing confrontation reaffirms the need
for a rapid end to all violence, for the respect of human
rights, for restoring the humanitarian situation and for
assisting internally displaced persons and refugees in
neighbouring States. It is important to urge international
humanitarian organizations and the Syrian Government
to maintain the existing level of trust and constructive
cooperation, preventing any undermining of that trust
through artificial politicization of the humanitarian
problem.
The current priority is to force all warring sides to
cease all violence, to take a seat at the negotiating table
and to reach agreement on the creation of a transitional
governing body as provided by the 30 June 2012 Geneva
final communiqué of the Action Group for Syria
(S/2012/523, annex). There is a need to step up the joint
efforts to implement the agreements and to avoid being
drawn into the dubious campaign to legalize structures
that seek to replace the legitimate Government of Syria,
especially at the United Nations, the mission of which
is after all to be the guardian of international legality.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): We express our thanks
to the Under-Secretary-General of Political Affairs,
Mr. Feltman, for his briefing this morning.

19

S/PV.6950

As we know, the deepening crisis around the conflict
in Syria is quite rightly an overriding preoccupation. It
should be, but we should of course not also be deterred
from the imperative of reinvigorating the peace process
between Israel and Palestine. Australia supports all
efforts to achieve lasting security for Israel and the
establishment of an independent and viable Palestinian
State. A durable two-State solution will only be achieved
through direct negotiations without preconditions
on the basis of the 1967 boundaries and with agreed
land swaps. There is a window of opportunity now to
re-engage in the peace process, which we simply must
not miss.
Australia welcomes United States President
Obama’s visit to the region and the work being done
by United States Secretary of State Kerry. United
States leadership is crucial. Prime Minister Netanyahu
has confirmed his new Government’s commitment
to a peaceful two-State solution, to sit down at the
negotiating table without preconditions, and to work
together to end the conflict. And President Abbas said,
the Palestinians were prepared to implement all their
commitments and obligations. Those declarations need
to be translated quickly into actions by all parties.
There are some signs of a more conducive environment
for Israelis and Palestinians to re-engage in direct
negotiations. We welcome the restraint shown by Israel
following recent rocket attacks from Gaza and urge
all sides to abide by the November ceasefire. Equally,
we welcome the restraint shown by the Palestinian
Authority in refraining from taking unilateral action
in international forums. Of course, more needs to be
done by both sides. In particular, illegal settlement
activity directly undermines the prospects for peace
and threatens the viability of a Palestinian State.
Continuing donor support to Palestinian economic
development is crucial, as is ongoing economic reform
by the Palestinian Authority. We regret Prime Minister
Fayyad’s resignation at this important juncture.
We appreciate his role in building the institutional
foundation for a future Palestinian State and his efforts
in promoting economic development and in driving
reform. The Authority must not allow his achievements
to be lost, and we must continue to support its efforts.
We look to Israel to take immediate steps to ease
restrictions and allow the development of a sustainable
Palestinian economy. We welcome the resumption of
tax transfers, but the clearance of tax revenues needs to
be improved on a sustained basis.

20

We urge the Palestinians to cease all acts of violence
against Israel, resolve their internal differences and
unite for peace. The ongoing stalemate in the peace
process is, of course, not in the interests of Israel, the
Palestinians, the region or the international community,
and it is well past time, but still possible, for that
stalemate to be broken.
Just as the stalemate in the peace process has
implications for regional stability, so too does the
deepening crisis in Syria, where Palestinians are
among those who are suffering from the conflict. There
are approximately 500,000 Palestinians in Syria, many
now facing displacement and discrimination. Like other
Council members, Australia was chastened by last
week’s briefings on the humanitarian and human rights
situation in Syria by senior United Nations agency heads
(see S/PV.6949). The situation in Syria is now clearly at
a tipping point. The scale of the humanitarian crisis, its
impact on the Syrian people and its destabilizing impact
on its neighbours and the region must be of decisive
concern to the Council. The cost of further inaction is
unbearable for the Syrian people themselves. It is also
unbearable for Syria’s neighbours, especially Lebanon
and Jordan, but also Turkey and Iraq, which are facing
destructive pressures from refugee flows, spillovers of
violence and cross-border violations.
There were 3,000 refugees per day in January, 5,000
in February, 8,000 in March, and more this month. One
in four of the people living in Lebanon are Syrian. One
in five of the people living in Jordan are Syrian. As the
violence worsens, the effects become exponential and
our ability to cope collapses. All parties, in particular
the Syrian authorities, must cooperate fully with the
United Nations and other humanitarian agencies to
allow access for these organizations and to remove
obstacles to the provision of humanitarian assistance.
As Under-Secretary-General Amos told the Council on
18 April, this needs to include cross-border access. The
safety of all humanitarian personnel, medical workers
and medical facilities must be ensured.
In the face of this growing humanitarian
catastrophe and the direct threat to the security and
stability of Syria’s neighbours, the Council must act
decisively to meet its Charter responsibility to maintain
peace and security and to help end the conflict in Syria.
Mr. Brahimi has made clear to the Council how it can
support his efforts, including through building on the
agreement reached by the Action Group in Geneva last
June. It is well past time for the Council to respond to

13-30970

S/PV.6950

Mr. Brahimi’s plea and act firmly so that a political
solution can be realized and the crisis brought to an
end.
We call on both the Syrian Government and
the opposition Syrian National Coalition to engage
in meaningful genuine dialogue for an orderly and
inclusive transition towards a future Syria that is
democratic and exercises the rule of law. Respecting
international humanitarian law, reaching out to minority
communities, and rejecting and extremist ideology will
be instrumental to the future Syria.
We remain seriously concerned over all allegations
of the use of chemical weapons in Syria, and call on the
Syrian Government to allow immediate and unhindered
access for the Secretary-General’s investigation into
those allegations. Should they be substantiated, the
Council must be prepared to respond swiftly and
credibly.
We are now in the third year of the Syrian conflict.
The Council simply cannot continue to fail to do what
we all know we need to do by beginning to end this
catastrophic situation.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I wish to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his
comprehensive briefing on the recent developments in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Since the peace process was interrupted in 2010,
the Palestinian cause has experienced an historic and
decisive turning point, requiring the international
community as represented by the Council to intervene to
ensure the resumption of the peace process in the region
and to expedite progress towards a comprehensive and
lasting peace, which is the only guarantee of security
and stability for all the peoples of the region.
The visit to the region by President Barack Obama
and the initiatives of John Kerry offer a glimmer of
hope for a reinvigorated peace process between the
Palestinian and the Israelis aimed at achieving the twoState solution. We welcome that visit and the ensuing
initiatives. We wish those initiatives every success
in helping to reinvigorate the peace process and the
negotiations.
In that regard, allow me to recall once again that
the Arab side has repreatedly, and most recently at the
Arab League Summit held in Doha in March, proven
its committment to a lasting and fair peace in the
Middle East as a strategic option, and to the principles

13-30970

of the peace process and, in particular, the Arab Peace
Initiative, the significance of which has been restated at
successive League of Arab States Summits held since
2000.
Experience has shown us that the flexibility shown
by the Arabs and the Palestinians has unfortunately been
stymied by the ongoing settlement and colonization
activities, in particular in the city of Jerusalem. This
poses a serious threat, preventing an internationally
acceptable solution, as settlement activities have been
roundly and consistently condemned and rejected by the
international community. This practice infringes upon
international law, flouts Security Council resolutions,
and prevents the establishment of an environment
conducive to the resumption of negotiations.
We are all aware that the city of East Jerusalem has
been the primary target of the settlement policy, which
seeks to alter the geographic, cultural and demographic
composition of a city that is of key symbolic significance
to all practitioners of holy religions. Its nature cannot
be modified. The city cannot be isolated from Palestine.
The Kingdom of Morocco chairs the Al-Quds
Committee of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
We call once again on the international community to
shoulder its full historic responsibility to bring to an
end to the violations of the sacred nature of holy sites,
be they Christian or Muslim, and to ensure respect for
the status of the city of Jerusalem as a territory for the
coexistence of all holy religions.
The occupied Palestinian territory is facing dire
economic circumstances. The further deterioration of
the economic situation could endanger the economic
gains made to date by the Palestinian Authority, thereby
jeopardizing the creation of a Palestinian State. We can
only welcome the efforts that have been made to resolve
this situation and to prevent a further deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory.
Once again, we call for an end to the blockade that
has been imposed on Gaza since 2006. It is a form of
collective punishment imposed on more than 1.6 million
Palestinian, including more than 1 million refugees. We
underscore once again the importance of ensuring that
the ceasefire agreed last November is not violated in
order to ensure that the lives of innocent civilians are
protected. That agreement preserves the security of all
parties concerned, without exception.

21

S/PV.6950

Moreover, we call upon the Palestinian factions
to fully abide by the national reconciliation process
in Palestine. The unity of the Palestinian State is a
prerequisite for ensuring that the Palestinian interests
are upheld in the negotiations and that peace is achieved.
With regard to the issue of Palestinian prisoners,
we again call upon Israel to put an end to the tragic
fates of thousands of prisoners in its jails, including the
sick, those on hunger strike, children and those under
administrative detention.
We support the ongoing Palestinian determination
to achieve international peace through negotiation.
However, the region cannot endure a further failure in
the peace process. That is why, today more than ever
before, all parties must do their utmost to attain a twoState solution based on a political plan that is clear and
through credible negotiations within a specific time
frame and in accordance with a well-defined mechanism
that will allow for the achievement of a two-State
solution based on the 4 June 1967 borders. We hope
that 2013 will be the year of a political settlement that
will finally enable the Palestinian people to forge their
own independent and viable State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, living side by side with Israel.
As a non-permanent member of the Council, the
Kingdom of Morocco shall support all regional and
international efforts to revive the peace process and
fulfil the hopes of all the peoples of the region for are
a Middle East where peace, prosperity and security
prevail. Let us do our utmost to ensure that the Israeli
Government also demonstrates political willingness to
contribute, as it has done in the past, to the creation of
a comprehensive and just peace in the Middle East, in
accordance with the parameters recognized by all.
We have focused on the Palestinian issue because
it lies at the heart of the Israeli-Arab conflict. We fear
that the lack of a solution will lead to tragedies for the
future of present and coming generations, which would
tarnish the Organization.
We shall never forget the ongoing occupation by
Israel of the Syrian Golan and southern Lebanon and
we call upon Israel once again to withdraw from those
territories so that a lasting and comprehensive peace
may be achieved in the region.
Again, we restate our concern with regard to the
situation affecting the brotherly Syrian people and its
humanitarian impact. We are convinced that all forms
of violence must cease and that the Council must be
22

united in action in order to create an environment
conducive to international efforts aimed at putting an
end to the killings and to achieve a solution that will
meet the aspirations of the Syrian people to freedom
and coexistence among all its ethnic and religious
components with a view to ensuring respect for Syrian
national and territorial unity.
Once again allow me to recall our position, which is
based on Lebanon’s stability and the unity of its people.
We commend the nationalist spirit of responsibility
demonstrated by all the groups of Lebanese people
in order to uphold the national sovereignty and
territorial unity of Lebanon. We are certain that the
Lebanese authorities are fully able, through dialogue
and wisdom, to resolve pending matters and to reach
agreement on the formation of a new Government so
that the legislative elections can be held pursuant to
Lebanon’s Constitution.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Let me commence by
thanking you, Sir, for convening this debate on the
situation in the Middle East. I also thank the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Feltman,
for his briefing and the representatives of Palestine and
Israel for their statements.
Discussions on the situation in the Middle East
bring the whole set of pressing issues to the fore, the
solution of which urges long-term dedication and the
proper coordination of efforts by the international
community. Although the Middle East peace process
is definitely among such issues, the long-awaited
breakthrough has so far been elusive. It is clear, however,
that there is no alternative to peace and negotiations,
and the establishment of the groundwork necessary for
a credible peace process remains a core priority for the
international community.
The latest developments in the region give hope
that the situation may begin to move from its current
standstill. Azerbaijan commends and supports the
diplomatic efforts, particularly those currently
undertaken by the United States, to facilitate the
process, revive the negotiations and contribute to
greater stability in the region. We also underline
the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative, which
provides the regional support for the achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out, all
those involved should work to breathe new life into the
peace process, create an environment conducive to the

13-30970

S/PV.6950

resumption of negotiations, and establish a credible
political horizon for achieving a two-State solution. As
we have repeatedly stated, and I would like to stress
once again, among the necessary prerequisites for
success is the need to ensure that the process is guided
by the normative standards set by the Charter of the
United Nations and by the objective of achieving a
comprehensive settlement based on international law.
Needless to say, the achievement of tangible
outcomes will be impossible in the absence of strong
commitment and dedicated efforts on the part of the
parties. Settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory constitute a serious obstacle and threat to the
peace process and the prospects of achieving a two-State
solution. Azerbaijan has consistently condemned and
rejected settlement practices, which are illegal under
international law and which must cease immediately
and unconditionally. It is important that the parties
uphold their commitments to the 21 November 2012
ceasefire agreement and refrain from any action that
may undermine it.
It is also essential to fully utilize the advantage of
cultural diversity by promoting intercommunal dialogue
and reconciliation while categorically rejecting and
invalidating any manifestation of ethnic and religious
intolerance. We support the ongoing efforts to achieve
Palestinian reconciliation under the leadership of
President Abbas, and express our hope that Palestinian
unity will soon be achieved.
Economic and development support for Palestine
must be promoted. The humanitarian situation
also demands continued international attention
and assistance, particularly in order to ensure the
unimpeded provision of humanitarian aid throughout
the region. It is also critical to put an end to the suffering
of Palestinian prisoners and detainees.
The urgency for renewed peace efforts is
unarguable. The moment of opportunity must not be
missed. We would like once again to express our firm
conviction that peace, security and prosperity in the
Middle East are achievable with greater political will,
a stronger commitment and concerted efforts at the
regional and international levels.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate on
the Middle East. We thank Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman for his very insightful and timely
briefing. This is an important time for Palestine and

13-30970

Israel, as well as the entire region. There is a slight
tinge of optimism in Mr. Feltman’s briefing today.
A flicker of hope appeared after the visits of
President Barack Obama and Secretary of State John
Kerry to the region. That tentative beginning, after
a long hiatus, should be leveraged to generate the
momentum for engagement and a resumption of the
peace process.
The Security Council, the Quartet and the regional
leaders need to energize the stalled peace process.
While different bodies, including the Council, must
play their role, it is conventional wisdom that the most
decisive impetus for restarting the peace process will
come from Israel and Palestine. Working towards
sustainable peace is in the interest of both countries.
We all know that a leadership role by the United States
could persuade the two sides to come to the negotiating
table. The process needs benchmarks and deadlines.
In his report pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 67/19, the Secretary-General reiterates that
an end to the occupation and the achievement of a twoState solution are overdue (see A/67/364). He gives us
a stark reminder that the year 2013 will be decisive for
the peace process. Similar views have been expressed
by other regional and world leaders.
However, a two-State solution is rapidly vanishing.
Palestine and Israel have not met for the past two and
a half years. There is an impasse in the peace process.
United States Secretary of State John Kerry warned
last week that the window for a two-State solution is
shutting after years of failure and that the chance to
create a Palestinian State alongside Israel will be lost
in one to two years. That is not a gloomy forecast. It
is the reality developing on the ground. That warning
underlines the sense of urgency for taking concrete
steps fast. The two sides need to engage. To do that,
they must overcome their persistent scepticism.
The ongoing settlement construction and Israel’s
plans for new settlements in the E-1 area will hinder the
two-State solution by cutting the West Bank into two
and destroying the contiguity of the Palestinian State.
A one-State reality will be unlawful and unsustainable.
The United Nations Independent International
Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, established
by the Human Rights Council, pronounced that Israeli
settlements symbolized the acute lack of justice
experienced by the Palestinian people (see A/64/490,

23

S/PV.6950

annex). The settlements deny the people of Palestine
the right to self-determination and systematically
discriminate against them. The report calls on Israel
to comply with article 49 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and to cease all settlement activities
without preconditions. We concur. In the interest of
both Israel and Palestine, new Israeli settlement plans
must be frozen and earlier decisions rescinded.
It is in the interest of Israel itself to work towards
a long-term and sustainable resolution of the ArabIsraeli conflict. Ending the Israeli occupation of the
Syrian Golan and Lebanese lands is imperative in that
regard. The establishment of a viable, independent
and contiguous State of Palestine on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
is the only lasting solution to the Palestinian question.
This is also a time for national cohesion within
Palestine. The momentum towards building and
consolidating the national institutions — interior,
police, finance, health-care and education — must
be maintained. The flow of financial assistance to
Palestine should not slow down. We hope that the recent
elections in Israel and the consequent formation of
the Government will not be cited as justification for a
reduced interest in the resumption of the peace process.
While we continue to push for a long-term solution
of the Arab-Israeli conflict, urgent measures must be
taken to alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian people.
First, Gaza has become one big prison. As
demanded by resolution 1860 (2009), the blockade on
Gaza must be lifted. The heightened restrictions on the
movement of people and goods, as well as on fishing
limits, must be removed.
Secondly, checkpoints and barriers should be
removed from the West Bank because they interfere
with mobility and trade. The World Bank report to
the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians in Brussels last month provides details
of the damage to the Palestinian economy caused by
Israeli restrictions. Productivity has halved since the
late 1990s and the rate of unemployment has increased
many times.
Thirdly, the Palestinian Authority’s tax revenues
should be transferred to Ramallah on time.

Fourthly, the inhuman treatment of the Palestinian
prisoners and detainees in Israeli jails should be
stopped.
Fifthly, an independent investigation into the death
of Arafat Jaradat in Israeli custody is overdue. It must
be initiated and be concluded in order to bring the
perpetrators to justice.
We welcome the agreement between Palestine and
Israel on UNESCO involvement in Jerusalem. It is a
small but important confidence-building measure.
Let me now turn to Syria. Syria is being decimated
before our own eyes. Last week’s briefings to the
Council revealed that more than 70,000 people have
been killed (see S/PV.6949). Syrians are killing Syrians.
Foreign terrorist organizations have penetrated into
Syrian territory. Summary executions are on the rise.
More than 1.3 million Syrians have taken refuge in
neighbouring countries. Some 7 million people inside
Syria need humanitarian attention and assistance. The
crisis is assuming more sinister dimensions by the day.
Violence and refugees are threatening to embroil the
whole region in a wider conflict.
The dictates of realpolitik have immobilized the
international community and the Council from making
any meaningful intervention. Matters have reached a
tipping point. The competing doctrines of militarization
and military triumph are choking conduits for dialogue
and diplomacy.
The supply of weapons to all sides should be halted.
Within the opposition, some entities and outfits are
allied to Al-Qaida. Judging by the Libyan experience,
such weapons will end up in the hands of terrorists,
who could plunge the entire region into a wider crisis.
Joint Special Representative Lakhdar Brahimi and
the other briefers last week made impassioned pleas
to the Council to work towards a political solution.
We continue to feel that the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/523, annex) contains all the right ingredients for
political dialogue and dispensation. No other alternative
is in sight. Syrians, regional countries and major Powers
need to sit with Mr. Brahimi to implement the Geneva
communiqué. If there is any fresh thinking, it needs to
be developed rapidly and shared with Council members.
We earnestly hope that that will happen without delay
to stop further carnage in Syria.
We appeal to all sides to continue to trust
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as a mediator. It is also important

24

13-30970

S/PV.6950

that he continue to represent both the Secretary-General
and the Arab League.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we wish to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.
Although the intervals between meetings where we
take up this issue are short, the situation in the Middle
East is dynamic enough to provide new developments
each time. Thus, in recent months there have been some
significant developments that are worthy of comment. I
will therefore focus on two topics today — the situation
in the Syrian Arab Republic and the Middle East peace
process.
Regarding the situation in Syria, the Council’s work
has been focused on finding a political solution to the
conflict that has wracked the country, but despite the
many efforts undertaken, we have seen only an increase
in the use of violence, both by the Government and by
the armed opposition, all of which has resulted in the
deaths of thousands of innocent civilians, the suffering
of millions of people, and a humanitarian crisis of the
most serious dimensions. Worse still, the trend shows
no signs of improving, as both parties are governed by
the logic of military victory over the other, but with
very little prospect of achieving that goal. That is why
Guatemala continues to strongly believe that the only
solution to the conflict in Syria is for both parties
to agree to lay down their weapons and negotiate a
political solution.
We do not believe that the militarization of the
conflict will solve the underlying problems that gave
rise to demonstrations in Syria two years ago. Rather,
the continuation of the armed struggle will serve only
to increase sectarian violence in the country, with the
additional risk of spreading it to neighbouring countries.
We are also deeply concerned about the emergence of
groups within the armed opposition that do not conceal
their association with terrorist organizations. We
believe that those organizations should not be allowed
to take advantage of the existing instability.
We acknowledge the efforts made and the work
done to place the various opposition groups in Syria
under the same banner, which has so far resulted in
the creation of the so-called Syrian National Coalition.
However, we remain concerned that the label of
“legitimate representative of the Syrian people” is
being assigned to the Coalition. Guatemala believes

13-30970

that any transition in Syria should be the product
of a Syrian-led process that respects the rights of all
parties, and that it is premature to legitimize a group
that, like the Government, may not enjoy the broad
support of the Syrian population, much less has not
been elected democratically. We hope that the function
of that group is focused on facilitating interlocutors to
advance peaceful negotiations between the parties. On
that point, it should be clear that the perpetrators of
all crimes committed in Syria, whoever they may be,
should be held accountable for their actions. Atrocities
of the magnitude of those that have occurred in Syria
must not go unpunished.
In addition, Guatemala recognizes the urgent need
for the implementation of the humanitarian response
plan in Syria. It is unacceptable for the suffering of the
Syrian people to continue. In that regard, although we
have welcomed the pledges that have been made in the
various meetings of donor countries, we believe that it
is important that they be made effective. In the same
context, it is also indispensable to help all countries
that provide humanitarian aid and receive Syrian
refugees. The impact that the conflict has had within
their borders is quickly consuming those resources,
thereby also putting them at risk.
Turning now to the Middle East peace process,
including the Palestinian question, we hope that in
the short term both Israel and Palestine can commit
themselves to the peace process and work to advance
a solution that will lead to a long and lasting peace.
In that regard, on 8 April my Government took
the decision to recognize Palestine as a State. That
decision, based on the principle of the right to selfdetermination, was made while taking into account the
importance of relaunching direct negotiations between
Israel and Palestine with the support of the international
community and leading to the adoption of a definitive
agreement that would allow both parties to live in
peace within clearly defined, secure and internationally
recognized borders, and that would ensure peaceful
coexistence between the two peoples. We hope that
the Quartet will resume playing a proactive role in that
regard.
Above all, we hope that the parties directly involved
will assume the responsibility of working to find viable
solutions in the short term. The year 2013 should be
marked by the long-delayed resumption of substantive
negotiations that will lead to a definitive agreement
to resolve all outstanding issues and demands. In that

25

S/PV.6950

regard, we believe that the work done by the United
States in recent weeks may help steer the process and
give the parties the necessary push to launch muchneeded dialogue.
Furthermore, we are concerned with respect to the
poor state of the Palestinian economy and its negative
impact on efforts to build State institutions. We believe
it necessary for the international community to reaffirm
its support for the Palestinian Authority and encourage
countries of the region and emerging economies to
fully extend their assistance for the revitalization of the
Palestinian economy.
The international community should urge both
sides to avoid any act, action or provocation that would
hinder the possibility of returning to the negotiating
table. We believe that the international community,
through the United Nations, is obliged to condemn all
violations committed, including those related to safety,
and take all necessary actions to put an end to those
transgressions. The parties cannot be expected to act
responsibly if condemnation for their actions is not
forthcoming.
Finally, my delegation believes that it is only
through respect for the rights of each of those peoples
and a firm commitment to a peaceful solution that both
parties will be able to live together in peace, within
secure and recognized borders.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like at the outset to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman for his briefing and for his reflections.
I wish also to thank the Permanent Representative of
Israel, who was here with us in the Chamber until just
a few minutes ago, and the Permanent Observer of the
State of Palestine for their statements.
There is broad agreement among the international
community on the fact that the coming months will be
decisive in terms of reviving the peace process between
Israel and Palestine. There is also a general and shared
acknowledgment of the fact that lack of progress or a
fresh failure in this undertaking could seriously harm
the two-State solution. There is no doubt that the current
window of opportunity noted by Mr. Feltman to attain
the two-State solution cannot withstand further delay.
Time is pressing, and the moment is now. It is urgent
because it is possible. The international community
believes that it will be possible to breathe new life into
the peace process.

26

We know, however, that the situation on the ground
continues to present immense challenges, both longstanding and new. In spite of the repeated calls made
by the international community, there are no signs that
Israel plans to modify or curb its current settlement
policy, which is a real, concrete and tangible obstacle
in the way of peace. Nor does it appear that there is
to be a just and favourable solution to the problem of
Palestinian prisoners being held in Israeli custody,
which has recently intensified.
In that context, resolving the case of Samer Issawi
is pivotal in order to preserve stability in the West Bank.
We therefore welcomed the news of a legal decision
indicating that Mr. Issawi will now be able to exercise
his right of return to Jerusalem in order to complete his
sentence there and end his hunger strike.
In addition, the rocket attacks targeting Israeli
territory that have occurred in recent weeks deserve to
be roundly condemned and demonstrate the fragility of
the ceasefire reached last November. In that context,
a number of positive signs allow us to believe, with
cautious optimism, that there exist real possibilities of
overcoming the current impasse. We would like also to
acknowledge President Obama’s recent trip to the region
as well as the rapid follow-up visits paid by Secretary of
State Kerry, which undoubtedly are significant events
in that regard.
We know that the success of these new undertakings
will hinge largely on the extent to which this renewed
commitment leads to a credible and comprehensive
proposal for the resumption of talks, which must include
the actors in the region and beyond who have declared
their intention to move forward in a coordinated
manner. We believe also that the Security Council can
play an important and constructive role in that regard
by reaffirming the framework for the peace process and
ensuring that the parties do not engage in blameworthy
or unlawful conduct, which would exacerbate the
situation and undermine mutual trust.
We also welcome the announcement of plans to
promote economic and social development in Palestine
and all measures aimed at promoting institution-building
and the fiscal sustainability of the Palestinian Authority.
However, Argentina is convinced, and knows from
experience, that the economy, economic development
and social cohesion as objectives — not only in the
case of Palestine but anywhere in the world — are not
separate or independent from political decisions.

13-30970

S/PV.6950

That is why the long-term strengthening of
the economy and of social cohesion as well as the
consolidation of Palestinian institutions will be possible
only if there is a political horizon in place for ending
the occupation.
Furthermore, the alleviation of the humanitarian
situation — in addition to being a legal, social and
political imperative — must also be central to actions
aimed at creating a favourable environment for the
resumption of the talks. In Gaza in particular, is a
well-established fact that the extension of fishing
limits to 12 nautical miles would have a significant and
beneficial impact on the living conditions of more than
3,000 families that depend on fishery resources, and
that the lifting of restrictions on the entry of building
materials and on the entry and egress of goods would
lead to an immediate improvement in the situation of
the most vulnerable sectors of the population. Those
are measures that can and should be taken quickly and
in full and must not be delayed, undermined or ignored.
Finally, we welcome the fact that the registration
of Palestinian voters has been completed. That is
a significant technical step on the road towards
establishing a unity Government, and we are also aware
that substantial problems remain to be resolved in order
to progress towards the necessary reconciliation between
Fatah and Hamas, in the context of the commitments
made by the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Finding a rapid solution to the Syrian crisis appears
to be an increasingly complex, controversial and
difficult process. The signs of openness to dialogue
that were noted some three months ago did not develop
sufficiently. Indeed, the serious incidents that have
occurred in recent weeks on the border between
Lebanon and Syria and the allegations regarding the use
of chemical weapons suggest that the conflict continues
its downward spiral of violence and has now entered a
stage that is cause for the utmost concern.
We reiterate our conviction that the only possible
solution to the crisis is a political one. In spite of that,
rather than witnessing coordinated efforts on the part of
those with influence on the parties aimed at convincing
them to take a place at the negotiating table, we continue
daily to receive reports of the increased military
assistance that external actors continue to provide to
both sides, thereby enabling them to continue with their
mutual destruction and that of the rest of the country.

13-30970

The continued provision of weapons to both sides
in this dispute has been instrumental to the escalating
militarization of the conflict. I recall that Argentina
urged the Council in January to adopt appropriate
and just measures aimed at putting an end to the
uninterrupted supply of arms and the subsequent spiral
of violence.
The fact that the Security Council was able, a few
days ago, to speak unanimously on the humanitarian
situation in Syria (see S/PV.6949) shows not only that
we can end the status quo of intolerable silence, but
also that the solution in Syria is and must be a political
one. Similarly, the Security Council must overcome its
differences, which is not only a political decision but
also a moral duty.
We have made clear that we support and
fully endorse the principles outlined by Special
Representative Brahimi. We did so not only last January
but also reaffirmed that view only a few days ago, both
our confidence in Joint Special Representative Brahimi
and the criteria of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523,
annex). I hope that that will not be a mere mechanical or
rhetorical repetition, but a decision by us as a Council
to contribute to a political solution for our brothers and
sisters in Syria through a frank and inclusive dialogue,
which our fellow delegations must not impede, hamper
or prevent from taking place.
Finally, with regard to Lebanon, we certainly
remain concerned at the impact of the Syrian crisis on
that country. As High Commissioner Guterres said in
this Chamber, the crisis has become an existential threat
to the survival of many and to the future prospects of
others in Lebanon. We support once again the policy of
disassociation adopted by the Government of Lebanon
and reiterate how important it is that all political sectors
in Lebanon respect that policy as a key element for
preserving the stability of the country.
Despite the change and upheaval rippling across
the Middle East, we must not lose sight of the central
importance of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in our
deliberations on peace in the region. Peace and security
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
have been on the agenda of the United Nations almost
since the very inception of the Organization. Time,
hope, resources and efforts of all kinds have been
devoted, at best, to providing a space to manage the
crisis, but not to resolving it.

27

S/PV.6950

In that regard, we have a normative framework
with the criteria and principles for a lasting solution,
which enjoy broad international acceptance. Together
we must continue to consider what our shortcomings
have been and how we can implement that framework
for the benefit not only of the parties, Palestine and
Israel, but also the region and the world.

and the humanitarian aid delivery to the Gaza Strip.
We urge the Israeli authorities to do more by raising
the blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip. We also urge
them to release Palestinian prisoners and detainees who
have not been charged but are still currently in Israeli
prisons. We also believe that the time has come to end
the expansion of settlements.

We hope that the strong support of the international
community for the two-State solution will give rise
to concrete efforts on the part of both sides, and of
relevant international actors, aimed at relaunching
the peace process without delay and at creating an
environment conducive to the resumption of direct
negotiations in order to attain a comprehensive solution
based on a vision of the region whereby the two States,
Israel and Palestine, live side by side, within secure and
recognized borders. Argentina will continue to actively
support all initiatives towards that end.

At the same time, we once again urge Hamas to
take all steps possible to control the armed groups that
refuse to renounce violence and whose acts undermine
the trust that otherwise could have been strengthened
between that movement and Israel since the ceasefire
agreement was signed in November 2012.

Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of the State of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.
My country will take the opportunity provided by
this debate to address the Israeli-Palestinian issue and
the situations in Syria and Lebanon.
Today’s consideration of the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, offers yet
another occasion to my delegation not only to express
its profound concern at the ongoing events in the region,
but also to draw the attention of the international
community, and especially the Security Council, to the
urgent need to work to urge all parties to overcome the
obstacles blocking the path to peace and security in the
region.
It is indeed time for the Palestinian and Israeli
parties to decide to genuinely embrace rapprochement.
We believe that the status quo has gone on for too long
and that the two parties should resolve to make good
on their commitments to achieve a negotiated solution
for the creation of two States, in conformity with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Israel
and the Palestinian Authority must now take steps to
strengthen mutual trust.
In that regard, we welcome the reopening on 19 April
of the Kerem Shalom crossing, reserved for goods
28

The issue of Palestinian refugees living in camps
remains a source of major concern for my country. The
United Nations is making enormous efforts to assist
those thousands of persons through the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA). That is why my country
condemns the attacks aimed at the UNRWA office
site by the demonstrators in Gaza on 4 April. We
believe that nothing could justify such acts of violence
against humanitarian personnel and United Nations
installations trying to assist refugees. The authorities in
Gaza should provide the guarantees needed to allow the
Office to continue its operations peacefully and free of
impediments.
It cannot be overemphasized that the solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can only be achieved
through direct negotiations between the two parties.
Those negotiations, interrupted now almost three years
ago, must absolutely be resumed. In that regard, Togo
would like to call on the international community,
and more specifically on the Security Council and the
Quartet, to exert pressure of all kinds on the two parties
to agree on a renewed timeline for the resumption of
negotiations. We are convinced that dialogue is the only
way to a lasting settlement of the conflict.
In this regard, my country reaffirms the call it
issued at the debate in January (see S/PV.6906) for
the reactivation of the Arab Peace Plan, the Madrid
principles and the road map, with the support of the
States Members of the United Nations that have any
influence with either party. We therefore welcome the
recent decision of the Arab League to resume work to
revive the peace process. The creation of an independent
and viable Palestinian State, living alongside Israel
in peace and security within recognized borders,
remains the goal that all our efforts should contribute
13-30970

S/PV.6950

to achieve. In that respect, we welcome and support all
initiatives, in particular those recently undertaken by
the United States of America, that could contribute to
that objective.
In Syria, the prevailing political and military
situation has plunged the international community
into growing uncertainty about a future solution to the
crisis. The destruction of the country’s infrastructure,
the unbridled pursuit of killings, massive violations
of human rights, and the mass movement of displaced
persons and refugees lead us to believe that the country
is self-destructing even as the whole world watches
without being able to act to end this tragedy. Given such
a state of affairs, an end to the war is indubitably the
solution.
In this respect, Togo welcomes the Security
Council’s 18 April call on the parties to end the violence
in all its forms and to start negotiations for a political
transition based on the Geneva communiqué of 30 June
2012 (S/2012/523, annex). The Security Council must
build on the unity it attained on 18 April 18 to compel
the parties to sign a ceasefire that would open the way
to the national dialogue that alone can end the conflict.
With respect to Lebanon, my country is concerned
not only about the ongoing insecurity on its border
with Syria, but also and especially by the scale of its
humanitarian needs. Beyond the security implications
of the Syrian war, which has been manifest in clashes
between factions and supporters of each party to the
conflict, which my country condemns, the issue of
Syrian refugees, who are estimated at more than
1.2 million and whose numbers are increasing every
day, fuels our concerns. Indeed, the burden of these
refugees is felt at all levels of life in Lebanon, and it
is to be feared that this situation may jeopardize peace
and stability in that country.
Togo again calls on the international community
and donor countries to further support the Lebanese
Government in addressing both the humanitarian
needs of the refugees and the growing insecurity in the
host cities. We reiterate our warm thanks to the donor
countries for the efforts they have undertaken to that
end.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank UnderSecretary-General Feltman for his detailed briefing.
Entering the second quarter of the year, the Middle East
peace process seems to be at the fork of two diverging
roads. There must have been a road not taken much

13-30970

fairer than the one Israel and Palestine have taken thus
far. The choice both sides make today will make all the
difference. Recently, we have witnessed a faint glimmer
of hope that allows for cautious optimism, but there
also exist disappointing elements. Israel and Palestine
should deal with the unforeseen incidents occurring on
a daily basis. No matter how serious these incidents are,
however, both parties should maintain the farsighted
perspective of a negotiated resolution of all issues.
Following the death of a Palestinian detainee on
2 April, protests broke out, and during the clashes two
young Palestinians died. This is an unfortunate vicious
cycle that needs to be broken. My delegation condemns
the rocket attacks from Gaza. Both parties must abide
by the ceasefire agreed to in November. In this regard,
we commend the government of Israel for reopening
the Kerem Shalom crossing.
The continuing plight of the inhabitants of the Gaza
Strip is unacceptable; at the same time, cannot justify
hostility towards humanitarian facilities and staff.
The violent acts of protestors against a United Nations
food distribution centre are deplorable. The safety and
security of United Nations humanitarian property and
staff must be guaranteed regardless of the situation.
In terms of the long-term perspective, my delegation
takes note of three particular developments. First, it
is encouraging that the United States Government
is making efforts to engage both sides, as well as
neighbouring countries, through President Obama’s
and Secretary Kerry’s visits to the region. We expect
that this shuttle diplomacy will lead to an atmosphere
conducive to the resumption of direct talks between
Israel and Palestine. We welcome the reported agreement
to seek ways to assist the economic development of
Palestine. Meaningful progress on the economic track
will, we hope, create positive momentum in breaking
the political stalemate.
Secondly, my delegation is concerned that Israel’s
demolition activity has recently resumed in Area C.
We urge the Government of Israel to forego further
construction of settlements. We welcome the agreement
between Israel and Palestine regarding UNESCO’s
activity in the Old City of Jerusalem. We hope that this
small progress will lead to a more meaningful trustbuilding going forward.
Thirdly, the resignation of Prime Minister Fayyad
of the Palestinian Authority has overshadowed
uncertainties on the future of the Palestinian Authority,

29

S/PV.6950

reconciliation between Fatah and Hamas, and the
prospects of the peace process. My delegation hopes
that, under the leadership of President Abbas, a capable
successor will be appointed soon.
In order for all these variables to converge on
the common goal of lasting peace and security in
the Middle East, it is imperative that both Israel and
Palestine refrain from initiating provocative acts and
demonstrate a spirit of compromise. We hope that the
Quartet will resume its work and, combined with the
mediation efforts of the United States, have a synergic
effect.
The situation in Lebanon requires our continued
attention. The resignation of Prime Minister Mikati
could increase the unpredictability of the domestic
political scene. With the Syrian crisis at its doorstep, the
Government’s dissociation policy needs to be observed
by all parties in order to prevent the inflammation
of sectarian tensions within Lebanon. The influx of
refugees has increased Lebanon’s population by more
than 10 per cent. With the Syrian crisis on the verge of
spilling across its borders, all political players should
unite to secure Lebanon’s political sovereignty and
territorial integrity at this critical juncture.
The civil war in Syria is by far the most dangerous
crisis in terms of the scale of its casualties and the
scope of its impact. The crisis has entered its third
year, resulting in well over 70,000 deaths, 4.5 million
internally displaced persons and 1.3 million refugees.
Last week, five United Nations humanitarian agency
heads made a joint statement warning that the
humanitarian response has reached the limits of its
capacity. Their statements demonstrated the urgency of
a political solution to the Syrian crisis.
Particularly heartbreaking is the suffering of the
most vulnerable groups, especially women and children.
The international community should continue to attend
to their suffering and provide support. The Republic
of Korea believes that all perpetrators of violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law must
be held accountable. My delegation urges the parties
to the conflict to immediately cease hostilities and
embark upon efforts towards a political solution. We
also invite countries that have not yet done so to provide
their support for referring the case to the International
Criminal Court.
It is imperative that the international community
rally to support the Syrian people. Their ongoing

30

plight foreshadows a bleak future for the entire nation.
Therefore, it is also important to prepare for a future
reconstruction process in Syria. In that regard, I wish
to inform the Council that the Government of the
Republic of Korea is planning in June to host the third
meeting of the working group on economic recovery
and development of the Group of Friends of Syria. To
that end, we are now consulting with Germany and the
United Arab Emirates, the co-chairs of the working
group.
It is with a heavy heart that I must accept that the
situation in Syria has not improved since the Security
Council held its open debate three months ago (see
S/PV.6906). On the contrary, it has begun to deteriorate
on an exponential scale. As members of the Security
Council, we share a heavy sense of responsibility. I
hope that the Council will break the current deadlock
and make a meaningful contribution to the resolution of
that tragic conflict.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman
for his briefing. I have also listened carefully to the
statements made by the observer of Palestine and the
representative of Israel.
The core and root causes of the Middle East questions
remain the Palestinian issue, to which dialogue and
negotiation represent the only viable solution. China
is concerned about the long-term stagnation of the
peace talks. Recently, the international community has
stepped up efforts to promote peace, and both parties
have expressed their willingness to resume peace talks.
China welcomes those developments and hopes that
both sides will seize opportunities, overcome obstacles,
bridge their differences, take measures to build mutual
trust and restart negotiations as soon as possible.
China is open to all initiatives conducive to
bridging the differences between the two parties and
restarting dialogue and negotiations. This year marks
the twentieth anniversary of the signing of the Oslo
accords, and we hope that it will not be another futile
year for the peace talks between Palestine and Israel.
Israeli settlement activities are the direct cause of
the stagnation of the peace talks and the major obstacle
to their resumption. Israel should take the initiative
by ending its settlement activities in the occupied
territories and addressing the issue of Palestinian
detainees in order to create the necessary conditions for

13-30970

S/PV.6950

the restoration of mutual trust and an early resumption
of the peace talks.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Rwanda.

Currently, the security and humanitarian situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including the
Gaza Strip, remains grave. The relevant United Nations
resolutions must be effectively implemented, and we
hope that Israel will lift its blockade of the Gaza Strip
as soon as possible and alleviate the humanitarian
situation there. We call on the Quartet to take concrete
measures to promote the resumption of talks between
Palestine and Israel, while the Security Council also
needs to play a bigger role in promoting a settlement
of the issue.

I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his informative
and insightful briefing on the current situation in
the Middle East. I also thank Mr. Riyad Mansour,
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of Palestine
to the United Nations, and Mr. Ron Prosor, Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations, for
joining us today.

China continues to believe that Palestine and Israel
should settle their disputes through political dialogue,
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Middle East road map. The ultimate goal is
to establish a sovereign and independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on the basis
of the 1967 borders and living side by side with Israel
in peace.
China firmly supports the just cause of the
Palestinians for the restoration of their legitimate
national rights, and has been promoting the peace
talks through its own means. The Chinese special
envoy on the Middle East issue, Mr. Wu Sike, will visit
Palestine and Israel from 25 to 30 April to exchange
views with both sides on the latest developments in the
peace process in the Middle East and to carry out peace
facilitation work.
China stands ready to work with the international
community to play a constructive role for the early
realization of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East.
A political solution is the only viable way to resolve
the Syrian issue. Currently, the Syrian issue is at a
critical stage. We urge the parties concerned in Syria,
on the basis of the Geneva communiqué of the Action
Group for Syria (S/2012/523, annex), to achieve a
ceasefire and end hostilities as soon as possible, launch
a political dialogue and implement a Syrian-led political
transition process. The international community should
also step up mediation efforts in order to play a positive
and constructive role in the just, peaceful and proper
settlement of the Syrian issue.

13-30970

In the Security Council, we hold an open debate
every quarter to examine the progress made and the
bottlenecks in moving forward, and to keep track of the
Middle East peace process. We last gathered here on
23 January (see S/PV.6906) to examine the stalemate
in the Middle East peace process, and specifically in
the implementation of the two-State solution. Today, we
have come here to review what we have achieved or not,
and the way forward.
A sustainable solution for the Middle East peace
process must be our collective strategic objective.
All Member States should play their role in complete
commitment to those objectives and throw their full
moral, diplomatic, political and economic support
behind its early realization. Our role in the Council
is to make sure that deliberations and decisions are
translated into action.
On 20 March, President Obama visited Israel and
Palestine. That was a positive step in the revival of
the Middle East peace process. It is on that note that
we express our appreciation to the Government of the
United States for that initiative, and we hope that the
effort will bear concrete results. We further commend
President Obama’s efforts for the reconciliation of
Turkey and Israel. Israeli/Turkish reconciliation could
improve regional coordination in the Middle East peace
process and prevent the crisis of the Syrian civil war
from spreading.
Rwanda, like the African Union, is of the view that
a two-State solution is the only viable resolution for
both nations. That involves the creation of a Palestinian
State that is independent and sovereign, living side
by side in peace and security with the State of Israel.
We therefore encourage both sides to support and
implement confidence-building measures that will
allow the peace process to move forward. Any action
that may undermine the two-State solution should be
avoided. We reiterate our view that Israel should be

31

S/PV.6950

fully recognized by its regional partners and should
live in security within its borders. At the same time,
the Palestinians’ aspiration to have their own State that
is political independent and economically viable must
be fulfilled.
We urge all parties to consolidate the ceasefire
in Gaza that was brokered by the Egyptian President,
Mohamed Morsy. Rwanda expresses its concern over
the deteriorating security in the West Bank. We call on
all sides to avoid public statements that could further
fuel the tensions.
We continue to support the Quartet in its mediation
efforts, but deplore the current diplomatic impasse. We
therefore call on the Quartet and those countries that
have influence on both parties to redouble their efforts
to bring to the table new initiatives for peace in the
Middle East.
Turning to Syria, let me clearly state that the
situation is unbearable. The humanitarian situation is
worsening day by day with the deaths of thousands
of people, with refugee numbers reaching over
1 million and with over 3 million internally displaced
persons. This is a stain on the world’s conscience. The
international community has the duty to address the
situation. Mr. Brahimi reminded the Council that it is
the last court of appeal when international peace is at
risk, and it is time to translate our deliberations and
decisions into actions.
Based on the recent report of the independent
international commission of inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic, violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law and mass destruction
have been committed. There are reported accounts
of murder, arbitrary detentions, sexual violence and
torture committed by the parties involved, and now we
have heard allegations of the possible use of chemical
weapons.

unified response to bring about a process of political
transition in Syria. Military intervention in Syria will
only continue to exacerbate the killing and violence and
the emergence of Al-Qaida. In that context, we continue
to support the work of the Joint Special Representative
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, in his efforts to bring a political
solution to the conflict. And we believe that the Arab
League should indeed assume a role in that solution.
In seeking to prevent the escalation of the Syrian
conflict into neighbouring countries, we hope that
Lebanon will soon be able to control its borders in
order to avert clashes between the Syrian rebels and
the Hizbullah militants, which put civilians’ lives at
risk in border areas. We also call upon the Lebanese
Government to take action against Hizbullah’s
aggressions and to do everything within its means to
ensure the safety of civilians on the Lebanese-Syrian
border.
In conclusion, the stalemate in the Middle East is
not impossible to resolve, but we need realistic solutions
based on international principles and norms. That will
require all influential stakeholders to display strong
political will by considering and reinforcing the needs
of the peoples and nations of the region. It goes without
saying that the Security Council must play its intended
role by fulfilling its mandate to seek and enforce a
sustainable solution to the conflicts in the Middle East
as far as returning credibility. We therefore call on
everyone to take responsibility.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
There are still a number of speakers remaining
inscribed on my list for this meeting. I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.25 p.m.

As a member of the Security Council, Rwanda will
work with our colleagues to encourage a strong and

32

13-30970
