General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

12

Bearing in mind the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 8 especially the recommendations of the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee at its sixth session with respect to the promotion
of the applications of space technology, 9
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1426 (XLVI) of 6 June 1969, in which the Council,
ínter alia, expressed its conviction that intemational
co-operation through the United Nations should continue to play an important role in assisting the efforts
of Governments in the fields of investigation and utilization of non-agricultura] natural resources,
Aware of the urgent need for a more complete understanding of man's environment,
Recognizing that space technology may make a significant contribution to this understanding,
Expressing the desire that earth resources survey
satellite programmes be available to produce information for the world community as a whole,
Wishing to encourage the study of earth resources
survey programmes, including those related to remotesensing techniques, and participation to the extent feasible and practicable in their development,
1. Invites Member States with experience in the
field of remole earth resources surveying to make such
experience available to other Member States which do
not have such experience and encourage them to become familiar with this field;
2. Invites Member States to join in exploring the
various aspects involved in the analysis of data obtained
through earth resources surveying techniques, their dissemination and application, so as tó maximize the benefits to be obtained therefrom, taking into account the
particular interests and needs of developing countries;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to bring the present
resolution to the attention of ali organizations within
the United Nations system whose objectives or programmes might be furthered by this developing technology;
4. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its studies with regard to the
possibilities of further international co-operation, in
particular in the framework of the United Nations
system, in connexion with the development and use of
remole earth resources surveying techniques so as to
assure that as the practica! benefits of this new technology are achieved, they are made available to both
developed and developing countries.
1836th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
2601 (XXIV). lnternational co-operation in the
peaceful uses of outer space
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2453 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 10
8 lbid., Supplement No. 21 (A/7621) and Supplement No.
21A. (A/7621/Add.1).
• lbid.1 Supplement No. 21 (A/7621), annex 11, section B.
10 lbia., Supplement No. 21 (A/7621) and Supplement No.
21A. (A/7621/Add.1).

Reaffirming the common interest of mankind in furthering the exploration and use of outer space for
peaceful purposes,
Convinced of the need for increased efforts to promote applications of space technology for the benefit
of non-space Powers, particularly the developing countries,
Believing that the benefits of space exploration can
be extended to States at all stages of economic and
scientific development if Member States conduct their
space programmes in a manner designed to promote
the maximum intemational co-operation and widest
possible exchange of information in this field,
1. Endorses the recommendations and decisions11
contained in the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
2. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue to study questions relative to
the definition of outer space and the utilization of outer
space and celestial bodies, including various implicacations of space communications, as well as those cornments which may be brought to the attention of the
Committee by specialized agencies and the lntemational
Atomic Energy Agency as a result of their examination
of problems that have arisen or that may arise from the
use of outer space in the fields within their competence;
3. Invites those countries which have not yet become parties to the Treaty on Principles Goveming the
Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of
Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies and the Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Retum of Astronauts and the Return of
Objects Launched into Outer Space to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to those agreements so
that they may have the broadest possible effect;
4. Rea{firms its belief, as expressed in its resolution 1721 D (XVI) of 20 December 1961, that communication by meaos of satellites should be available
to the nations of the world as soon as practicable on a
global and non-discriminatory basis, and recommends
that States parties to negotiations regarding international arrangements in the field of sateUite communication should constantly bear this principie in mind so
that its ultimate realization may not be impaired;
5. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of
the Working Group on Direct Broadcast Satellites on its
first session 12 and its second session13 and requests the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, at its
first 1970 session. to consider the agenda for the session
of the Working Group to be held in 1970 which is to
<leal with the implications of direct broadcast satellites
in social, cultural, legal and other areas;
6. Welcomes the decision of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to promote more energetically the applications of space technology as set out
in paragraph 15 of its report, and in paragraphs 22
to 31 of the report of the Scientific and Technical SubCommittee;14
7. W el comes the decision of the Secretary-GeneraPII
to provide the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space at an early date with a report on the Secretariat arrangements in the field of outer space, bearing
Supplement No. 21 (A/7621 ), chapter IT.
Supplement No. 21 A (A/7621/ Add.1) annex III
annex IV.
'
·
14 !bid., Supplement No. 21 (A/7621). annex 11.
1 ~ lhid .. Supplement No. 21A (A/7621/Add.l), annex IT.
11 lhid.,

12 lhid.,
13 Jbid.,

13

Resolutions adopted on the reporte of the Fint Committee

in mind the need to achieve optimum co-ordination in
the work of the Secretariat to promote co-operation in
the peaceful uses of outer space;
.
8. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space for the appointment by the Secretary-General of ~ qualified in~ividual
with the full-time task of promotmg the practica! applications of space technology; 16
9. Welcomes the efforts of Member States to share
with other interested Member States the space venture
and the practica! benefits which may be derived
from their programmes in space technology;
10. W elcomes the efforts of Member States to keep
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
fully informed of their activities and invites all Member
States to do so;
11. Approves sponsorship by the United Nations
of the CELPA Mar del Plata Station17 in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 1802 (XVII) of
14 December 1962 and recommends that Member
States should give consideration to the use of these
facilities for appropriate space research activities;
12. Approves continuing sponsorship by the United
Nations of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching
Station and recommends that Member States should
give consideration to the use of these facilities for appropriate space research activities;
13. Notes with appreciation that, in accordance
with resolution 1721 B (XVI) of 20 December 1961,
the Secretary-General continues to maintain a public
registry of objects launched into orbit or beyond on the
basis of information fumished by Member States;
14. Requests the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the Intemational
Telecommunication Union and other interested specialized agencies, the United International Bureaux for
the Protection of Intellectual Property, as well as the
broadcasting organizations of the type mentioned in
paragraph 45 of the report of the Working Group on
Direct Broadcast Satellites on its second session, to
prepare reports as suggested by the Working Group
as basic documents for the work of that Group at its
session in May 1970;
15. Requests tbe specialized agencies and the Intemational Atomic Energy Agency to examine the
particular problems which arise or which may arise
from the use of outer space in the fields within their
competence and which should in their opinion be
brought to the attention of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, and to report thereon
to the Committee for its consideration, as indicated
in paragraph 2 above;
16. Invites the specialized agencies concemed and
the International Atomic Energy Agency to furnish the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space with
progress reports on their work in the field of the peaceful uses of outer space;
17. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to continue its work as set out in the
present resolution and in previous General Assembly
resolutions, and to report to the Assembly at its twentyfifth session.
1836th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
16 lbid.,

Supplement No. 21 (A/7621), para. 12.
21A (A/7621/Add.1), paras. 9-11.

17 !bid., Supplement No.

B
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the importance of intemational cooperation in developing the rule of law in the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space,
Confirming the terms of reference assigned to ~e
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space m
General Assembly resolution 1721 E (XVI) of 20
December 1961,
Recalling that in its resolutions 1963 (XVIII) of
13 December 1963, 2130 (XX) of 21 December
1965 and 2222 (XXI) of 19 December 1966 it requested the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space to prepare a draft agreement on liability for
damage caused by objects launched into outer space,
Recalling further that in its resolution 2345 (XXII)
of 19 December 1967, in which it commended the
Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Retum
of Astronauts and the Retum of Objects Launcbed
into Outer Space, it also called upon the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to complete
urgently the preparation of the draft agreement on
liability,
Recalling also its resolution 2453 B (XXIII) of 20
December 1968 in which it requested the Committee
on the Peaceful U ses of Outer Space to complete
urgently the preparation of the draft agreement on
liability,
N oting that various proposals have been submitted
to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
and that a considerable number of provisions have
been agreed upon in its Legal Sub-Committee,
l. Regrets that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space has not been able to complete the
drafting of a liability convention, a task assigned to
it by the General Assembly during the last six years;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the efforts made
by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
at its twelfth session to complete the preparation of
this draft with a view to its submission to the General
Assembly at its twenty-fourth session;
3. Notes that a certain rapprochement of views
was achieved in the negotiations on the draft convention on liability in 1969;
4. Expresses its deep dissatisfaction that efforts to
complete the convention have not been successful and,
at the same time, urges the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to complete the draft convention on liability in time for final consideration by
the General Assembly during its twenty-fifth session;
5. Emphasizes that the convention is intended to
establish intemational rules and procedures concerning
liability for damage caused by the launching of objects
into outer space and to ensure, in particular, prompt
and equitable compensation for damage.
1836th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
2602 (XXIV). Question of general and complete
disarmament
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2456 D (XXIII) of 20
December 1968,
