144

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Recalling its resolution 35/97 of 5 December 1980, in
which it reiterated its appeal to the international community
to assist the Comoros in overcoming its financial and economic difficulties,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for the
Comoros;
2. Notes with satisfaction the response by various Member States and organizations to its appeal and that of the
Secretary-General for assistance to finance, in whole or in
part, a number of projects identified in the annex to the
report of the Secretary-General of 3 November 1977 198 and
in subsequent reports; 199
3. Notes with concern, however, that the assistance thus
far provided continues to fall short of the country's urgent
requirements and that a substantial amount of assistance is
still urgently required to carry out the projects identified in
the annexes to the reports of the Secretary-General;
4. Reiterates its appeal to Member States, regional and
interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
bodies to provide effective and continuous financial, material and technical assistance to the Comoros to help it
overcome its financial and economic difficulties, in particular its budgetary and balance-of-payments deficits;
5. Urges Member States to give special consideration
to the inclusion of the Comoros in their bilateral and multilateral programmes of development assistance and, in
cases where assistance programmes for the Comoros are
already in force, to expand them, wherever possible;
6. Also urges the international community to take fully
into account, in providing assistance, the priority which the
Comoros gives to projects in the fields of infrastructure,
transport and telecommunications;
7. Invites the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Bank
and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to
bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their
consideration, the special needs of the Comoros and to report
the decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General by
15July 1982;
8. Appeals to the international community to contribute
to the special account which was established at United Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 32/92 of 13 December
1977, for the purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to the Comoros;
9. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to increase their
current programmes of assistance to the Comoros, to cooperate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an
effective international programme of assistance and to report
periodically to him on the steps they have taken and the
resources they have made available to assist that country:
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to the Comoros;
(b) To keep the situation in the Comoros under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and international financial institutions con-

1
••
199

A/32/208 and Add. I and 2.
A/33/170, A/34/361 and Corr. I, A/35/394, A/36/268 and Corr. I

cerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council.
at its second regular session of I982, of the current status
of the special programme of economic assistance for the
Comoros;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
of the Comoros and the progress made in organizing and
implementing the special programme of economic assistance
for that country in time for the matter to be considered by
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/213. Assistance to Nicaragua
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/8 of 25 October 1979 and 35/
84 of 5 December 1980 concerning assistance for the reconstruction of Nicaragua,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Nicaragua,200
Noting with satisfaction the support which Member
States, the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system have given to the efforts of the
Government of Nicaragua for the reconstruction of the
country,
Considering that, despite the efforts of the Government,
the economic situation of Nicaragua has not yet returned
to normal and continues to require the assistance of the
international community,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts regarding assistance to Nicaragua;
2. Urges all Governments to continue contributing to
the reconstruction and development of Nicaragua;
3. Requests the bodies of the United Nations system to
continue and increase their assistance in this sphere;
4. Recommends that Nicaragua should continue to receive treatment appropriate to the special needs of the country until the economic situation returns to normal;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981
36/214. Assistance to Zambia
The General Assembly,
Recalling previous United Nations resolutions concerning
the question of assistance to Zambia, in particular Security
Council resolution 329 (1973) of 10 March 1973 and Economic and Social Council resolutions 2012 (LXI) of 3 August I976 and 2093 (LXIII) of 26 July 1977, which
commended the decision of the Government of Zambia in
1968 to implement progressively United Nations mandatory
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia in accordance with
Security Council resolution 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 455 ( 1979) of
23 November 1979 and General Assembly resolution 33/
131 of 19 December 1978, in which the Assembly strongly
endorsed the appeals made by the Council and the SecretaryGeneral for international assistance to Zambia,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 201
to which was annexed the report of the review mission
"" A/36/280.
·'"' A/36/270-S/1467.s and Corr. I.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

which he sent to Zambia in response to General Assembly
resolution 35/94 of 5 December 1980,
Regretting that the international community has not thus
far provided assistance to Zambia on a scale commensurate
with the costs, as called for in Security Council resolutions
253 (1968) of 29 May 1968. 277 ( I970) of 18 March 1970
and 329 (1973) of JO March 1973,
1. Endorses the assessment and recommendations contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance provided
thus far to Zambia by various States and regional and international organizations;
3. Draws the attention of the international community
to the additional financial, economic and material assistance
required by Zambia, as identified in the annex to the report
of the Secretary-General, and to the particular need for
assistance in the transport sector;
4. Calls upon Member States. regional and interregional
organizations and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to provide financial, material and technical assistance to Zambia, wherever possible in the form
of grants, and urges them to give special consideration to
the early inclusion of Zambia in their programmes of bilateral or multilateral development assistance, if it is not
already included;
5. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank.
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development.
the World Food Programme, the World Health Oq~anization
and the United Nat10ns Children's Fund-to mamtain and
increase their current and future programmes of assistance
to Zambia, in order to enable it to carry out its planned
development projects without interruption;
6. Further requests the appropriate specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system to
report periodically to the Secretary-General on the steps
they have taken and the resources they have made available
to assist Zambia;
7. Invites the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Bank
and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to
bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their
consideration, the special needs of Zambia and to report the
decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General by 15
July 1982;
8. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to continue his humanitarian assistance programmes on behalf of refugees in Zambia, and urges Member States and the international community to provide him
speedily with the necessary means to carry out those programmes, as indicated in the Secretary-General's report:
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Zambia;
(b) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary arrangements are made for continuing the organization of the
international programme of assistance to Zambia and the
mobilization of resources;
(c) To keep the economic situation in Zambia under
constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, the specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental organizations and international financial in-

145

stitutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social
Council, at its second regular session of 1982, of the current
status of the special programme of economic assistance for
Zambia;
(d) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
of Zambia and the progress made in organizing and implementing the special programme of economic assistance for
that country in time for the matter to be considered by the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/215. Assistance to Mozambique
The General Assemhly,
Recalling the decision of the Government of Mozambique
to implement mandatory sanctions agai1;1st the ill~gal regim~
in Southern Rhodesia in accordance with Secunty Council
resolution 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968,
Recognizing the substantial economic sacrifices made by
Mozambique in the implementation of its decision to enforce
United Nations sanctions and to close its borders with Southern Rhodesia,
Recalling Security Council resolution 386 (1976) of 17
March 1976, in which the Council appealed to all States to
provide, and requested the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the appropriate organizations of the United Nations system, to organize with immediate effect, financial,
technical and material assistance to enable Mozambique to
carry out its economic development programme normally
and to enhance its capacity to implement fully the United
Nations mandatory sanctions,
Noting with deep concern the loss of life and the destruction of such essential infrastructure as roads, railways,
bridges, petroleum facilities, electricity supply, schools and
hospitals identified in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General of 16 August 1979, 202
Recalling further its resolutions 31/43 of I December
1976, 32/95 of 13 December 1977, 33/126 of 19 December
1978, 34/ I 29 of 14 December 1979 and 35/99 of 5 December 1980, in which it urged the international community to
respond effectively and generously with assistance to
Mozambique,
Noting that the independence of Zimbabwe provides both
an opportunity and a challenge for the international community, particularly for those neighbouring States whose
economies have been so closely linked to that country,
Bearing in mind the fact that the drought which affected
six out of the ten provinces of Mozambique has attained the
dramatic proportions of a natural calamity,
Having examined the document on the drought in Mozambique, 2113 which contains an assessment of the immediate
requirements for urgent assistance from the international
community,
Noting that a mission of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Food Programme and the World Meterological Organization visited
Mozambique in July 1980 in order to assess the emergency
food situation in terms of the partial loss of cereals due to
the drought which had devastated part of the country,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General of
21 August 1981 204 and noting with concern that the economic and financial po~ition of that country remains grave
and heset by hudgetary and balance-of-payments deficits
"" A/34/377.
'"' AIC.2/3515. annex.
,,., A 116/267-S 1 14627.
