A/64/PV.81

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

81

st plenary meeting
Monday, 29 March 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Hackett
(Barbados), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now consider the reports of the Fifth Committee
under agenda items 130, 132, 138, 141 and 142.
I request Ms. Yuliana Zhivkova Georgieva of
Bulgaria, Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee, to
introduce, in one intervention, the reports of the
Committee that are before the Assembly.

the adoption of a draft resolution, which the Committee
adopted without a vote.
On agenda item 132, the Fifth Committee
recommends, in paragraphs 8 and 9 of its report
contained in document A/64/548/Add.2, entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011”, the
adoption of two draft resolutions. Draft resolution I
deals with special subjects relating to the programme
budget for the biennium 2010-2011, and draft
resolution II relates to conditions of service for the
ad litem judges of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, which the Committee
adopted without a vote.

Ms. Georgieva (Bulgaria), Rapporteur of the
Fifth Committee: I have the honour today to present to
the General Assembly the reports of the Fifth
Committee that contain recommendations on issues
that require action during the first part of the resumed
sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly.

Under agenda item 138, entitled “Joint Inspection
Unit”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/64/724, the adoption of a draft resolution
that was adopted without a vote.

The Fifth Committee met from 1 to 19 March
2010 and held five plenary meetings and numerous
rounds of informal consultations and informal informal
consultations. I therefore have the honour to present
the following brief report on the work of the Fifth
Committee.

The report of the Committee under agenda item
141, entitled “Review of the implementation of
General Assembly resolutions 48/218 B, 54/244 and
59/272”, is contained in document A/64/723. In
paragraph 6 of that report, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of a draft
resolution that it adopted without a vote.

With regard to agenda item 130, entitled “Review
of the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly, in paragraph 6
of its report contained in document A/64/596/Add.1,

Finally, under agenda item 142, entitled
“Administration of justice at the United Nations”, the
Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of its report
contained in document A/64/582/Add.1, the adoption
of a draft decision that it adopted without a vote.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-29374 (E)

*1029374*

A/64/PV.81

I wish to thank delegations for their cooperation
and to assure them that the changes made in the course
of the Fifth Committee’s 27th formal meeting have
been duly taken into account and are reflected in the
draft resolutions and reports before the Assembly.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
reports of the Fifth Committee that are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
members are notified otherwise in advance.
Agenda item 130 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/596/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution, entitled “Towards an accountability
system in the United Nations Secretariat”. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

2

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/259).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 130.
Agenda item 132 (continued)
Proposed programme budget for the biennium
2010-2011
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/548/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Special subjects relating to the programme budget for
the biennium 2010-2011”. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
64/260).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Conditions of service for the ad litem judges
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda”.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
64/261).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
132.
Agenda item 138
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/724)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Report of the Joint Inspection Unit
for 2009 and programme of work for 2010”. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

10-29374

A/64/PV.81

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/262).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 138.
Agenda item 141
Review of the implementation of General Assembly
resolutions 48/218 B, 54/244 and 59/272
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/723)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/263).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 141.
Agenda item 142 (continued)
Administration of Justice at the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/582/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft decision recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take action on the draft decision.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 142, as well as its consideration of all the
reports of the Fifth Committee before it.

Agenda item 128 (continued)
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
Letter from the Secretary-General (A/64/710)
Letter from the President of the Security
Council (A/64/727)
The Acting President: In document A/64/710,
the Secretary-General transmits a letter dated 1 March
2010 from Judge Patrick Robinson, President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
regarding the case of the Prosecutor v. Popović et al.
In document A/64/727, the President of the
Security Council transmits to the President of the
General Assembly the text of Council resolution 1915
(2010) of 18 March 2010, whereby the Council, inter
alia, decided
“that the total number of ad litem judges serving
at the International Tribunal may temporarily
exceed the maximum of twelve provided for in
article 12, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the
International Tribunal, to a maximum of thirteen
at any one time, returning to a maximum of
twelve by 30 June 2010, or upon completion of
the Popović case if sooner”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides that the
total number of ad litem judges serving at the
International Tribunal may temporarily exceed the
maximum of 12 provided for in article 12, paragraph 1,
of the Statute of the International Tribunal, to a
maximum of 13 at any one time, returning to a
maximum of 12 by 30 June 2010, or upon completion
of the Popović case if sooner?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 128.
Agenda item 112 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(j) Appointment of three ad litem judges of the
United Nations Dispute Tribunal

10-29374

3

A/64/PV.81

Letter from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the General Assembly
(A/64/664)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
by its resolution 63/253 of 24 December 2008, the
General Assembly decided, inter alia, to appoint three
ad litem judges for a term of one year each to address
the problem of the backlog of cases being transferred
from the old system to the Dispute Tribunal.
At its sixty-third session, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Internal Justice Council,
appointed the following persons as ad litem judges of
the Dispute Tribunal for a one-year term of office
beginning on 1 July 2009: Mr. Michael Adams
(Australia), Mr. Jean-François Cousin (France) and Ms.
Nkemdilim Amelia Izuako (Nigeria).
In document A/64/664, the Chairperson of the
Internal Justice Council has indicated that the Council
feels that
“the threat of the United Nations Dispute
Tribunal being ‘swamped’ by the influx of new
cases ‘before it has really got up and running’
would ’severely prejudice the implementation of
the new system’”.
The Internal Justice Council has therefore advised the
Secretary-General that “this undesirable result could be
avoided if the terms of office of the current ad litem
judges were to be extended for a further 12 months”.
On the recommendation of the Fifth Committee,
the General Assembly took a decision earlier today to
extend the tenure of three ad litem judges of the
Dispute Tribunal for one additional year beginning on
1 July 2010. The Internal Justice Council has
recommended the extension of the terms of office of
the following three ad litem judges for an additional
one-year term of office beginning on 1 July 2010:
Michael Adams (Australia), Jean-François Cousin
(France) and Nkemdilim Amelia Izuako (Nigeria).
May I therefore take it that the Assembly wishes
to extend the terms of office of the three ad litem
judges Michael Adams, Jean-François Cousin and
Nkemdilim Amelia Izuako for an additional one-year
term of office beginning on 1 July 2010?
It was so decided.

4

The Acting President: May I also take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (j) of agenda item 112?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Request for the inclusion of an additional subitem in the agenda of the sixty-fourth session:
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs:
Election of a member of the International Court
of Justice (A/64/236)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take up a request submitted by the SecretaryGeneral in document A/64/236 relating to the election
of a member of the International Court of Justice.
In his note, the Secretary-General informed the
General Assembly of the resignation of Judge, former
Vice-President and former President Shi Jiuyong as a
member of the International Court of Justice effective
28 May 2010. A vacancy in the Court will therefore
occur on 28 May 2010.
The agenda of the sixty-fourth session of the
General Assembly does not contain a sub-item on
election of members of the International Court of
Justice.
The Secretary-General has therefore deemed it
necessary to request, pursuant to rule 15 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, the inclusion in the
agenda of the current session of an additional sub-item
entitled “Election of a member of the International
Court of Justice”, under agenda item 110.
Owing to the nature of the item, unless there is an
objection, may I take it that the General Assembly
agrees that the relevant provision of rule 40 of the rules
of procedure, which would require a meeting of the
General Committee on the question of the inclusion of
this additional sub-item on the agenda, could be
waived?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly, on the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral, wishes to include in the agenda of the current
session, an additional sub-item entitled “Election of a

10-29374

A/64/PV.81

member of the International Court of Justice”, as a
sub-item of agenda item 110 under heading I?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to consider this sub-item directly
in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.

10-29374

The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that this additional sub-item becomes
sub-item (c) of agenda item 110 on the agenda of the
current session.
I should also like to inform the General Assembly
that the election to fill the vacancy shall take place on
29 June 2010.
The meeting adjourned at 10.30 a.m.

5
