VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Thlrd Commlttee

Cultural Rights,76 which will be entrusted from 1987 on
with the important task of overseeing the implementation
of the Intemational Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights;
5. Urges the Secretary-General to take determined
steps, within existing resources, to give publicity to the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and
to ensure that it receives full administrative support in order to enable it to discharge its functions effectively;
6. Affirms the importance and relevance, to programmes and activities being undertaken throughout the
United Nations system, of reports submitted by States
parties to the Intemational Covenants on Human Rights
to the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
7. Decides to discuss at its forty-second session, under
the item entitled "lntemational Covenants on Human
Rights", the question ofthe indivisibility and interdependence of economic, social, cultural, civil and political
rights.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/118.

tific and Cultural Organization in its resolution 2.2, 78
adopted at its twenty-third session, conceming the proclamation of an intemational literacy year,
l. Approves the appeal made by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to proclaim an intemational literacy year;
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council to consider
in 1987 the question of declaring 1989 as the intematio~al
literacy year and to inform the General Assembly of 1ts
recommendation at its forty-second session;
3. Requests the Director-General of the U~it~ Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orgamzatton to
prepare, in co-operation with other interested o~ganizations, his suggestions on the observance of the mtemational literacy year and to submit them to the General Assembly at its forty-second session, through the Economic
and Social Council;
4. Encourages the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to prepare, in accordance
with General Conference resolution 4.6, 78 a plan of action
designed to assist ali States in eradicating illiteracy by the
year 2000, whereby the impetus given by the intemational
literacy year will be duly furthered.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

Efforts and measures to promote the eradication of illiteracy

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights 2 and the Intemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights22 the inalienable right of everyone to education is recognized,
Mindful of the fact that the eradication of illiteracy is
one of the paramount objectives of the Intemational Developmen t Strat~y for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
Recognizing that the elimination of illiteracy constitutes
a prerequisite for ensuring the right to education,
Emphasizing that widespread illiteracy, especially in
many developing countries, seriously hinders the process
of economic and social development and cultural and
spiritual advancement,
Emphasizing further that this situation is utterly incompatible with what is required by the great advances in the
scientific and technical revolution that mankind is witnessing,
Convinced that the process of education can make an indispensable contribution to the achievement of social progress, mutual understanding and co-operation among nations,
Mindful of the fact that the eradication of illiteracy calls
for world-wide co-operation and joint efforts,
Consideringthat the complete elimination ofilliteracy in
all regions of the world should be recognized as a priority
objective of the intemational community,
Convinced that the elaboration of a global strategy for
the eradication of illiteracy and the organization of a
world-wide literacy campaign will promote deeper understanding by the world public of the various aspects of the
problem of illiteracy and help to intensify efforts to spread
literacy and education,
Taking into consideration the appeal made by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scien76 See Economic and Social Council resolution 1985/17 of 28 May
1985.
77 See resolution 35/56, annex, sect. II.

177

41/119.

International Covenants on Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/51 of 14 December 1978,
34/45 of 23 November 1979, 35/132 of 11 December
1980, 36/58 of 25 November 1981, 37/191 of 18 December 1982, 38/116 and 38/117 of 16 December 1983,
39/136 and 39/138 of 14 December 1984 and 40/115 and
40/116 of 13 December 1985,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General79 on
the status of the Intemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 22 the lntemational Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights22 and the Optional Protocol to
the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 22
Noting with appreciation that, following its appeal, more
Member States have acceded to the lntemational Covenants on Human Rights, 24
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights
Committee in the implementation of the Intemational
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol thereto,
Taking note of the approach adopted by the Human
Rights Committee at its twenty-eighth session80 in reviewing its activities, setting priorities and seeking savings that
would not affect the Committee's vital work,
Taking into account the useful work of the Sessional
Working Group of Govemmental Experts on the Implementation ofthe Intemational Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
Bearing in mind the important responsibilities of the
Economic and Social Council in relation to the Intemational Covenants on Human Rights,
78 See United Nations Educational, Scientiflc and Cultural
Organization, Records of the General Conference, Twenty-third Session,
vol. 1, Resolutions, sect. 111.
7" A/41/509.
80 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-first Session,
Supplement 'Vo. 40 (A/41/40).

178

General Assembly-Forty-fint Session

Welcoming the establishment, pursuant to Economic
and Social Council resolution 1985/17 of28 May 1985, of
the Committee on Economk, Social and Cultural Rights
to oversee the implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
Noting with concern the critical situation with regard to
delays in the submission of reports due \lnder the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Noting that 1986 marks the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultiiral Rights and the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights,
l. Takes note with appreciation ofthe report ofthe Human Rights Committee on its twenty-sixth, twentyseventh and twenty-eighth sessions, 80 and expresses its
satisfaction with tbe serious and constructive manner in
which the Cómmittee is continuing to undertake its functions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the States parties to the
lntemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights that
have submitted their reports to the Human Rights Committee under article 40 of the Covenant and urges States
parties that have not yet done so to submi.l their reports as
speedily as possible;
•

3. Urges those States parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights that have been requested by the Human Rights Committee to provide additional information to comply with that request;
4. Commends the States parties to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights that
have submitted their reports under article 16 ofthe Covenant and urges States that have not yet done so to submit
their reports as soon as possible;
5. Notes with satisfaction that the majority of States
parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and an increasing number of States parties to
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, have been represented by experts for the presentation of their reports, thereby assisting the Human
Rights Committee and the Economic and Social Council
in their work, and hopes tlntt ali States parties to both
Covenants will arrange such representation in the future;
6. Again urges ali States that have not yet done so to
become parties to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International
Covenant on Civil ánd PCllitical Rights, as well as to consider acceding to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
1. Invites the States parties to the litternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to consider making the
declaration provided for in article 41 of the Covenant;
8. Emphasizes the ithportance of the strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and, where applicable, the Optional Protocol to
the lnternational Coverlant on Civil and Political Rights;
9. Stresses the importance of avoiding the erosion of
human rights by derogation and underlines the necessity
of strict observance of the agreed conditions and procedures for derogation;
.. 10. Recommends to States parties that they continuátly review whether any reservation made in respect of the
provisions of the lnternational Covenants on Human
Rights should be upheld;

11. Urges States parties to continue to pay active attention to the protection and promotion of civil and political
rights, as well as economic, social and cultural rights;
12. Urges States parties to the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the specialized
agencies and other relevant United Nations bodies to extend their full support and co-operation to the Committee
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Human Rights Committee informed ofthe relevant activities
of the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the Commission on Human Rights, the SubCommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Wornen, and also to transmit the annual reports ofthe Human Rights Committee to
those bodies;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its forty-second session a report
on the status of the lnternational Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on
Civil and Política! Rights and the Optional Protocol to the
lntemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
15. Again urges the Secretary-General, taking into account the suggestions ofthe Human Rights Committee, to
take determined steps, within existing resources, to give
more publicity to the work of the Committee and, similarly, to the work of the Economic and Social Council, to
maintain satisfactory programmes of meetings and to improve the administrative and related arrangements to enable them to carry out effectively their respective functions
under the Intemational Covenants on Human Rights;
16. Welcomes the progress already made with a view
to the publication of the official public records of the Human Rights Committee in bound volumes and looks forward to further progress in this regard;
17. Encourages ali Govemments to publish the texts of
the Intemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the lntemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in as many
languages as possible and to distribute them and make
them known as widely as possible in their territories;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Centre for Human Rights ofthe Secretariat effectively assists the Human Rights Committee and the Economic and
Social Council in the implementation of their respective
functions under the International Covenants on Human
Rights.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/120.

Setting international standards in the field of
human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling the extensive network of international standards in the field of human rights, which it, other United
Nations bodies and the specialized agencies, have established,
Emphasizing the primacy of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 2 the lntemational Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights 22 and the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 22 in this network,
