TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
.th
MEETING:

NEW

12 AUGUST

1968

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/

Adoption

of the agenda

1438)

.. . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . ,. . . , ,. , . . . . , .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The situation in the Middle East:
(n,J Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representative
of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/86 16);
(b,J Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representative
of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/86 17);
(c,J Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative
of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/872 1);
(d) Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent Representative: of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8724)
. . . .. . . . . . .

slPV.1438

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
Supplements of $he Official Records of the Security Couxil.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York

AND THIRTY-EIGHTH

on Monday,

President: Mr, Jo?10August0 DE ARAUJO CASTRO
(Brazil).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
I-Iungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1438)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
”
of the Security Council (S/8616);
Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8617);
Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8721);
Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8724).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8616);
(b) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8617);
(cl Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8721 1;
(d) Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8724)

MEETING

12 August 1968, at 3 p.m.
Security Council table, and Mr. M. El Kony (United Arab
Republic), Mr. A, Pachachi (Iraq), Mr. G. Tomeh (Syria)
and Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Couixil chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
Jordan.

I call on the representative of

3. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): The Israeli representative has
repeatedly alleged that their military operations and air
attacks were aimed at and confined to what he called “the
terrorist bases” and that “our forces did not bomb civilian
installations”. But no matter how ‘many times Mr. Tekoah
repeats the same allegations, he is not,able to conceal the
truth. Both attacks, on Irbid and Salt, were aimed at the
civilian population, their farms and farming equipment. The
attacks on the civilians were not accidental; the motives of
the Israelis can be ascertained from their own utterances.
The following are bui some examples.
4. Ha Tsofeh, an Israeli newspaper, reported on 5 August
1968 that “the leaders of Jordan must understand that
unless they bring about a drastic change in their policies,
tragedies and calamities will be brought upon Jordan and
upon its people.”
5, Ha Aretz, another Israeli newspaper, stated on 5 August
1968-that is, one day after the Israeli attack on Salt:
“Israel did not attack the Jordanian military positions in
the raid of yesterday. However, the Jordanian authorities,
who must 1,earn the truth of Israel’s pronouncements,
should take the raids as a warning and an ultimatum,”
6. According to The New York Times of 6 August 1968,
an Israeli official was reported as saying: “We realize that
the saboteurs themselves are nearly all Syrians and
Egyptians”-which
is not true-“but what puzzles us is why
Hussein gives them the support he does, He must know by
now that he will be the one to pay the consequences.”
7. The following day, 7 August, Mr. Eshkol warned the
Arabs: “the enemy will be made to pay the price in full.”
This was also quoted yesterday in The New York Times.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions previously taken by the Security Council, I propose to invite
the representatives of Jordan, Israel, the United Arab
Republic, Iraq, Syria and Saudi Arabia to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.

8. The Christian Science Monitor of 14 June reported the
following: “Israel Defence Minister Moshe Dayan was
quoted by news agencies as having told the Israel Knesset,
or Parliament, on 12 June, ‘we will do everything possible
to destroy the influence of the Hashemite King of
Transjordan.’ ” Mr. Dayan certainly knows that Jordannot Transjordan-is the name which comprises both the
west and the east Bank,

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the

9. Describing what happened to the Jordan Valley after
the Israeli attack on the city of Irbid, Mr. John Cooley,

Mr. Mohammad Abdul Razzak Abou Shahtout,
Mr, ‘Mohammad Ali Hiyarri, all from the town of Salt.

writing in the Christian Science Monitor of 25 June 1968,
had this to say:

and

(g) How would he justify and explain the bombing of
Red Crescent ambulances while they were aiding the
wounded, thus causing the destruction of four ambulances
of the Red Crescent? Six of the wounded were burnt inside
the ambulances, and on-e of the drivers was also killed.

“Once North Shunah was a thriving market town of
about 5,000 people. East Jordan’s richest farm land,
pro.!ucing bananas, oranges, grain and vegetables, extends
from here up and down the Jordan Valley.
“Since last winter’s fighting in the Valley and especially
since the nine-hour artillery duel and Israeli air attacks on
June 4, Shunah is a desolate, nearly deserted place. Like
the Jordan Valley towns and hamlets, its peoples have
contributed to the flow of about 35,000 additional
refugees driven east. Every building in Shunah appears to
have suffered hits from shelling and air strafing. On
June 4, anti-personnel bombs landed, throwing steel
fragments in all directions. They caused casualties here
and in the larger city of Irbid.”

(h) How does he justify and explain the use of napalm
bombs in most of these attacks?
13. These are but a few examples of what our civilians
were subjected to as a result of the Israeli air attacks against
our farmers and innocent civilians. The pictures presented
in document S/8739 of 9 August show beyond doubt that
Mr. Tekoah, through his statements, intended with malice
to mislead the Council. His contemptuous attitude is very
clear, He has not said anything so far about the use of
napalm against innocent men, women and children, However, and in order to put an end to Israeli distortions and
allegations, the President of the Red Crescent in Jordan has
already invited the International Red Cross in Geneva to
send representatives to Amman to see for themselves the
brutality of the Israeli crimes. Right now, while I am
speaking here, a representative of the Red Cross in Amman
is visiting fields and hospitals, talking to victims and seeing
for himself the extent of the casualties and damage caused
by the destructive weapons and napalm bombs.

10. Mr. Dayan, only thirty-eight days before bombing
Irbid, said: “The Jordan Valley will turn into a battlefield
and there will not be room there for civilian life.” Sure
enough, after the bombing of Irbid and the burning of the
crops in the Jordan Valley, Mr. Dayan’s sinister statement
to end farming in the Jordan Valley was fulfilled.
11. When Mr, Dayan visited the towns of Ramallah and
El-Bira only last Wednesday-Wednesday of last week,
7 August-the Mayor of El-Bira asked him permission for
the villagers of Zeita, Beit Nuba and Yalu to go back to
their lands and rebuild their villages, which had been razed
to the ground immediately after your cease-fire resolution.
This was the subject of my letter of 18 June 1968
[S/8642]. Mr. Dayan said : No. We will resettle them
elsewhere if they want, but to rebuild their villages on their
original lands in Latrun, never. He then added that if they
chose to adopt the position of refugees-which of course
they did not-then their problem would be the affair of the
United Nations. I am quoting from Z%e Jerusalem Post of
9 August 1968.

14. I now turn to the Israeli allegations about El-Fatah
and the so-called role of Jordan and other Arab countries
vis-a-vis this Organization. On 5 August, Mr. Tekoah said:
“Jordan became the principal base for continued Arab
aggression against Israel. Special military camps were
established to train saboteurs. Recruiting centres were
opened in Amman. Officers and men of regular Egyptian
and Syrian army units were transferred to Jordan and
assigned to terror operations. Iraqi troops, openly supporting and participating in the continuation of warfare
against Israel, were given the free run of the country.”
[1434th meeting, para. 65.1

12. These are but some quotations. One cannot now but
wonder at how Mr. Tekoah will explain to the Council the
following details of the air attacks of 4 August 1968:

15. I am instructed by my Government to state the
following points in regard to these malicious Israeli allegations: first, no centres for recruitment were ever opened in
Amman; secondly, the Jordanian Government does not
know of any bases of fedaveen, and the Israeli allegations
that there are special training camps have no foundation
whatsoever; thirdly, the Iraqi army units are in Jordan for
defensive purposes against any Israeli aggression, and they
do not help or train fedayeen; fourthly, the Jordanian
Government categorically denies the Israeli allegation that
there is a co-ordination among the Governments of Jordan,
the United Arab Republic, Syria and Iraq, on the one hand,
and the fedayeen, on the other,

(a) The bombing of a public works camp, causing serious
injuries to the laborers in the camp;
(b) The bombing of coffee shops in the Wadi Sho’aib
area;
(c) The bombing of the workers of the Ministry of
Communications engaged in repairing the telephone lines,
injuring seven of them;
(d) The bombing of farmers and the burning of their
crops and over 1,000 olive trees by napalm bombs;
(e) The bombing of trucks carrying crops from the fields;

16. In an attempt to confuse the issue further, Mr. Tekoah
alleged that an Iraqi officer of El-Fatah was killed and
buried in Iraq. This again is not true, There are no Iraqi
officers in El-Fatah. The one buried in Iraq is a Palestinian
engineer. His name is Oman Ali ElSaratawi; he is the son of
Ah Saratawi, a well-known Palestinian educator who was
expelled from Palestine in 1948 and who resided in Iraq.

(f) The bombing of men, women and children in the
suburbs of Salt, causing the death of many. I will mention
just a few names of those innocent victims of the Israeli
raids: Mr. Thafir Said Dawood, who is a member of the Salt
municipal council; Mr. Hashim Fareed Ja’afran Hadidi,
2

17. The truth of the matter is that the Israelis want to
convince the world and the Security Council that the
Palestinians are happy and contented with the usurpation
of their rights and their homes by the Zionists, that they do
not resist the usurpation and occupation, and that it is the
Arab States and not the Palestinians who are actually
resisting the foreign occupation. It seems that Mr. Tekoah is
carried far away by his fantasies in concealing the efforts of
a people expelled from its homeland and struggling ,for
peace and dignity.

them-all of them-to judge the present clear-cut case of
aggression on its merits. Inaction on the part of the Council
will accommodate the aggressor. A routine resolution will
not lead to peace, it will not help the area; it will further
complicate the situation in the area. I appeal to the Council
to realize this important factor.
22. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I call on the representative of

23. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): There are many truths which
the ancients recognized. Tacitus said: “It is human to hate
those whom we have injured.” Again the Security Council
has been treated to the same spectacle. The aggressor comes
before the Council to complain about the consequences of
his aggression, The United Nations cannot serve as an
insurance company, reimbursing States for damage they
incur in waging war in contravention of the Charter. Indeed
war brings about suffering, damage and casualties. There is
one way, and one way only, to put an end to this tragedy.
The war must stop, not be pursued in defiance of the entire
world.

18. During the last meeting, Mr. Tekoah said that the Arab
States have disregarded the United Nations resolutions and
world opinion. It is common knowledge now that it was
Israel that defied every United Nations resolution for the
last twenty years. Today it is Israel which is refusing to
heed the’ General Assembly and Security Council resolutions vis-a-vis Jerusalem, the last of which was taken by this
Council in May [resolution 252(19&t?)], with thirteen
votes in favour and only the United States and Canada
abstaining. It is Israel which is refusing to implement
Security Council resolution 237 (1967), requesting the
return of the inhabitants expelled or having fled as a result
of last June’s hostilities. Only last Wednesday, Mr. Dayan
said that they would not accept the inhabitants and that
Israel would not permit the return of war refugees because
the Israeli Government’s position was that this was a matter
to be discussed at a Conference table. Above all, it is Israel
which is, to this very minute, refusing to announce without
reservation the acceptance of the November resolution and
its implementation.

24. I see no reason why one should give more credence to
the partisan fabrications of the Jordanian representative
concerning the action of 4 August than to eye-witness
accounts. At the previous meeting I brought evidence from
such Arab eye-witnesses and from other Arab sources
proving that of the thirty-four killed in the action, as
reported by Mr. El-Farra himself, all were either El-Fatah
members or military personnel. Today I should like to add
the following description dispatched from Beirut and
published in The Daily Telegraph of 8 August: “British
university students, including girls, watched unharmed as
Jordanian anti-aircraft guns Bred at the Israeli planes over
the east bank of the river Jordan.” Surely t!le airplanes
were not instructed to draw a distinction between civilians
of different nationalities on the ground. They were ordered
not to strike at civilians in general, whether Jordanians or
others. The report in The Daily Telegraph from Beirut
continues: “The Israeli planes bombed two bases said to be
used by the El-Fatah. One base was believed to be the
guerrillas’ main training camp, the other their headquarters.”

19. There is a new generation, especially among intellectuals in Israel, who feel that they were born to be the
victims of the arrogance of the Zionists for the last twenty
years. This generation wants genuine peace in a world of
“togetherness”. They have had enough of the Zionist blind
dogma aiming at wars and expansions. They are fed up with
being taught hatred every day ‘and with discrimination
between Jews and Gentiles. They are people of a new
generation who want peace, genuine peace, but their voice
is still not heard. Eventually their voice of reason will
prevail over Mr. Tekoah’s voice of hatred, the voice with
which he has repeatedly preached in this Council.
Mr. Tekoah’s reasoning and Hitlerite utterances fit into the
era of racism, of the supremacy of certain races. His voice
here in the Council is identical with those of South Africa
and Rhodesia. Those voices, whether from Africa cr from
West Asia, do not fit into the spirit of today, and surely not
the world of tomorrow.

25. Rarely have controversy and acrimony raged with
greater frenzy than during our present deliberations. Rarely
has Arab intransigence been so dramatically underscored
and implacability of disagreement so overwhelmingly expressed. Yet not even the wildest flights of hatred, not even
the most extreme dialectical distortions, have obscured or
questioned the central element of the present situation-the
cease-fire. In fact the only agreement visible at present is
the agreement on the existence of the cease-fire. It is with
special care that we must all address ourselves to this
element, the sole mutually accepted and binding common
denominator without which there would be nothing left
but chaos,

20. I have taken a great deal of the Council’s time in
explaining Israel’s aggression. In the present case, I wish to
underline that there are two aggressions: one against Irbid
in June, and one against Salt in August, and we expect a
remedy applying to both aggressions, not one.
21. It is over a week now since I brought this question
before the Security Council. We hope therefore that
adequate action will be taken by the Council with no
further delay. We agree that the bigger the Power the bigger
the responsibility. We want the big Powers-all of them-to
play their parts, their constructive parts, guided by the
Charter, We expect them-all of them-to take a firm stand
on the contemptuous attitude of Israel. We appeal to

26. The cease-fire was meant to bring the hostilities
between the parties to an end, It is clear that the
continuation of hostilities, under any guise whatever, is a
violation of the cease-fire, It is clear that the Security
Council cannot countenance such violations, as it could not
have countenanced violations of the armistice or the truce
in the past.
3

became the Fatah commander’s deputy. His main activity
was in operations and co-ordination with the Jordanian
authorities and army units-where
his previous experience
stood him in good stead. Major Hamdan also organized the
transfer of conscripts for training in Egypt and the receipt
of manpower and weapons from Egypt via the Iraqi Army.

27. It is clear that the cease-fire is not an ambiguous State
but a relationship between the parties imposing definite
obligations on their Governments. According to the
Security Council resolutions, the cease-fire was to terminate
“all ‘military activities in the area” and to constitute “a first
step” towards peace. A government which openly proclaims
the- pursuance of warfare violates the cease-tire. A government which organizes, fmances, trains, arms and assigns
manpower to the continuation of warfare violates the
cease-fire. A government which offers the use of its
territory as a base for waging war violates the cease-fire.

33. He planned sabotage actions and when the Fatal-r
commander was absent made decisions in his place. Arms
and explosive materials were distributed under his direction,

28. How directly and how deeply the Jordanian ,Government is involved in the terror warfare ‘against Israel is
illustrated in the following confidential information which
my Government has decided to release.

34. Together with Arafat, the Fatah commander, he
briefed the saboteurs before they went on a raid. In
incursions which were considered especially important, he
accompanied the commandos to the River Jordan, waiting
there until morning for their return.

29. The Jordanian authorities do not limit themselves to
general support of the terror operations. The Jordanian
authorities participate directly in the terror operations.
There is full operational- co-ordination between the
Jordanian Army and the raider commandos to prevent
clashes as a result of mistaken identity. For that purpose
the commandos are given special guidance concerning the
location of Jordanian minefields on the east bank and of
Jordanian Army ambushes: The Jordanian Army command
has issued instructions to its forces to assist the ‘raider units
in determining the best timing and route for crossing the
cease-fire line. The raider units receive from the Jordanian
Army military intelligence information about Israeli
minefields, defence installations, patrols and posts. It is
from Jordanian military observation posts that they reconnoitre the area into which they plan to penetrate. They are
given passwords to be,used by them and by the Jordanian
Army patrols in the area. In case of encounters with Israeli
forces, they are given covering fire by Jordanian regular
forces. In certain parts of Jordan road-blocks are manned
jointly by soldiers and armed members of the terror
organizations. Such road-blocks can be traversed only by
holders of El-Fatah permits.

35. He left Karameh a day before the Israel Army action
there last 21 March.
36. In the light of this reality the fantasies about the
nature of the terror operations to which Arab representatives and their supporters have subjected the Security
Council are utterly ridiculous.
37. The raiders are well-trained military commandos,
sometimes of Egyptian, Syrian and Iraqi origin, frequently
transferred to terror operations from the regular armies of
the Arab States. They do not operate from within the
territories under Israel control but come from the outside.
They never venture far from the cease-fire line so as to be
able to return immediately and to take refuge in Arabcontrolled territory.
38. These organizations are artificially maintained and
encouraged by the Arab Governments, an expression of the
unabated belligerency of these Governments, a creation
that would crumble the moment the Arab Governments
take one simple step-abide by their cease-fire obligations.
39. Try it and let the world know. Observe the cease-fire;
just stop organizing, training, arming, financing the terror
organizations in defiance of the cease-fire and terror
warfare will end, It will end because the people do not want
it, they are weary of war, they want peace. The ones who
want war are the Arab Governments. To them the people
do not matter, their interests do not count. To them
continued bloodshed is of no consequence. To them, it is of
no significance that the relations between Israelis and Arabs
on the west bank, for instance, have brought us the closest
to understanding and co-operation between the two peoples
since 1948. To them it is still war for war’s sake, not the
search for peace but the justification of war and the
exaltation of murder.

30. It is to be observed that the Syrian-Jordanian frontier
is now open to all who possess El-Fatah cards. These are
officially recognized as entry permits by Jordanian border
guards.
31. A supreme co-ordination committee of the Jordanian
Army and the terror organizations has been recently
established.
32. ,It is interesting that the El-Fatah commander of the
Salt area, Faiz Mahmoud Hamdan, known also as Riad
Khaled, killed in the air action of 4 August, was an officer
of the Jordanian Army and served as a liaison official
between the Fatah command and the Headquarters of the
Jordanian Army. Major Hamdan was the deputy of the
Fatah commander, Yasser Arafat. He assisted the commandos while still an officer in the Jordanian Army, from
which he was transferred to the Fatah. In September 1967
he was responsible for training saboteurs in their Al-Hamma
central camp near Damascus. In January 1968 he went to
Aqaba with a group of saboteurs and organized actions in
the Eilat area in co-operation with soldiers of the 14Ist
Egyptian Commando Battalion. The following month he
went to Karameh, which was then the central base, and

40. Murder it is-cowardly,
contemptible. The entire
world knows it and stands aghast. With so much responsibility for the tragedies that have befalIen the Arab
peoples, will the Arab Governments now bring about the
spiritual catastrophe of their nations by glorifying the kiher
in the dark, the thug who places button-shaped mines in
school-yards, the murderer who opens fire on sleeping
villages and lays mines without knowing or caring who his
victims might be? Is this what the Arab Governments want
to be known as patriotism, as heroism?
4

41. They must stop before it is too late. They must halt
before the assassinbecomes the personification of Arab
chivalry-in our times.

remember that the road to peace lies through the
equitable application of the law to each situation.“1

42. The Arab States have it within their power to
terminate the terror warfare. It is incumbent upon them to
terminate this warfare pursued in violation of their ceasefire obligations.

44. International law and international opinion leave no
room for any doubt that the cease-firemust be maintained
on a basis of strict reciprocity. The prospects for peace
depend in no small measure upon the Security Council’s
strengthening of this fundamental premise. Past weaknesses
on this point in Security Council actions have already had a
most detrimental effect on the situation.

43. The venerable Rene Cassin, an authority on international law, one of the world’s greatest figures in the fight
for human rights and France’s representative in the Human
Rights Commission, wrote on 8 August 1968 in the Nice
Matin about our present deliberations:
“Since the cease-fire order issued by the Security
Council in June 1967 to all the belligerent parties in the
Middle East, the political world has forgotten or pretends
to have forgotten one of the surest principles of international law-namely, that the obligation of one party to
observe the cease-fire is reciprocal to, and inseparable
from, the other party’s obligation to do the same. Clearly,
when the Jordanian Government assumed the obligation
to cease-fire-after being the first to open fire at
Jerusalem-it did so not only in respect of its regular
forces but for all the irregular non-Jordanian forces which
it had allowed to settle on its territory not far from the
capital. Is it not obviously failing to fulfil this obligation
when it gives the members of El-Fatab all kinds of
facilities for crossing the cease-firelines, and also provides
them with military support instead of using its regular
forces to prevent expeditions into Israel?
“The question which arises, not only for the members
of the Security Council but also for the conscience of all
men and all peoples, is this: when a cease-fire is ordered
by the international authority, is it right to ask only one
party to observe the cease-fire, and to let the other party
violate it with impunity? Can we confine the blame to
the party which takes reprisals, and exonerate the party
which struck the first blow?
“No! There is no obligation to keep faith with some
one who breaks his own. It is this principle of the
indivisibility of joint commitments and bilateral agreements which is upheld by the laws and courts of all
countries in disputes between private parties. The international Conference which met at Vienna this year to
codify the law of treaties also upholds this tradition.
“What can we conclude from all this? That the
cease-fire obligation binding Israel is void, since its
neighbours have violated it. It is suspended to the extent
necessary to put an end to the undeniable violations
committed by Israel’s neighbours: violent reactions are
legitimate, Israel has a right to the same treatment as the
other belligerents.
“A unilateral condemnation of the party against which
the cease-fire is frequently violated would be iniquitous.
It must be remembered that when Israel-which had not
retaliated-complained in November 1966 that its farmers
had been shelled by the artillery at Golan, the Security
Council, by its failure to take action, precipitated the
events which led to the war of June 1967. It should now

45. When Jordanian policies and actions become compatible with the cease-fire, warfare by terror,will end and
the parties will be able to devote their efforts to the search
for peaceful agreement.
46. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Jordan in exerciseof his right of reply.
47. Mr. EL-FARRA: Certain points raised this afternoon
by Mr. Tekoah call for an answer.Mr. Tekoah referred to a
cease-fire agreement. He said that the cease-fireis the only
agreement visible. I do not know of any agreement between
Jordan and Israel called a cease-fire.I know that there is a
decision that was taken by the Security Council, We are
abiding by the letter and the spirit of the decision calling
for a cease-fire.
48. But I know of one international agreement-which is
still valid and which continues to be legal and bindingrejected by Israel: it is the Mixed Armistice Agreement
which created the armistice machinery. This is the only
agreement which is binding on Israel and on Jordan, and it
is defied and violated by Israel, despite the fact that United
Nations jurisprudence continues to reiterate that this
international agreement is binding.
49. Mr, Tekoah referred to confidential information. This
is something to attract the’ attention of the Security
Council-“confidential information”, Then he started citing
the very same argument, the very same claims which were
mentioned earlier without this headline “confidential information”. One of the points raised wasthat of the British
students who are now working in the Jordan Valley. We
have 150 students from Western Europe trying to help in
reconstructing what the Israelis destroyed. He said that the
British students-I do not have his exact words-watched
unharmed the Israeli action against the terrorist bases. If
that is part of the confidential information, it is false. I can
prove this by referring to Mr. Tekosh’s source, the Jewish
Chronicle. This is what it said: “Seventy-four British
students are among the 150 students from Western Europe
working during their vacation in the Jordan Valley.
According to Agency reports, they heard”-they did not
watch; they heard; and this is a Jewish source, the Jewish
Chronicle of London-“they heard Israel’s attacks on
El-Fatah bases on Sunday but did not seethem.” That was
the information quoted-I should say misquoted-in the
Council.
50. I need not dwell on any point referred to as coming
under “confidential information”, becausethe Israelis, with
their history, their past, are not in a position to claim that
1 Quoted in French by the speaker.

they have anything confidential that we can believe. They
can forge anything. Those who forged the Lavon affair,
those who forged a decision, the signature of the Minister
of Defence Lavon, those who had people go and destroy
American libraries and installations in Cairo and
Alexandria, those who forged the signature of the Minister,
can certainly forge anything, any confidential instrument
under the sun. The fact that he is calling it confidential
does not give but one picture-the picture of the Lavon
affair, forged by the Israelis.

be helpful if we try to remedy the cause before speaking
about the effect.
56. There are many-other points I should like to answer,
but I know the time of the Council is very precious. I know
many points have been answered by me in the previous
meetings; I know that Mr. Tekoah keeps repeating themrepeat a lie so it may stick. I do not want to keep repeating
the answers, because I have faith in the wisdom and
understanding of this great body, the Security Council.
57. The PRESIDENT: I now recognize the representative
of Algeria on a point of order.

51. Referen,ce was made to El-Fatah and to the obligation
of Jordan under the cease-fire. I say, and repeat and
reiterate: we are bound by the cease-fire; we are not
violating the cease-fire; we shall continue to abide by the
resolution calling for a cease-fire. But, with all due respect,
we cannot be held responsible for the security of Israel; we
cannot be held responsible for the rise of liberation
movements, be it El-Fatal-i, El-Jabha, or otherwise. Nor is it
the responsibility of Jordan-let me make this very clear-to
protect the Israeli aggression and continued occupation of
our Arab territo,ries. This is not the responsibility of Jordan
under the cease-fire resolution,

58. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): As you know, Mr. President, consultations have
beer going on simultaneously with the public debate in this
Council. I am certain that, in expressing the feelings of the
Algerian delegation I am also to a great extent expressing
those of most, if not all, members of the Council who hope
our work will lead to the desired results as soon as possible,
59. My delegation therefore considers it advisable and
appropriate that the members of the Council should be
given time to enable them to resume these consultations as
actively as possible. To this end my delegation would Iike
to propose to the Council, through you, Mr. President, that
the meeting be suspended so that these consultations may
be continued.

52. Mr. Tekoah has deemed fit, at almost every single
meeting you have been kind enough to convene,
Mr. President, to refer to the organizations carrying out
resistance as “terrorists”.
He was able to have three
members make that reference: the United States, China,
and I will be in a position later to verify the third member
in the Council. Out of fifteen he was able to have three
members use that term. But Israel, the United States and
China have an ,authority which disagrees with all three of
them. I am referring to Mr. Dayan himself, the Minister of
Defence of Israel. Mr. Dayan, on 28 June 1968, drew a
comparison-I regret to quote this, but Mr. Tekoah asked
for it-between the conflict in Vietnam and the conflict in
our area.

60. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Algeria has
proposed that this meeting be suspended, and, according to
rule 33 of the provisional rules of procedure, any motion
for the suspension of a meeting will be decided without
debate.
61. Is there any objection to the suspension of the
meeting for, say, half an hour? Would the representative of
Algeria agree to a suspension for half an hour?

53. I need not say that Mr. Dayan himself is the one who
was inspired to bomb the north of Jordan; it was
Mr. Dayan’s idea; to kill and murder by bombing was
Mr. Dayan’s idea, and his specific instruction. But the point
I.am driving at now at this stage is that Mr. Dayan made a
comparison between Vietnam and what is going on in the
area. He referred to the guerrilla warfare ln our area as “a
war of liberation”,

62. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated jk~nt
French): I did not specify the length of the suspension
because, as we all know, half-hour suspensions in the
Security Council may last longer than thirty minutes.
63. The PRESIDENT: As I hear no objection, the meeting
is therefore suspended for at least half an hour.

54. Need I remind Mr. Tekoah of the attempt by the
Director of the Israeli Radio-and the radio station there is
government controlled-to censure and suppress that part
of the speech of Mr. Dayan on the grounds that it was a
revolt against the definition they wanted to convey to the
world, the definition Mr. Tekoah keeps repeating? But
after the objection of Dayan the same definition went on
the air.

The meeting was suspended at 4.35p.m. and resumed at
6.5 p.m.
64. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Saudi Arabia
has expressed his desire to address the Council.
65. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia):
Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me permission to speak at this late
hour, and I can assure you that I will not take more time
than the consultations have already taken.

5.5. I hate to detain the Council, but these fabrications and
distortions should be answered. When the Israeli representative speaks about violation of the cease-fire, who is
violating it-the one who is bulldozing houses and shrines in
the Old City of Jerusalem, or the one who is reacting? The
one who is arbitrarily arresting people, putting them in jail,
torturing them, or the one who is reacting? I think it will

66. Although most representatives at the United Nations
are not policy-makers and must ultimately wear the strait
jacket of instructions issued by their respective Govern.
ments, the diplomats of this Organization are not required
O~Y to be a sounding-board of Member States serving their
6

individual national interests; they must also, through the
~interchange of ideas, ultimately reflect policies which
basically derive from the Charter. If we do not follow this
procedure of basing our policies on the letter and spirit of
the Charter, then the United Nations may be doomed to
failure-like the League of Nations before it.

questionbetweenIsraelandthe Arab Governmentsor tne
Arab countries--I have hadto statethat thereis a people
called the Palestinian people which numbers about
2 million. Do you blamethem if they arepatriots? They
have lost their land, they havelost their houses,they have
lost their patrimony. As I said,someof them may have
beenJews”(1407th meeting,para.1941.

67. It is such hackneyed phrases as “Politics is the art of
compromise” which may work for a while, perhaps on the
domestic scene. But in international affairs we have found
that there can be no compromise with justice. Solutions in
the United Nations should not be basedon compromise
whenever the Charter is compromised. Once we corn.
promise the Charter, we arebound to fail in our purposeof
achievingworld peace.
68. As an observer of the activities of the Leagueof
Nations in WesternEurope in the decadebefore the Second
World War-more precisely, between 1929 and 1939-I can
vouch, like many others who lived in that era, that the
League of Nations, in opting for the sloganof politics as
being the art of compromise,failed to preserveworld peace.
I am afraid that we may be repeatingthe samemistakehere
in the Council. Weshould not attempt to compromisethe
Charter time andagainwith impunity.

I alsostated at that samemeeting:
“I do not speakfrom hatred.The Arabsdo not hate the
Jews,and wewill repeatthis a thousandtimes.Jewsfared
well in Arab landswhen Arabs werein their glory. Even
when the Arabswere trodden down they never molested
the Jews. It is you Westerripeoplenow-perhapsout of a
guilty conscience,I do not know-who are trying to say,
let us boost Israel.At whoseexpense?At your expense?
At somebody else’sexpense?What right have you to
establishanenclavethere?“-meaning in Palestine.-“It is
just for your economicrights”-or for what other reason.
“You do not fool us . . .“[ibid., para.2011.

72, Israel is a wedgein the heart of the Arab world. Far be
it from me to tell this Councilnow “I told you so” andthis
is what is happening.But 1 could not remainsilent as an
Arab when I heardMr. Tekoahsay that all alongthe Arabs
69. Many of those sitting around this table who have not
have been aggressors.
Again, needI tell you that before the
known me might say, “What doesthis have to do with the
Balfour Declarationthe Palestinians
comprised94 per cent
item before us?” I mentioned in my last statement that
Arabs and only 6 per cent Jews? What happened in
without going to the genesisof the problem we can get
Versailleswhen the late Mr. Wilson, the then Presidentof
nowhere. Any argumentthat is basedon a falsepremiseis
the United States, enunciatedthe principle of the selfbound to totter in the long run.
determinationof peoplesandnations?He wasmolestedby
70. I have been addressingmyself to this Palestine the then so-calledalliesand he wasaskednotwithstanding
question since 1947, and, as I saidthe last time I addressed the sacrifices of the United States, to go back home
the Council, wereI to repeatwhat othersand I have saidwe
empty-handed.It wasnot because
an uncleof our erstwhile
would find that we are-to use an American phrasecolleague, Henry Cabot Lodge, who served the United
rehashingthe sameold arguments.But I will not cite from
Nations, was not, as has been mentioned by some hisspeechesasfar back as1947. I have to be considerateto the
torians, taken along by Mr. Wilson to the VersaillesConmembers of the Council as the hour is late and many of
ference that the United Statesdid not join the Leagueof
Nations. It wasbecauseit dawnedupon the United States
them must have engagements
for the evening.However, it
was on 4 April 1968 in this very Council that I said the
of that era that insteadof liberatingthe countries and the
following :
lands that were under the domination of the enemy they
were partitioned into mandateswhich were colonies in
“ . . * what is the useof coming here and quibblingover
disguise-andPalestinewasoneof thosemandates.
texts and interpretations? Is there no way out of this
difficulty? Shall we spendanother twenty years-if this
73. Mr, Wilson returned to the United Statesa broken
Organization survives-in such meetings, listening to
man and the United Stateskept aloof from the Leagueof
incriminations and accusationswhich would be difficult
Nations, Here we come to the crux of the questionand I
to substantiatein fairnessto one sideor the other in all
am answeringMr, Tekoah acrossthe table. The principle of
objectivity? Shall we go on arguingover who is to blame self-determinationwasthrust to the wind. Why? There are
and who is not to blame,over what is a terrorist and who
many factors that makeup the picture, but I amnot going
is a freedom-fighter, and giving definitions, each one
to enumerateall of them. It wasbecauseof the pressure
subjectively interpreting certain wordsin accordancewith
that the Zionistsbrought to bear on the United Kingdom,
the policy of his Government or whateverhis desiresmay
by which they obtained the Balfour Declaration.The price
be? If so, there will be no end to it, This thing will be
wasthe entry into the First World Warof the United States,
under review, I am sure,till the end of the year, and then
brought about by the influential Zionists in the United
there will be other meetings and other incidents”.
States.That isone of the causes,
inter al/a.
[1412th meeting,para. 101.1
74. Where wasthe principle of self-determination?Wasit
71. I hope I will not tax the patience of the Council if I
observed?
No, Sir. One would say that Governmentsbig
read a quotation from what I said on 24 March in this
and small can make mistakes.Then we come to 1945. I
Council :
happenedto be in San Franciscowhen the Charter was
“But time and againhere in this Council-and the whole
finalized. I do not have a copy of the Charterwith me,but
you know that in the preamblethe principle of selfresolution revolves around this question as being a
7

French Jew-may
Jacques Kayser,

ms soul rest in peace--none other than
who was a member of the French
delegation to the United Nations, and he collaborated with
me on the draft convention on freedom of information,
wmch is still pending, He said to me: “France stands for the
self-determination of peoples and nations”. I asked him if it
was his Government’s view, and he said to me, “It is my
view, anyway”; and later we found France, in the person of
that unique leader in world affairs, General de Gaulle,
saying, “Liberate the colonies”. And Mr. Cassin in 1951
was still c&ng Algeria a dkpartement-a
department,
Inasmuch as I respected Mr. Cassin, I knew that those were
instructions from his Government at that time, and I lived
long enough to read speeches by members of the British
Parliament and by members of the French Chamber of
Deputies using the phrase “right of self-determination”,
although it had been considered a flimsy principle that did
not hold water, and a fantasy of the late Mr. Wilson, the
President of the United States.

determination is paramount. That was in 1945, three years
before the creation of Israel. Did the big Powers heed the
principle of self-determination enunciated in the Charter?
No. Sir, the principles of the Charter were compromised,
and that is why I made my initial statement that perhaps on
the domestic scene States may use compromise as a
solution in practising the art of politics. But when we come
to international relations, God help us if we compromise the
principles of the Charter; we have nothing to go by; the
Charter is the Constitution of the international community.
75. The Supreme Court in Member States is the guardian
of the Constitution-not the politicians. The trouble with
the world nowadays is that we have too many politicans
and very few statesmen.
76. Then, how can the Palestinian people be considered as
having aggressed against the Eastern European Jews who
held the banner of Zionism? As I have mentioned time and
again, Zionism wasnot Eastern-or rather, not Oriental, so
as not to have any confusion between the Jews of Eastern
Europe and the Jews of our area. The Zionist movement
wasnot initiated by any Oriental Jew.

79. But in fairness to the French, at the height of the
Algerian war, when armies, like any other army for that
matter, were going into excesses,the voice of the French
was raised high against their own Government for the
maltreatment of the so-called terrorists. The Algerians are
represented today by one of the illustrious young men of
that country, none other than Mr. Bouattoura. They were
terrorists then, but it took a great man like de Gaulle finally
to recognize that they were patriots fighting for their
country.

77. Why do I go as far back as the Versailles Treaty? Well,
without saying it, all the premises of Mr. Tekoah are based
on biblical grounds going back thousands of years; so I may
be permitted to say that if I go back to the Versailles
Treaty or to the Versailles Conference it is to show YOU
that the Charter wasinfringed upon and that the Palestinian
people cannot be deemed aggressors,but as having been
aggressed against-by the Allies, to begin with, and subscquently, by the Eastern European Zionists.

80. What is the difference between the Palestinians and
the Algerians, for that matter? Are they a different breed
of people? They are fighting for their freedom. What right
have we representatives of Arab Governments to tell them,
“No, you have no right to fight to retrieve your homeland”?

78. As I said during my last statement any syllogism based
on a false premise falls down. But I would not have spoken
today had it not been that I was deeply touched, and I
regret to say in an adversemanner, by the quotation taken
by Mr. Tekoah from a French newspaper, from an article
by none other than Mr. Rend Cassin, with whom I worked
in the United Nations from its inception, or more precisely
from 1947, at Lake Success.Mr. Cassin is still active, still
being sent here once in a while to conferences like the one
held in Teheran, which I was supposed to attend, and
would have attended were it not for an ailment that kept
me from it. I have known Mr. Cassin since 1947, and when
some of my colleagues and myself found how the United
Nations Charter was infringed upon in that the principle of
self-determination was cast to the four winds, we got
together and began to think about how we could enunciate
the principle of the self-determination of peoples and
nations into a right. That was immediately after the
partition of Palestine and the proclamation of Israel in
1948. It took us eight years to elaborate that right because
of the opposition we encountered in the United Nations,
None other than Mr. Cassin in the Third Committee at that
time-and, I remember, in 195 1, during the sessionwe had
at the Palais de Chaillot in Paris, that he, with another
friend of mine, Sir Samuel Hoare of the United Kingdom,
as illustrious as Mr. Cassin and Mrs. Roosevelt in the Third
Committee of the United Nations declared that you cannot
evolve this principle into a right. They claimed it was a
vague principle. In fairness to France, France watched from
the sidelines; and I had a colleague, who happened to be a

81. AS I have said time and again, we would be considered
traitors and those of us who counsel too much patience and
peace might be shot. I know what I am talking about, and I
tell you we might be shot.
82. In order to suit the State of Israel, the leaders of the
countries contiguous to Israel should sign away the right of
the Palestinian people to their land, and their right to
self-determination, elaborated and enunciated as a right and
enshrined in the Charter, should be neglected.
83. Who is the aggressor? When we go back to the genesis
of the whole question, we know who the aggressoris. Time
and again, I say, we felt, all of us, sorry for the persecution
of the Jewsin Europe, especially during the Second World
War. We deplored it. Many of us wrote ‘articles about
it-and I do not want to take credit for what I said about it.
But that did not mean that a people who had been
persecuted should replace another people.,For the Charter
happened to be compromised, and we, here in the United
Nations-not in our collectivity but in our contrived
majority-abetted
this in order to pave the way for the
creation of a usurper State.
84. On almost every occasion when I met a Zionist in
prewar days I told him, “You will not have a chance in the
8

long run”. There were still possibilities of coming to an
agreement t9 let the Jews come and settle in Palestine
without decl.aring themselves a State, to live side by side
with the Arabs under a Palestinian flag. Now I see tliat the
Mufti was right. Mr. Tekoah mentioned the Mufti of
Jerusalem. The Mufti said: “Do not try. Do not try.
Ultimately they want to have a State”. That is why they
hate him, why they always slur him and throw aspersions at
him-because he knew. It was his country.

was given to them by God. How many times must I say it:
let them produce the title deed.
90. Just because they played on the sentiments of certain
Protestant ministers here who are fundamentalists and who
supported them, should we bow our heads to the Protestant
ministers who supported them? No, sir. Perhaps I might
want to bow my head, but I cannot ask the Palestinian
people, who have their own personality, to bow their heads.
It is their land, not mine. No Arab has the right to tell the
Palestinians: “Go and forfeit your right to your country, to
your homes, to your orchards”.

85. Palestine, by the way, is not my country. Some people
here have thought I am a Palestinian. I think Sam Brewer of
The New York Times thought I was a Palestinian. But every
Arab becomes a Palestinian when he finds that his fellow
Arabs are being trodden underfoot. We may fight amongst
ourselves, just as many other people fight. You sometimes
fight, brothers under the same roof sometimes fight each
other. However, this is not a question of Arab solidarity
against the Jews; this is Arab solidarity against an incursion
of Eastern European nationals. They were nationals of
States who, under the banner of Zionism, established
themselves in Palestine by force when they were a minority.
By what yardstick of justice can we, here in the United
Nations repeat the errors of the League of Nations? And
the tragedy of it all is that the Zionists ‘are being pampered
by certain States, and protected and helped and assisted.
Why? Because there happen to be Zionists in the bodies
political and social of certain States sitting around this
table.

91. Mr. Tekoah spoke of the Palestinians who are doing
business, so to speak, with the Israeli authorities on the
west bank of the Jordan, I lived under Ottoman rule and I
witnessed one of the worst famines in the world. They talk
of the famine of Biafra. One third of the Lebanese people
perished between 1916 and 1918. We found some Lebanese
co-operating with the Ottomans- with Jamal Pasha in fact,
because the Ottomans did not know what was going on.
Jamsl Pasha, the Commander of the Fourth Army in the
First World War, who had authority between the Taurus
Mountains and the Suez Canal, was a dictator. He was given
authority. Anyway, the Sultan in Turkey could not restrain
him. This was before the so-called quislings. There were
quislings in Lebanon. There are quislings everywhere. There
are quislings in this country. There are quislings in every
country. Sometimes they try them for treason. For the
information of members of the Council, I would state that
many of those collaborators were shot later by the
Lebanese. Always when a State or an authority dominates a
region there are apt to be a few people who collaborate
with them, That is not strange. It is not only in Norway, I
must say in fairness to the Scandinavian countries. In
Germany itself there were people collaborating with the
enemy. Those who were fighting the Germans also had
people collaborating with them in Germany against the
Germans. So Mr. Tekoah should not try to deceive the
Council by saying, “Everything is fine in the Holy Land;
the Palestinian Arabs are collaborating with us.” All he has
to do is produce the musical score and let the orchestra of
Arab-Israeli collaboration play. It sounds like a symphony
when Mr. Tekoah talks about Arab-Israeli collaboration. I
personally like music, I like symphonies, but it has strident
notes. It is not even cacophony, not even modern electronic
music.

86. I am sure Mr. Cassin is not speaking on behalf of his
Government. I would be surprised if he were. I know
Mr. Cassin. I know his antecedents also. He held many
important posts, and we all know, those of us who are
familiar with Mr. Cassin’s career, that during the Second
World War he was Commissioner of Education in the
French Government in Exile in London. Did he write
articles then, basing his arguments on international law as
he seems to have done in the newspaper from Nice?
87. When the Arabs asked the United Nations to refer the
question of self-determination to the International Court of
Justice and the United Nations turned down that request,
where was Mr. Cassin? He was around, and this was a
question of international law, or at least for the International Court of Justice, the problem of judging whether the
Zionists could claim Palestine. Of course, the Arabs were
refused. But no judge in the International Court of Justice
could, in fairness to his conscience, say that the indigenous
people of Palestine had no right to their land.

92. I am here to tell the United Nations, after having spent
twenty-one years of my life in this Organization, that the
deliberations of this Council will be abortive unless something radical is pursued and we do not find ourselves in the
rut of the League of Nations-and of the United Nations so
far too. Is there no solution to the problem? Of course
there is a solution. I said that we here are sounding-boards,
most of us, for our respective Governments; but at the same
time we should reflect what basically derives from the
Charter of the United Nations. In other words, while we are
not policy-makers, we should in our collectivity influence
the policy-makers. I am saying this after pondering not only
the Palestine question but many other questions vis-a-vis
our work in the United Nations.
__
_ - Why do we have five major
Powers exercising the veto’! Because they exercise world
power. Could the representatives perhaps advise their

88. Why did not Mr. Cassin support the thesis at that
time? He was writing. He is a gentleman who is over eighty
years old. I have known him for twenty-one years. He never
changes, he stays young. But he gets younger when the
Zionists come and play on his sentim.ents as a Jew. Many of
those Zionists are secular. No doubt there are pious and
devout Jews inside Israel. As my colleague from Jordan
said, we should give them a chance; they will outwear this
aura surrounding a State built on theocracy. They are
human beings, they will come to their senses.
89. But those representing Israel claim Israel not on the
principle of self-determination but on the ground that it
9

know about the Soviet Union. They have permeated the
social, political and economic fabric of most States, and the
trouble is that they are still crying: “We are a small nation”.
But do you not see the invisible power which they are
wielding through the chanceries of nations where their
financiers sometimes have the last word, where their
negotiators go from country to country, and in negotiating
say: “Please, do something for Israel and I will do this for
you”?

countries-and
especially two of them-that any resolution-and I do not know whether the Council has hatched
any resolution-any resolution that even imposes sanctions,
not condemnation, will get us nowhere.
93. What is the alternative? The alternative is for the
States that exercise world power to send an ultimatum to
those who conquered a land which does not belong to them
to evacuate it. However, the leaders of those countries
should rise above balance of power and spheres of
influence, the outmoded policy of the League of Nations
and to a large extent of our Organization. This is why we
are not achieving world peace but only devising palliatives,
trying to cure the fever by, as we say in Arabic, watermelon
poultices in the age of penicillin. Instead of injecting into
the body what should cure it we are only trying to cure the
fever with watermelon poultices. This is a primitive way of
dealing with the situation.

98. The invisible power of Zionism. They do not have to
be 100 million or 200 million to wield power. They are
resourceful in wielding power invisibly. The invisible
influence that the Zionists are wielding, especially in
Western Europe, should not be underestimated, and I assure
the Council that I say all this without hatred, rancour or
dislike, although Mr. Tekoah tries to imagine that we
Arabs have nothing to do in the world but to hate the Jews.

94. On 4 April I cited the fact that both Russia and the
United Kingdom sent an ultimatum to Mohammed Ali to
evacuate the territories he had taken from the Sultan. Of
course each of them was acting on the basis of its national
.interest of those days. Nowadays we say that action should
be taken not on the basis of national interest but for
preserving world peace. Gne might say that that is all very
well, and it may work if the big nations that exercise power
agree to such a joint action. We find them coexisting
beautifully these days; so I do not see why they should not
work out such an action. I hope that this coexistence era
will yield better fruits, but on the basis of justice, not on
the basis of any national interest; on the basis of the
provisions of the Charter, not to serve the policies of
balance of power or the policies deriving from spheres of
influence. If in turn we as diplomats tried to impress our
Governments by suggestion-we cannot give instructions to
our Governments-that
this might be a solution to the
problem, we would not have had so many resolutions.

99. We have countries which we would like to develop,
but we do not want them to be exploited by an alien force
from Eastern Europe. We want to develop them the way we
think they should be developed. We want to evolve our own
customs into better customs, our own traditions as the
foundation, perhaps, of better traditions in the distant
future. We want to live our own life. We consider Israel a
foreign body in the Arab world.
100. But forget about this. What about the Palestinian
people? What should we do with them, 2 million of them?
I will bet anything that, had it not been for what
Mr. Tekoah called “Transjordan”, which is Jordan, Zionists
would have taken Transjordan. They had the capacity to do
it; but then world public opinion would have been aroused
because they would have had to throw the Palestinian
people into the desert, there to perish. They will not perish.
Anyone with an indomitable spirit will not perish-unless,
as I said, the world commits suicide.

95. I have witnessed the work of this Council on this
question since 1947, and things are getting worse from day
to day. It used to be from year to year; now it is from day
to day. Every day there are incidents, and this is going to
continue, and any flash may set off the powder kegs in the
area, and who knows what might happen.

101. These incidents I predicted-23 and 24 March. There
will be more incidents this year; there will be more
incidents next year. The Zionists may be irked, so much
upset that they will have another round with the Arabsnot the Arabs another round with Israel, It is the other way
round. What will happen? How can we protect Western
interests there, or any other interests, for that matter, when
the people are aroused and anarchy prevails? Do you think
there will be any oil left? Do you think there will be any
buildings left?

96. Is it not enough to be engaged in warfare and conflict
in the Far East? And we have it in the Middle East too, or
the Near East as some still call it. Both sides of Asia go into
flames, and the whole world goes into flames. This is a
possibility as long as the Zionists have the influence in
many States to drive them, because those States until now
could not take the question of Zionism or of Israel out of
their domestic policies. The whole world, and they themselves, the poor, innocent Jews who fled from Hitler-or
their fathers-and the new generation will also be engulfed
in the flames with the Arabs and others. What a sorry sight
to see when we have an Organization which could set aside
national interests and work on the basis of the Charter.
Otherwise, I am reminded of a verse in the New Testament
which says, “They have eyes and do not see. They have ears
and do not hear.”

102. Here the Arab students, who number in the host
country of the United Nations and in Canada-and I want
my Canadian colleague to note this, as well as Ambassador
Finger-about 12,000, have an executive board, Very few
people know that they came on a sit-in strike to many of
our delegations. It so happened that I was working on the
Feast of Aladha, the Feast of Sacrifice, in my office. The
executive board, fifteen unannounced Arab students, came,
and, as if I had handed Palestine to Israel, they gave mc an
ultimatum : “If you do not take the Zionists out of
Palestine we will settle with you”. I am paraphrasing, of
course. This organization is tied with organizations of
students in Moscow, Rome, London, wherever there are
Arab students. Maybe they number 50,000, 60,000. These

97. The portents are before us. Time may be running
short. The Zionists are strong in every country-I
do not
10

are the pillars of the future. Many of them are postgraduate students, engineers, doctors, physicists. They were
not just college students, and I was given to understand that
if the Arab Governments do not help the Palestinians they
will see to it that their Governments, including my own, are
brought down.

admired not for its prowess, but for its humanity and
multiracial composition.
107. I must say something personal here, Sir, A nephew of
mine is a Brazilian and a member in your Chamber of
Deputies-Jamil Haddad, from Rio de Janeiro. I do not
know him. He was named after me, the first name-his
father is a Haddad. When I met his father three years
ago-after forty years-and his mother, my sister, I told
them: “Always have your sons be loyal to their country of
birth or adoption”. I reminded them-1 did not tell
them-to work for the Arab cause.

103. Tltis is no secret, but I have to tell you, to drive
home what is happening in the Arab world, while we
deliberate here about what words we should use in order
not to offend the Israelis and what words we should use not
to offend the Arabs, and with what result? Zero. There will
be no implementation; not even sanctions will be implemented. During the First World War it is known that the
steel cartels sold to both sides.

108. But what do we find, Sir? The Zionists of Eastern
Europe have played on the sentiments of even Rene Cassin,
a noted Frenchman, to help them by writing articles in a
French newspaper citing international law. Why did he not
cite international law when it came to the selfdetermination of the people of Palestine? Jacques Kayser
was a French Jew, but he forgot that he was a Jew. His
religion was between him and his God. He was free to have
any religion, but he was a Frenchman, a real Frenchman.
Here Zionists come to a man about eighty years old, and
play on his sentiments, so that he elicits a reply from me, a
friend of his, who worked with him for twenty years.

104. It is well known that in South Africa-were it not for
the South Africans I do not know what would have
happened to the arrangement with them for a gold price of
$35 an ounce-people are purchasing diamonds; the ladies
make the men buy them, if they do not. Gold is being
purchased from South Africa. Where are the sanctions?
Whom are we fooling about sanctions?
105. Only the Governments of the United States, the
Soviet Union, France and the United Kingdom-and I
would say morally the Government of China, because it
wields no power-wield
such power that they can make
things happen on the basis of justice and not on the basis of
the national interest of each State, predicated on the
balance of power, predicated on a policy that stems from
spheres of influence.

109. When shall we rise above religion, above national
interests in the United Nations? Shall we remain in that
strait jacket of instructions, crippled, or shall we, perhaps in
statements we make in this Council, by the interchange of
views, weigh things in the light of the Charter, so that
maybe we will influence those who issue the instructions to
think that, after all, our representatives at the United
Nations are not stooges for instructions, but also dynamic
in shaping the course of history.

106. You, Sir, have assumed high posts in your country.
You were the Foreign Minister of a great country, Brazil.
You know what I am talking about when I say spheres of
influence, balance of power and national interests, which
are at play now in our area. I hope, Sir, it augurs well that
you are the President during this month, at least as the
representative of Brazil, a Power that is respected and

110. Sir, I think I have taken less time than the consulta.tions you have had, and I thank you.
The meeting rose at 7.5 p.m.

11

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNIES

Ler publications
der Notions
Unies
sont en vente
dons
les libroirier
et ler ogencer
d&poritaires
du monde entier.
Informer-vous
oupr&s
de votre libroirie
ou adressez-vour
6:
Notions
Unies, Section der wales,
New York ou Get&e.

HAH

llO/lYClMTb

MI,tJAHMR

OPi-AHti3AYUH

06bEAMHEHHblX

HAuHfi

II3~~llllllf
O~ll'~lllll:l~l~Illl
&hf~IlllClllll~IS
Ikll(ll"l
llOilill0
liJUllTh
ll Iillll~lilll~lS
~Iill'Wllll~X
:1l'CIITI'Tll~S
110 IIf'CS p;lfiOllZlS
YllprZ. IIlUlOXMTC
~+Ilp~nlill
06 Il:l~~llllllS
n IltilllCM
l~llllilillOY
HLlRl:lllllC
ILlI IllIIIlIITC
110 tl,lIWQ':
Gprnimagwi
O~~J,~III~I~III~~
IIai~rik
CCKIIIIH
llpO~ll;liC
Il~l~llll~il,
IIhlO-nO[)Ii
IlJll ~CllOLllL.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicocioner
de tar Naciones
Unidor
erttrn
en todor
porter
del mundo.
Consulte
o su librero
Ventar,
Nuevo York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

uo

UNIDAS

en vento en librerios
o dirijase
o: Nocioner

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

II

y cows distribuidoror
Unidor,
Secci6n

in other currencies)

de

35643-October

197%2,050
