S/2016/353

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 April 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 27 of Security Council
resolution 2251 (2015), in which the Council requested me to continue to inform it
of progress in the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and to bring to its immediate attention any
serious violation of the Agreement between the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement on temporary arrangements for the
administration and security of the Abyei Area, of 20 June 2011 ( S/2011/384, annex).
The report provides an update on the situation in Abyei and on the deployment and
operations of UNISFA from the issuance of my previous report (S/2015/870) on
13 November 2015, to 31 March 2016. It also presents the progress made in the
implementation of the additional tasks mandated under Council resolution 2024
(2011) relating to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and
provides a recommendation on the extension of the UNISFA mandate.

II. Security situation
2.
The security situation in the Abyei Area remained unpredictable but generally
calm during the reporting period. The Government of the Sudan continued to
maintain between 120 and 150 oil personnel inside the Diffra oil complex, in
violation of the Agreement of 20 June 2011 and various Security Council
resolutions. An armed South Sudanese soldier was also found within the Abyei Area
in violation of the Agreement and relevant Council resolutions. Following a sixweek pause due to flooding, on 11 November UNISFA observed the resumption of
excavation work by the Government of the Sudan, which was designed to improve
the Diffra oil installation defences, in the presence of some 30 armed police
officers. In December 2015, contractors from the Sudan finished digging a trench
along a circumference of approximately 75 km around the installation, leaving the
oil facilities entirely encircled by the trench, but maintaining vehicular acce ss via
road. On 25 February, UNISFA troops on a routine patrol in the area of Soheib in
the central sector observed the drilling of a water well by a Chinese company in the
presence of between 10 and 15 armed security guards, in another violation of the
Agreement of 20 June 2011.
3.
The dry season began in October following a wet season characterized by a
lack of rainfall compared with previous years, especially in northern parts of Abyei.
16-05839 (E)

190416

*1605839*

S/2016/353

While the rains were sufficient to render roads impassable, rivers and water
reservoirs were not filled to their usual levels, raising the prospect that the water
table would not be adequately replenished to last throughout the dry season. A lack
of water and pasture in northern Abyei led to increased pressure on the Miss eriya to
migrate into Ngok Dinka-inhabited areas in the south, in particular those on the
Bahr al-Arab/Kiir River. Concurrently, a scaling back of food rations in the Agok
area south of the Kiir River encouraged Ngok Dinka resettlement to villages north
of the river. This movement of both communities increased the risk of clashes
during the dry season.
4.
The conflict prevention and mitigation strategy adopted by UNISFA in
previous dry seasons revolved around the creation of a military line of
disengagement between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities. To mitigate
the increased risk of conflict during this dry season, UNISFA reinforced the line of
disengagement in central areas with a high density of Ngok Dinka and relaxed it in
western and eastern areas with a lesser Ngok Dinka population to enable Misseriya
access to the grazing land and water available only in the south. This relaxation was
made possible through engagement with both communities to identify suitable
migration corridors to be used by each community for water and the grazing of
cattle and through regular patrols to coordinate the sharing of resources and monitor
the movement of cattle herders. The communities themselves were involved in the
monitoring of migration activities and in the maintenance of law and order in these
areas. During the reporting period, UNISFA conducted 5,582 patrols, both during
the day and at night, undertook 1,256 escorts and facilitated 36 joint security
committee meetings with community leaders in the Abyei Area.
5.
On 10 December, UNISFA troops on patrol in the general area of Shegeg in
the northern sector arrested and disarmed a soldier from the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement in Opposition in possession of an AK -47 rifle, a RGD-5
grenade and 11 AK-7 rifle cartridges. He was released on 20 January at Kabdud on
the northern boundary of the Abyei Area. On 21 December, UNISFA disarmed a
Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) soldier in Agany Toak, in the southern
sector, in possession of an AK-47 rifle, a rifle magazine and 156 AK-47 rifle
cartridges. He was subsequently handed over to SPLA national monitors
representing the Government of South Sudan.
6.
One incident in particular highlighted the volatility of the Abyei situation
during the reporting period. On 26 November, unknown assailants fired rocketpropelled grenade rounds in the general area of Makir, in Abyei town, targeting the
residence of the Ngok Dinka Paramount Chief. Five shells landed in the vicinity of
the Paramount Chief’s residence, another inside his compound and another in a
nearby primary school. During the attack, a 4-year-old girl was killed, and five
other residents were wounded. UNISFA troops present in the area returned fire.
During the ensuing exchange, a peacekeeper was critically injur ed and transferred to
the UNISFA level II clinic, where he succumbed to his injuries. The protection of
the Paramount Chief’s residence has since been enhanced by reinforcing the
defences around the premises and establishing a temporary operating base acro ss the
Nyamura River, in the direction from which the attack was launched.
7.
Crime also remained a worrying source of insecurity in the Abyei Area. On
11 November, UNISFA was informed of an attack on Misseriya traders in the
general area of Shegeg in the northern sector. A patrol launched to verify the

2/12

16-05839

S/2016/353

incident located 13 men who had been shot dead and 2 men who had been wounded
by gunshots. The wounded were given first aid and taken to the Diffra local hospital
for further treatment. They stated that their group had been travelling back from
Mayom market, in Unity State, South Sudan, when they had been ambushed and
robbed of their money by unknown assailants. One of the two men wounded
subsequently died of his injuries. A thorough search of the area was u nsuccessful in
locating the perpetrators.
8.
On 3 December, UNISFA was informed of an attack by unknown assailants on
a cattle camp in the villages of Abyen Jong Yomand Mikol Alei, in the western and
eastern parts of Abyei town, respectively. In the first incident, during which about
500 cattle were stolen, a Dinka man was killed and two others were injured.
UNISFA troops conducting night patrols in the area pursued the perpetrators, who
abandoned the cattle and escaped through the bush. The injured men wer e evacuated
for treatment. In the second incident, a Dinka man was killed and another later
succumbed to multiple gunshot wounds while being taken to hospital for treatment.
UNISFA retrieved 15 AK-47 rifles from the area, which were taken into temporary
custody at Dokura pending their destruction.
9.
On 1 January, UNISFA received information from the local community that
unknown numbers of cattle belonging to the Ngok Dinka had been rustled and a
person killed by unknown armed persons east of the Mulmul ar ea of Abyei. A
UNISFA patrol launched to verify the information and search for the suspect located
a Dinka fatality. Members of the local community reported, however, that cattle had
not been rustled during the incident. On 3 January, UNISFA was again info rmed by
the local community that 200 Misseriya cattle had been rustled and a Misseriya
person killed by unknown armed persons at Koladet. UNISFA deployed a patrol,
which located a Misseriya fatality at the Todach and Noong junction, brought to the
area by members of the local community from the bush. The following day,
UNISFA troops conducted a further patrol to Koladet and found blood stains and six
AKM bullets in the general area. However, the local community denied that cattle
had been rustled during the incident.
10. During the reporting period, a number of incidents occurred in which cattle
believed to have been stolen from Misseriya herders were recovered by members of
the Ngok Dinka community and returned to their rightful owners. On 24 February,
four cows stolen from Misseriya herders were recovered by Ngok Dinka community
protection committee members at Agok in the southern sector following a tip -off.
The committee members handed the cattle over to UNISFA in the presence of local
community members and the Ngok Dinka Paramount Chief. The cattle were then
returned to their rightful owners on 27 February. On 20 March, 12 cows believed to
have been stolen from Misseriya herders by unknown rustlers and recovered by
members of the Dinka community were handed over to their rightful Misseriya
owners by Dinka tribal leaders, in the presence of UNISFA troops. UNISFA
observed an emerging trend of cattle recovery by both communities during the dry
season, complemented by a return to intercommunal trade.
11. On 17 and 19 March, UNISFA observed trading activities between the Ngok
Dinka and Misseriya communities at Noong in the central sector. More than 2,000
people from both communities were observed trading in commodities, including
sugar, wheat, flour, onions, salt, vegetables, livestock and textiles. On 28 March, an

16-05839

3/12

S/2016/353

exchange of goods and commodities between the communities was also observed in
the villages of Dokura, in the central sector, and Tajalei, in the southern sector.
12. The United Nations Mine Action Service continued to survey, clear and
dispose of explosive hazards throughout the Abyei Area, enabling freedom of
movement for local communities, United Nations personnel and humanitarian
actors. The Service ensured that all UNISFA company operating bases we re safe
from explosive hazards, releasing over 572,000 square metres of land through battle
area clearance and verifying 77 km of UNISFA priority routes as safe from
explosive hazards. During the reporting period, non -technical survey and mine risk
education activities undertaken with the communities led to the identification and
destruction of 37 explosive remnants of war. The items recovered included rocket propelled grenade warheads, rockets and boosters, mortar rounds, hand grenades,
assorted ammunition and point detonating fuses. The Service provided mine risk
education to more than 10,400 people, including nomadic herders and returnees.
13. On 11 November, the United Nations Mine Action Service conducted its first
weapons and ammunition destruction exercise at the weapons and ammunition
management facility located in Dukra in the central sector. A total of 96 light
weapons and over 5,500 rounds of small arms ammunition confiscated by UNISFA
troops throughout the Abyei Area were destroyed, according to t he standard
operating procedures developed for the mission and pursuant to paragraph 12 of
Security Council resolution 2205 (2015).
14. On 28 January, during routine maintenance at the weapons and ammunition
management facility in Dukra, the United Nations Mine Action Service observed
that the compound had been broken into and a number of items stolen, including
parts of the high-priced weapons-cutting shears. On 22 February, UNMAS
discovered a further break-in at the same facility during a scheduled upgrade of
security measures there. Two wheels from weapons -cutting shears had been stolen, a
weapons container secured with three different locks containing remnants of
destroyed weapons had been opened, and a power cable for the lights at the facility
had been disconnected. An investigation into both incidents is under way, and
weapons and ammunition management activities have been suspended pending the
replacement of the stolen equipment. No weapons and ammunition were stored at
the location during the time of the break-ins.
15. The UNISFA police component continued efforts to support the maintenance
of law and order in the Abyei Area by conducting community-based interactive
patrols and enhancing the capacity of community protection committees, in
accordance with paragraph 16 of Security Council resolution 2230 (2015). UNISFA
police officers were co-located with community protection committees in the central
and southern sectors of Abyei to advise committee members on managing law and
order situations in the Area. The establishment of committees in northern Abyei
continued to be delayed owing to a lack of support from the Government of the
Sudan. During the reporting period, the UNISFA police component conducted 314
independent and joint security observation and community interactive patrols with
UNISFA troops throughout Abyei, covering a total distance of 8,797 km. The
Government of the Sudan continued to delay the issuance of visas for newly
recruited police and corrections personnel. This had a serious impact on the
component’s operational capacity.

4/12

16-05839

S/2016/353

16. UNISFA police officers embarked on crime prevention campaigns in the
Mulmul and Tajalei areas of central Abyei and provided 196 transport operators,
traders and community members with advice on theft prevention and methods for
resolving domestic disputes. The UNISFA police gender cell, in collaboration with
the UNISFA training and development cell, conducted six induction training
sessions for 114 military staff officers and military observers. In commemoration of
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
the UNISFA police component, in collaboration with other UNISFA sections and
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, organized two global open days on
women and peace and security, on 16 and 18 February, in Abyei town and Diffra
respectively.

III. Political developments
17. A meeting of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee has not been held since
March 2015, and the Joint Political and Security Mechanism has not held a meeting
since its extraordinary meeting held in October 2015. During the reporting period,
UNISFA and the African Union Commission continued to engage with the Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee and other senior Sudanese and South Sudanese
government officials to encourage a resumption of those meetings. The traditional
leaders’ dialogue meeting proposed by the African Union has also not been
rescheduled.
18. UNISFA continued to promote grass-roots dialogue between the Misseriya and
Ngok Dinka communities. In December, UNISFA and its partners planned a
conference to be held in Abyei between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka
communities. However, discussions concerning the role and responsibility of the
Abyei Joint Oversight Committee at the meeting led to it being postponed
indefinitely while consultations with the Committee continue. On 15 February, some
600 members of the local Ngok Dinka community staged a peaceful demonstration
outside the main gate of the UNISFA headquarters in Abyei town over the f ailure of
the meeting to take place. They demanded that meetings between the Misseriya and
the Ngok Dinka communities should be allowed to proceed in order for issues of
mutual concern to be addressed.
19. Following the conference on soft border management and peaceful co-existence,
held in Aweil, South Sudan, from 17 to 19 September, a follow-up conference planned
for 11 to 13 November was cancelled after local Sudanese authorities warned the
Misseriya participants that their security could not be guaranteed while travelling
from El Muglad in the Sudan to Aweil in South Sudan. A new date for the meeting has
not been set.
20. On 25 February, with security provided by UNISFA, some 300 members of the
Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities met in Noong, central Abyei. Led by their
respective chiefs, the communities discussed issues of mutual concern, including
migration, cattle rustling, the establishment of a common market and the sharing of
resources, water and pasture. During the meeting, the communities made progress
on the sharing of pasture and migration routes through Abyei, but were unable to
reach a consensus on a location for a common market. Reiterating previously stated
positions on the market, the Misseriya community called for it to be established in
Abyei town, while the Ngok Dinka community suggested Goli or Diffra in northern

16-05839

5/12

S/2016/353

Abyei. The communities agreed to establish a joint subcommittee to continue
discussions on the location.
21. On 6 March, UNISFA facilitated a further meeting of the Misseriya and Ngok
Dinka communities at its base in Todach. UNISFA provided transportation and area
security and facilitated the conduct of discussions. The agenda included the
modalities for conflict management during the dry season and grazing routes
through Abyei for Misseriya nomads. It was agreed that a joint committee would be
formed to deal with cattle rustling and other criminal activities. The terms and
modalities for making the committee operational were not, however, finalized. The
location of the common market was also discussed, with both communities
maintaining their initial positions. The issue was postponed for further discussion at
a later date.
22. On 17 March, a third joint community meeting between the Ngok Dinka and
Misseriya communities was held at Noong, in the central sector. It brought together
48 leaders from both communities, with UNISFA troops providing robust area
security. They discussed the sharing of water and grazing lands, the mitigation of
violence in both communities and, once again, the establishment of a common
market. While acknowledging their differences on the issue of a site for the
establishment of a common market, the communities agreed on the need for further
deliberations to find a way forward. The leaders met again on 24 M arch, and signed
an agreement to establish a traditional court system to mediate civil disputes and
deal with criminal activity, with support from UNISFA; form a joint committee to
locate and agree on appropriate grazing corridors for Misseriya nomads; and
continue with trading activities between the two communities at Noong, Dokura and
Tajalei while deliberations on a permanent location for a common market continued.
UNISFA will continue to engage closely with the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka
communities to build on the outcomes of the meetings and facilitate opportunities
for further dialogue and interaction.

IV. Humanitarian situation
23. The difficult economic situation, population movements, intercommunal
tension and limited or absent basic public services continued to result in significant
humanitarian needs in the Abyei Area. United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and non-governmental organizations continued to provide humanitarian
and recovery assistance to 139,000 vulnerable people throughout Abyei. That
comprises 61,000 people from the Ngok Dinka community; 20,000 Ngok Dinka
returnees within the Area; 8,000 people displaced fro m neighbouring Unity and
Warrap States in South Sudan; 15,000 resident Misseriya; and approximately 35,000
seasonal Misseriya migrants who entered the area in October due to drought. In
addition, humanitarian organizations provided basic assistance to some 3,000 South
Sudanese displaced from Unity State who used Diffra as a transit point to reach
their final destinations in the Sudan. In 2016, it is anticipated that drought will
exacerbate humanitarian needs.
24. Humanitarian organizations in Abyei worked to meet basic needs and increase
the resilience of agropastoralist and nomadic communities through approaches
tailored to their specific situations and vulnerabilities. Response priorities in 2016
include reducing the risk of malnutrition in children under 5 years of age and

6/12

16-05839

S/2016/353

pregnant and nursing mothers; providing adequate access to safe drinking water,
hygiene and sanitation; reducing dependency on food assistance; maintaining
veterinary services; supporting basic education and training; addressing protect ion
risks in collaboration with UNISFA; and ensuring coverage of basic health needs.
25. A total of 6,842 people displaced from Unity State in South Sudan continued
to benefit from general food distribution. Focus shifted from free food distribution
to more recovery-oriented interventions through food-for-assets projects. Other
food-related activities included food to encourage girls’ education, targeted
supplementary feeding and in-patient feeding. Efforts to support community
livelihoods also continued throughout the Area. Key activities included vocational
training in vegetable production; post-harvest and integrated pest management;
agricultural development; land preparation; nursery management; sowing,
transplanting and mulching methods; business skills; and literacy classes.
26. Health-care and nutrition services were provided in the Area, including
through mobile clinics, mass measles immunizations and nutritional screening for
children from 6 to 59 months of age. However, there remains a need to tackl e urgent
health and nutrition challenges in the returnee villages. Support to the three
non-functional clinics in northern Abyei, a shortage of government -provided health
staff and a lack of dog-bite vaccines remain the key challenges in these areas.
27. The registration of pupils began at two secondary schools in Abyei town that
had been closed since the conflict in 2011. The boys’ and girls’ schools were
renovated in 2013 and 2014, but have not yet reopened due to security concerns.
Currently, only one secondary school, in Agok, is operating in the Area. All the
schools in returnee villages that were affected by the conflict in 2011 are in need of
rehabilitation work. Returnee children are currently studying in open areas.
28. Access to safe water in the Area remained a priority. Seventeen new water
boreholes were drilled, including two in returnee villages, and five hand pumps
were rehabilitated. A hygiene campaign and community-led sanitation training were
carried out, and five household latrines were co mpleted in Agok. However, latrine
usage remained a key challenge throughout the Area.
29. An assessment of shelter and non-food items in the returnee villages was
conducted in January, and the registration process completed in March. As the
population of the host community is very low, a blanket distribution for shelter
items was undertaken in all returnee villages.
30. The humanitarian community continues to face many operational challenges. A
lack of implementation capacity is felt across all sectors, mai nly in northern parts of
Abyei, due to restrictions on the operation of international non -governmental
organizations in the Area. A new local non-governmental organization extended its
presence in northern Abyei, doubling the total number of local partners . Meanwhile,
three international non-governmental organizations established a base in Agok.
Additional challenges for the humanitarian response included funding shortages for
all partners; intercommunal tension; delays in the issuance of travel permits and
restrictions on the movement of personnel and supplies into the Abyei Area by the
Sudanese authorities; high implementation costs owing to security and logistical
constraints; and the non-availability of Sudanese staff for safety and security
reasons. Perceptions of bias in humanitarian delivery could further aggravate
intercommunal tensions and increase security threats to aid workers and operations.

16-05839

7/12

S/2016/353

Efforts to ensure an appropriate degree of balance notwithstanding, aid operations
are still to a large extent focused on Ngok Dinka communities in the southern parts
of Abyei, due to the relative ease of access to such areas.

V. Status of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism
31. Some positive developments were initially reported in relations between the
Sudan and South Sudan on border security during the reporting period. On 3 January,
against the backdrop of a slump in oil prices on the world market, the Sudan agreed
to review the oil transit and compensation fees owed to it by South S udan, upon
demonstration by the latter of its readiness to implement all other bilateral
agreements between the two countries. South Sudan obliged and, on 25 January, the
President issued a statement calling for a normalization of relations with the Sudan
and ordering the withdrawal of South Sudanese troops 5 miles back from the border
with the Sudan. He further pledged to activate all committees established under the
Cooperation Agreement between the Republic of the Sudan and the Republic of
South Sudan, of September 2012. In response, on 26 January, the President of the
Sudan ordered the reopening of the border with South Sudan. Since the
announcement, at least three border crossing points have reopened. On 3 February,
the President further announced the resumption of river transport between Kosti in
the Sudan and Juba in South Sudan.
32. In an apparent change of tone, on 17 March, a senior aide of the President
warned that the Sudan would reclose its borders if South Sudan continued what the
Sudan perceives as support to its rebels. The renewal of accusations was made
against the backdrop of reports in Khartoum that senior South Sudanese officials
had met the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North leadership in Juba to
discuss the needs of Sudanese rebels in Blue Nile and South Kordofan States. South
Sudan has denied the accusations. Also on 17 March, the official news agency in the
Sudan reported that the Council of Ministers, at a meeting chaired by the President,
had decided that South Sudanese resident in the Sudan would be treated as
foreigners, revoking a standing policy of equal access for Sudanese and South
Sudanese citizens to health and education services in the Sudan, and that legal
measures would be taken against any South Sudanese citizen not in possession of a
valid passport and Sudanese visa.
33. On 19 March, the Sudanese embassy in Juba clarified the Sudanese threat to
reclose its border with South Sudan, stating that more than 50 days had passed since
the President of South Sudan had ordered the withdrawal of forces 5 miles from the
common border and that the order had not yet been implemented. It also stated that
none of the joint committees established under the Cooperation Agreement had been
activated, in particular the Joint Political and Security Mechanism. It again accused
South Sudan of harbouring and supporting Sudanese rebel movements. In response,
South Sudan attributed the delay in withdrawing its forces from the border with the
Sudan to logistical challenges. In a meeting with a delegation from the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel on the Sudan and South Sudan visiting Juba
on 21 and 22 March, the President reconfirmed his country’s readiness to organize
and attend a Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting.

8/12

16-05839

S/2016/353

34. On 25 and 27 March, SPLA accused the Sudanese air force of carrying out
aerial bombardments of an SPLA military outpost in the Bebnis area of Renk, Upper
Nile State, on 24 and 26 March respectively. SPLA reported that a number of
livestock had been killed during the alleged incidents. The Sudanese army denied
the accusation, stating that the air force had not carried out any attacks in South
Sudan’s territory. On 29 March, the Government of the Sudan was reported in the
media as having decided to reclose the border with South Sudan.
35. During the reporting period, the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism continued to face numerous challenges in the implementation of its
aerial verification and monitoring mandate. A number of Mechanism patrol s were
not conducted owing to the rotation of UNISFA troops and the denial of permission
to land by the Government of South Sudan, in violation of Security Council
resolutions 1990 (2011) and 2024 (2011) and the status-of-forces agreements signed
by the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan in 2012. The restrictions on
aerial monitoring of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone in the western sector also
continued. Only 10 of 27 planned missions were conducted during the reporting
period, all of them in the eastern sector of the Abyei Area. To date, the Mechanism
has been able to conduct only 71 of the 175 planned aerial monitoring patrols.
36. On 8 February, a Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism aerial
patrol observed a military presence, including a likely deployment of armoured
vehicles and new civilian structures, in the general area of Tishwin in the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone to the east of the Abyei Area. A verification mission
conducted on 7 March confirmed the sighting. A ground pa trol to the area is being
planned for further verification.
37. Following a démarche made by the Force Commander to the South Sudanese
Minister of Defence and Veterans’ Affairs, on 10 March, UNISFA was granted
permission by the local SPLA brigade commander to deploy the remaining force
protection unit from Kadugli to Gok Machar. The deployment of the remaining
troops began on 20 March.
38. Five United Nations Mine Action Service contracted patrol support teams were
deployed to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism sector 1 and 2
headquarters in Kadugli and Gok Machar and remained ready to be deployed in
support of Mechanism ground patrols. Between 1 November and 24 February, the
Service delivered integrated ground patrol training to 40 natio nal monitors,
international military observers and elements of the UNISFA force protection unit.
In addition, a team participated in a two -day ground patrol exercise conducted at the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism sector headquarters in Gok
Machar. The scope of the exercise was limited to practising administrative and
logistical aspects of ground patrols within the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, but
led to useful recommendations on improving operations.

VI. Personnel deployment and mission support
39. During the reporting period, the UNISFA military component stood at 4,533
personnel (237 military observers/staff officers and 4,296 troops), of an authorized
strength of 5,326. The strength of the UNISFA police component stood at 17 police
officers (14 men and 3 women) from five police-contributing countries, of an
authorized strength of 50. The total number of civilian staff stood at 237. The

16-05839

9/12

S/2016/353

Government of the Sudan issued 115 visas for UNISFA personnel; 89 visas for
military, police and civilian staff remain pending. As at 1 March, the mission had
completed the rotation of 2,532 troops through Kadugli airport, conducting 209
rotary-wing round airlifts.
40. In support of the conflict prevention and mitigation strategy, UNISFA
concluded the construction of facilities in six dry-season deployment sites, at
Noong, Doungop, Alal, Goli, Um Khariet and Agany Toak, and the deployment of
troops and military observers to those sites. A permanent company operating base
was established in Goli, and the existing temporary operating bases in Marial Achak
and Doungap were upgraded to permanent company operating bases. In addition, a
platoon-size temporary camp, Madingthon, was constructed close to the Ngok
Dinka Paramount Chief’s residence for his protection. In the repor ting period,
national monitors, civilian staff and United Nations military observers moved from
their temporary accommodation area in the Gok Machar camp to a completed
permanent mission compound.

VII. Financial aspects
41. The General Assembly, by its resolution 69/294, appropriated $268.3 million
for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2015 to 30 June 2016.
As at 31 March 2016, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
UNISFA amounted to $65 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for all
peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $2,435 million. Reimbursement
of troop costs has been made for the period up to 31 January 2016, while
reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned equipment has been made for the
period up to 31 December 2015, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

VIII. Observations and recommendations
42. The positive momentum in bilateral relations between the Sudan and South
Sudan generated by the conciliatory statements made by their Presidents in January
appears to have waned following the decision by the Sudan to reclose the border
with South Sudan and its accusations that South Sudan is providing support to
Sudanese rebel movements. These developments highlight the need to ensure that
the mechanisms established in the 2012 Cooperation Agreement meet regularly to
address outstanding issues between the two countries.
43. Tensions between the two countries appear to be on the rise again. With their
internal political and conflict resolution processes taking centre stage, the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan have paid limited attention to their
responsibilities regarding Abyei. I call upon both parties to renew efforts to address
the issues that have remained unresolved for too long, including the implementation
of their Agreement of 20 June 2011. For the consolidation of peace and security in
Abyei, it is paramount that the parties revive a viable political process leading to the
implementation of the Agreement. In this regard, I urge the parties to reconvene the
meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, which has not met since March
2015.

10/12

16-05839

S/2016/353

44. I also request the Sudan and South Sudan to ensure the full and permanent
withdrawal of all unauthorized forces from the Abyei Area and to work towards
creating a security environment conducive to peaceful coexistence and migration.
The continued presence of armed Sudanese police personnel in the Diffra oil
complex constitutes a violation of the Agreement and var ious Security Council
resolutions. I once again urge the Government of the Sudan to withdraw these
personnel and agree upon an alternative security arrangement for the oil
installations, and I also urge the Government of South Sudan to prevent the entry of
any armed SPLA personnel into the Abyei Area.
45. I commend the efforts of UNISFA in preventing conflict and expanding the
Misseriya community’s access to resources during the dry season by adopting a
flexible and tailored approach to the disengagement line, achieved through close
engagement with both communities. This approach has provided the Misseriya with
access to grazing land and water available only in the southern region of the Abyei
Area at a time of resource scarcity in which there is an increas ed risk of clashes
between the two communities. I am hopeful that the success of this approach will
continue throughout the remainder of the dry season.
46. I am greatly encouraged by the initiative displayed by the Ngok Dinka and
Misseriya communities in holding a series of joint meetings in Noong and Todach,
and I commend UNISFA for its role in facilitating the discussions. UNISFA will
continue to facilitate community-level initiatives that provide a unique opportunity
for both communities to discuss issues of mutual concern. The constructive spirit in
which the meetings have been held and the progress made on migration routes and
the sharing of pasture demonstrates willingness on the part of both communities to
continue dialogue in order to work towards a future of reconciliation and peaceful
coexistence.
47. I am also encouraged by the resumption of trading activities between the Ngok
Dinka and Misseriya communities in the villages of Noong, Dokura and Tajalei. I
am hopeful that further initiatives of this nature will continue the trend of rebuilding
confidence and trust between the two communities. The reports of cattle stolen from
Misseriya herders being recovered by members of the Dinka community is further
indication that a measure of confidence is increasing between the two communities.
48. Following the progress made on the determination of the centre line of the
Safe Demilitarized Border Zone at the meeting of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism held in Addis Ababa on 14 October, I am disappointed that further
meetings of the Mechanism have not been scheduled. I once again urge the two
parties to allow the Mechanism to meet in order to provide effective and regular
oversight to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. I am hope ful
that the permission granted by the Government of South Sudan for UNISFA troops
to deploy from the temporary headquarters of the Mechanism in Kadugli to the
sector headquarters in Gok Machar indicates a renewed commitment on its part to
fully implement the Mechanism. As I have stated in previous reports, both parties
need to remove the remaining impediments to the Mechanism’s full realization.
49. I renew my call upon the Sudanese authorities to provide increased levels of
support to UNISFA. This includes the timely issuance of visas to UNISFA
personnel, in particular for the police component, which is unable to deliver on its
mandate effectively with its current level of personnel. I also call upon the
Government of the Sudan and South Sudan to reach ag reement on the establishment

16-05839

11/12

S/2016/353

of the Abyei police service, while supporting temporary solutions to address law and
order issues in Abyei such as the establishment of community protection
committees. In the absence of an Abyei Police Service, such committees constitute
an important community-based crime prevention and reduction initiative. I urge the
Government of the Sudan to grant the permission necessary to conclude
construction work at the Athony airstrip and allow the transportation of construction
materials to the Abyei Area to enable UNISFA to refurbish its dilapidated
infrastructure and thereby improve the very challenging living conditions of
UNISFA personnel. Lastly, I call upon the Government of the Sudan to accept my
decision, welcomed by the Security Council in resolution 2205 (2015), to appoint a
civilian head of mission to UNISFA.
50. As the Security Council considers the renewal of the mandate of UNISFA, I
am encouraged by the progress made by the communities in fostering constructive
dialogue on issues affecting their reconciliation and peaceful coexistence. I am also
hopeful that the parties will engage in a constructive dialogue with my new Force
Commander and Acting Head of Mission, Major General Hassen Ebrahim Mussa, to
address the ongoing disputes affecting the Abyei Area. I therefore recommend an
extension of the mission’s mandate for six months in order to sustain ongoing
efforts to facilitate intercommunal dialogue and give my new Force Commander and
Acting Head of Mission the opportunity to engage with the parties, the African
Union and the Government of Ethiopia on the political situation.
51. In conclusion, I wish to extend my gratitude and appreciation to the former
Head of Mission, Haile Tilahun Gebremariam, and the former Force Comma nder,
Major General Birhanu Jula Gelalcha, for their service to the United Nations and to
the people of Abyei. I also wish to express my gratitude to the recently appointed
Acting Head of Mission and Force Commander, Major General Hassen Ebrahim
Mussa, and his staff; my Special Envoy, Haile Menkerios; the former President of
South Africa and Chair of the African Union High -level Implementation Panel,
Thabo Mbeki; the African Union Commission; and the Government of Ethiopia for
their continued support and commitment to the search for peace in the Abyei Area.

12/12

16-05839
