S/PV.9120

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9120th meeting

Tuesday, 30 August 2022, 3.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dai Bing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mrs. Gasri
Ms. Bouanga Ayoune
Mr. Korbieh
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2022/632)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-47617 (E)
*2247617*

S/PV.9120

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2022/632)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/632, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. DiCarlo and Mrs. Ruchira Kamboj,
Permanent Representative of India, in her capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the main
developments in Libya over the past month. Since our
last meeting on Libya, on 25 July (see S/PV.9098), the
United Nations has continued to engage with Libyan
actors at every level to facilitate a resolution of the
political impasse. I am deeply concerned about the
possibility that the ongoing stalemate and continued
delays in implementing the electoral process pose a
growing threat to security in and around Tripoli, and
potentially to all Libyans. That threat materialized
a few days ago, when Tripoli once again became
a theatre of violent clashes between armed groups
respectively supporting Mr. Abdulhamid Al Dabiba
and Mr. Fathi Bashagha.
2/17

30/08/2022

The fighting broke out in the early hours of
27 August, rapidly intensified and spread to civilianpopulated areas of Tripoli. It involved the indiscriminate
use of medium and heavy weapons, affecting civilians
and civilian infrastructure. According to the Libyan
authorities, at least 42 people, including four civilians,
were killed in the clashes, and 159 were injured. Fifty
families were reportedly displaced, and five health
facilities were significantly damaged. Two detention
centres for migrants and refugees were affected,
involving a total of 560 people. This appeared to be
another attempt by pro-Bashagha forces to enter the
capital from the east. However, they were blocked by
pro-Al Dabiba forces at Zleiten, about 160 kilometres
east of Tripoli, and were forced to retreat following
clashes. Attempts by other pro-Bashagha armed groups
to advance on the capital from the west and south-west
were similarly repelled. The fighting in Tripoli and its
outskirts subsided the next day, although the situation
remained tense and fluid. A fragile calm has since
prevailed in Tripoli. It is unclear how long it will last.
Retaliatory attacks by both sides and the announced
intention by the Government of National Unity to
arrest pro-Bashagha elements involved in the fighting
may trigger armed clashes that could again affect the
civilian population.
I am very concerned about the limited political
progress that has been made during the reporting period.
The United Nations has consistently underscored that
the conduct of elections remains the only way to break
the current impasse. Despite our continued efforts, no
progress has been made on forging a consensus on a
constitutional framework for the elections. Following
their meeting in Geneva in June, Aguila Saleh Issa, the
Speaker of the House of Representatives, and Khaled
Mishri, the President of the High State Council, held
further discussions in Türkiye, on 1 August, and in
Egypt, on 14 August. Regrettably, their disagreements
persisted, particularly on the eligibility criteria for
presidential candidates. I urge both leaders to complete
the work accomplished by the joint constitutional
committee. It will be critical to reach an agreement on a
constitutional framework and timeline for elections that
will enable the Libyan people to choose their leaders.
There were a few positive developments during
the reporting period. Notably, I commend the ongoing
efforts of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission (JMC)
to preserve and strengthen the implementation of the
ceasefire agreement. Of note, on 27 August, the eastern
22-47617

30/08/2022

The situation in Libya

delegation to the JMC called its counterparts in the west
to assure them that the Libyan National Army would
not be involved in the fighting. Earlier, on 9 August,
the Joint Military Commission met with the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya in Sirte to enhance
the readiness of the Libyan ceasefire monitoring
mechanism. They made progress on the activation of
a joint operations room in Sirte and also finalized the
modalities for the withdrawal of foreign forces, foreign
fighters and mercenaries from Libya.
On another positive note, on 18 August the General
Assembly of the Supreme Court of Libya voted to
restore the Court’s Constitutional Chamber, which had
been suspended since 2016. The reactivation of the
Chamber could contribute to the resolution of disputes
over the legitimacy of decisions taken by Libyan
institutions. I am also encouraged by the progress on
national reconciliation, including the efforts of the
Presidency Council to implement its strategic vision for
the issue. I reiterate the readiness of the United Nations
to support Libyan efforts on national reconciliation,
as well as the African Union’s planned conference
on national reconciliation in Libya, to be held at the
earliest possible opportunity.
Turning to economic developments, oil production
was resumed on 17 July. By the end of July, production
had reached the pre-shutdown level of 1.2 million
barrels per day. The Libyan National Oil Corporation
recently announced plans to further increase oil
production capacity. However, I am concerned that the
growing public discontent in the southern region over
the lack of basic services and poor living conditions
may lead to renewed closures of oilfields in the area.
The explosion of a fuel tank in the vicinity of Zawiyah
on 1 August, which killed 25 people and injured
dozens of others, has sparked a wave of protests over
the long-standing marginalization of communities in
the south. On 21 August, local dignitaries threatened
to form a parallel Government in the south if their
demands for respect for their right to basic services and
stronger representation in State institutions were not
met. Libya’s natural resources belong to all Libyans,
and revenues from oil exports should be distributed
equitably and fairly.
I regret to report that human rights violations in
Libya continue to be a major concern. On 20 August,
armed groups affiliated with the Libyan National Army
encircled the town of Qasr Bouhadi, 25 kilometres
south of Sirte. Civilians were deprived of freedom of

S/PV.9120

movement and prevented from leaving their districts,
with hospitals, shops, schools, petrol stations and
other essential facilities forced to close. On 26 August,
military actors withdrew from the town, but continued
to control all movement in and out of the town. I urge
the relevant actors to immediately lift the continuing
restrictions imposed on the population of Qasr Bouhadi
and warn that the situation could further escalate to an
intercommunal conflict.
Individuals peacefully exercising their right to
freedom of expression continued to be subjected to
abduction, enforced disappearance and arbitrary
detention. Violence against women activists, as well as
their unlawful arrest and detention, continues. Smear
campaigns targeting civil-society actors, particularly
women, using hate speech and incitements to violence,
are deeply worrying and must cease. Migrants and
refugees also continued to suffer serious human rights
violations. According to the most recent statistics,
2,661 migrants and refugees have been arbitrarily
detained in official detention centres with restricted
humanitarian access. The United Nations continues to
call for the immediate release of all who are arbitrarily
detained and for due process for those charged with
contravening Libyan laws.
It is critical that all Libyan actors remain calm on
the ground, refrain from escalatory rhetoric and actions
and take immediate steps to reverse the political
polarization that is spilling over into violence. In the
light of the deterioration of the political and security
climate in Tripoli, the United Nations must continue
to provide and enhance its good offices and mediation
efforts to help Libyan actors resolve the ongoing impasse
and seek a consensus pathway to elections. Libyans
themselves are responsible for determining their own
future. Any support that the parties receive from within
or outside Libya should serve to unite them, not divide
them. The Secretary-General has put forward a number
of proposals for the leadership of the Mission and his
good offices. I urge everyone to support his efforts to
help Libyans forge a path to peace.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Kamboj.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): In accordance with paragraph
24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February 2011, I
have the honour to report to the Security Council on
the work of the Committee established pursuant to

22-476173/17

S/PV.9120

The situation in Libya

resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. The report
covers the period from 27 May to 30 August of this year,
during which time the Committee conducted its work
using the silence procedure with the aim of facilitating
the implementation of the sanctions measures. At the
outset, since this is my first periodic report to the
Security Council, let me say that I look forward to
working with all the members of the Committee for the
remainder of our Security Council membership.
On 13 July, the Security Council adopted resolution
2644 (2022), through which it extended to 30 October
2023 the time-bound measures aimed at preventing
illicit exports of petroleum from Libya, including
crude oil and refined petroleum products. The arms
embargo, the travel ban and the assets freeze are not
time-bound and continue to apply. The Council also
extended the mandate of the Panel of Experts on Libya
to 15 November 2023. On 12 August, the SecretaryGeneral appointed six individuals to serve on the Panel.
Council members will recall that at the previous
Chair’s briefing (see S/PV.9047), my predecessor
informed the Council that the Committee was
considering the recommendations from the final report
of the Panel under its previous mandate. The Committee
had agreed to take action on the three recommendations
addressed to it, as well as on a recommendation
addressed to all Member States.
With respect to the implementation of the arms
embargo, the Committee received two attempted
inspection reports and two vessel inspection reports
from European Union Naval Force Mediterranean
Operation IRINI. One of the inspections led to a seizure
of cargo, and the Committee expects a second report to
be submitted with all the relevant details following the
submission of the initial report. Committee members
expressed varying views on the seizure of the cargo.
In connection with that particular inspection, the
Committee also received a letter from the Panel of
Experts concerning the cargo.
In relation to the assets freeze, no negative decision
was taken by the Committee on an exemption notification
submitted by the Kingdom of Bahrain invoking
paragraph 19 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011). In relation
to notifications submitted by the United Kingdom, also
invoking paragraph 19 (a), the Committee recalled its
previous position on the matter whereby the notification
had been successfully cleared in the Committee. No
negative decision was taken by the Committee with
4/17

30/08/2022

regard to another case brought by the United Kingdom,
also invoking paragraph 19 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011).
The Committee received two additional notifications
from Bahrain invoking paragraph 21 of resolution 1970
(2011). The Committee acknowledged receipt of one of
those notifications, and a response is being considered
for the second notification.
The Committee received a letter from Libya on
matters related to the Libyan Investment Authority,
a listed entity, to which the Committee responded. In
accordance with two recommendations agreed by the
Committee from the Panel’s five reports, the Chair
intends to convene informal informal consultations to
discuss matters related to the assets freeze. With regard
to the travel ban measure, the Committee extended for
a third time the six-month exemption request granted
for humanitarian purposes to three individuals on
the Committee’s list: Ms. Safia Farkash Al-Barassi,
Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi and Mr. Mohammed Al-Qadhafi.
The Committee received a travel notification from
Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi under the aforementioned
exemption for travel to Italy. In accordance with the
travel-ban-related recommendation agreed by the
Committee from the Panel’s final report, the Committee
will be considering a letter to Italy with regard to
the travel reminding of the destination country’s
notification requirement. Earlier, the Committee had
received a letter from Egypt confirming Ms. Safia
Farkash Al-Barassi’s travel from Egypt to Oman
and back. An initial notification for that travel was
submitted by the listed individual and reported by my
predecessor to the Council (see S/PV.9047).
With regard to the sanctions list, the Committee
received a seventh communication from the focal
point for delisting established pursuant to resolution
1730 (2006), in connection with the delisting request
of a listed individual. The focal-point process is still
ongoing. In accordance with the recommendation
agreed by the Committee from the Panel’s final
report, the Committee updated an existing entry on its
sanctions list and issued a corresponding press release
and note verbale to all Member States.
Lastly, the Committee replied to a communication
from Italy that touched on the privileges and immunities
enjoyed by the Panel of Experts.
The primary responsibility to implement sanctions
measures rests with Member States. The Committee is
committed to facilitating the implementation of those
22-47617

30/08/2022

The situation in Libya

measures and seeks to contribute to the promotion of
peace and stability in Libya.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Kamboj for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your able leadership
of the Security Council for this month. I am grateful to
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing and welcome
Her Excellency Ambassador Ruchira Kamboj of India
and thank her for her briefing today. I would also like
to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for responding
to our request to be the first speaker in this meeting,
given the exceptional circumstances in my country. I
will nevertheless try to be brief, because honestly we
are tired of repeating the same statements. What is
important to us today and to most Libyans is listening
to Council members and hearing what will be said in
the Council and what members plan to do in the wake
of the latest series of tragic events.
As far as we are concerned, there is nothing positive
to note today since our latest briefing last month (see
S/PV.9098). As members realize, we are facing the same
political impasse and the same security and military
tensions, while the humanitarian suffering of the Libyan
people has increased. What can I tell Council members
about the events of this month? Children are dying of
scorpion stings due to a lack of medication. Libyan
families are losing their lives boarding boats of death
as they try to emigrate to Europe. More mass graves
have been uncovered in Tarhuna. The energy crisis
continues. Fuel is still scarce, especially in the south,
and that has led to a humanitarian catastrophe and a
tanker explosion that claimed the lives of more than 20
people and injured 80. More events have followed, and
all of that preceded the recent bloody tragedy in Tripoli
two days ago.
These events are not surprising. We have warned
about them on many occasions, both in previous
statements and during Council meetings. We have
warned about the repercussions of the political
stalemate, vacuum and impasse. Today Tripoli is
wounded, in mourning and in pain. The unfortunate
events that we witnessed in the centre of the capital and
its suburbs claimed the lives of 32 people and injured
more than 160 in less than 24 hours, most of them
innocent civilians. Those events were not the first of
their kind, and we are afraid they will not be the last.

S/PV.9120

They are closely connected to the ongoing political
division and increased tensions. They have claimed
the lives of innocent civilians who have done nothing
wrong and have nothing to do with the conflict. They
were killed all of a sudden, even though they thought
they were safe at home.
That is why we asked to speak first — to convey
the questions of Libyan citizens and to listen to what
the Council will say to the families of the victims. What
will the Council say to the family of young Mustafa
Baraka or the family of Hanan Al-Sugayr? What will
the Council say to the family of Dr. Hussein Al-Kikli?
He was one of my relatives, and he died before the
eyes of his children and wife, inside of his home. They
are listening to the Council now. Will it repeat its
expressions of denunciation and condemnation, or will
it act to shoulder its responsibilities in order to maintain
international peace and security and protect civilians? I
say that to point out a paradox that has also been noted
by many Libyan people — they are wondering about
the contradictory stance of the Security Council on
protecting civilians. We can compare what happened
in 2011 to what is happening now in most regions of
Libya and the latest events two days ago in Tripoli. We
are not asking the Council once again to intervene, as
there are so many actors that have already done so. As
we say — a believer shall not be stung from the same pit
twice. The only things we are asking the Council to do
is to be serious in the implementation of its resolutions
and avoid double standards.
At this juncture, I ask everyone to observe a moment
of silence to mourn the lives of thousands of Libyan
innocent people who lost their lives from 2011 to today.
They did nothing wrong. This is a moral responsibility.
The victims of today do not care about analyses or
justifications, who is right or wrong, who is attacked
or defended, who is legitimate or illegitimate. The
victims know well that those who are responsible for
these events are those who wish to impose authority
by force and who are clinging to authority without the
right to do so. The victims know that those responsible
are those who bear arms outside of State control. The
victims want accountability locally, internationally and
since 2011. There is no doubt that one day the truth will
be unveiled and accountability will become a reality,
because the rights of the victims are imprescriptible.
Will the Council support the investigation into the
events and hold the responsible accountable?

22-476175/17

S/PV.9120

The situation in Libya

Today I will convey to the Security Council some
of the questions that go through the mind of the Libyan
people, who are wondering how the events unfolded in
this manner. This list of questions is not exhaustive,
and I hope that Council members can respond to them.
First, why did elections fail? One of the main
reasons is because elections were not held in December
2021. That failure is not attributed to domestic reasons
alone; there are some countries that deliberately wanted
to ensure the failure of the elections. That led to people
feeling desperate and frustrated. It also opened the
door for some to present many initiatives to fill the
vacuum. Even if they were well-intentioned, some of
those initiatives were contradictory or non-consensual.
Therefore, why was there not a real reaction by the
international community or the Security Council
towards those who ensured the failure of the elections
despite the numerous adopted resolutions that threaten
those obstructing the political process domestically or
internationally? Libyan citizens are wondering.
Secondly, I want to touch upon the lack of consensus
on the constitutional basis. The latest talks between the
House of Representatives and the High Council of State,
in Geneva, have faltered. There has been no agreement
on the constitutional basis, and the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya has stopped its operation
because of the lack of a United Nations envoy. That
gave the wrong signal that there are no longer prospects
for a peaceful political solution and has opened the way
for military mobilization and the possible use of force
to impose a new reality. It also led to some confusion,
as no national solutions or initiatives were supported.
The Security Council is asking Libyans to hold on
to United Nations sponsorship of solutions, but the
Council itself has been unable to agree for nine months
on the appointment of a United Nations envoy. It is
unfair to have Libyans bear that responsibility, because
we know that there is no agreement on a new envoy due
to divisions within the Council.
A few weeks ago, two names from Africa were
officially put forward, but no consensus has been
reached on either one. That is why we asked the
Secretary-General to act swiftly in order to reach the
minimum level of consensus. Consultations with the
Libyans should be conducted in advance in order to
ensure the success of that envoy.
I would like to take this opportunity to stress once
again the Libyan support for the three African Member
6/17

30/08/2022

States of the Security Council and for the African Union
for their joint efforts to find a solution to this problem,
because Libya believes in the active and important role
that Africa can play in helping us in our plight. Nobody
also denies the role of Libya vis-à-vis the African
continent. In that regard, we reiterate our support for
the united African position and the statements on Libya
in the Council.
Thirdly, we are concerned about foreign intervention.
For how long will foreign intervention — direct or
indirect — continue, as well as the foreign presence
on our territory? Certain countries insist on being the
guardian and having the upper hand on any issue related
to the current crisis, whether political or economic. Of
course, this is again an old topic. Libyan citizens are
therefore wondering about the stance of the Security
Council in that regard. Imagine — with all the suffering
and crises in Libya — some countries are still trying
to exploit the situation in Libya and to control Libyan
assets of the Libyan Investment Authority. That is in
flagrant violation of Security Council resolutions, and
we have sent the Council detailed notes on that issue.
That is why we urgently call upon the Security Council
and the Sanctions Committee to bear the responsibility
for implementing their commitments and promises. We
also hold them responsible for ensuring that the wealth
of the Libyan people is not squandered.
Fourthly, I would like to talk about the flow and
proliferation of weapons and militias outside of State
control over most of the country. The absence of
a State monopoly over weapons is one of the main
reasons standing in the way of imposing stability and
State-building. Nevertheless, the Council is unable
to stop those phenomena. What then is the solution?
Libyan citizens are wondering.
In conclusion, we repeat that experience has shown
that there is no military solution to the Libyan crisis.
The era of coups has ended. The problem is political,
not legal.
Although the picture is bleak, there may be a final
opportunity — and a glimmer of hope — to break
the stalemate and restore to legitimacy the will of the
Libyan people. That is why we call upon the United
Nations to act immediately and support all efforts
to find a comprehensive Libyan-owned and Libyanled political settlement, not false and fragile political
solutions, as was the case in the past. Non-exclusionary
consensual grounds must be found, and the House of
22-47617

30/08/2022

The situation in Libya

S/PV.9120

Representatives and the State must come to agree on
a constitutional basis and set a clear time frame for
holding general elections as soon as possible.

Nations-brokered political process supported by the
wider international community to agree a path towards
free, fair and inclusive elections as soon as possible.

In that regard, the United Nations and the
international community must support a transparent
and fair electoral process and ensure that the results
are accepted. This would be a response to the Libyan
people’s demand for an end to current political bodies
and transitional stages. Concurrently, we call on
the international community to support the efforts
undertaken by the Presidency Council and the African
Union following their recent agreement to ensure the
success of national reconciliation and put an end to the
legitimacy crisis and the spiral of this conflict.

We must also ensure that the resources of the Libyan
people are managed in a transparent, responsible and
accountable manner. The wishes of the Libyan people
must be prioritized ahead of narrow self-interests.

In brief, we cannot expect different results when
we are using the same tools. A sick man cannot recover
if he takes the same medication over and over when that
medication has been proved to be ineffective.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now give
the floor to those members of the Council who wish to
make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
briefing and Raisedon Zenenga and his team in the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
for their continued work under difficult circumstances.
I also thank Ambassador Kamboj for her briefing on the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. I
also welcome the participation of the representative of
Libya in our meeting today.
I will make three points. First, the United Kingdom
condemns the violence perpetrated by armed groups in
Tripoli on 26 and 27 August. The use of violence by
armed groups, whether to acquire control of territory
or local resources, or to end political stalemate, is
unacceptable. As we have just heard, the actions of
armed groups this weekend resulted only in innocent
civilian casualties and the destruction of civil
infrastructure. Our condolences go to the victims and
their families.
Such violence is a result of the presence of parallel
governments and the misappropriation of State
resources. The Libyan parties and the international
community must acknowledge that there is no military
solution to Libya’s crisis of legitimacy. Rather, all
Libyan parties must engage constructively with a United

I encourage all Council members to agree to
the appointment of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General immediately. Increased tension
and violence serve only to illustrate the need for the
urgent appointment of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to lead mediation efforts. I call
upon the Security Council to stand ready to support
the Special Representative to deliver an inclusive and
comprehensive political process.
Finally, in recent weeks, a number of diplomatic
missions have faced restrictions on their movement
within Libya. The Libyan authorities must allow full
freedom of movement and travel within the territory, in
accordance with the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations. We also emphasize the importance of
allowing individuals and organizations engaged in
activities on behalf of embassies the freedom they need
to carry out their work.
The United Kingdom reaffirms its readiness
to work with Libyan stakeholders, the incoming
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
all international partners to work towards a stable,
peaceful and prosperous Libya.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. I also thank
the Permanent Representative of India for her briefing
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
Norway is saddened by the loss of lives resulting
from the clashes in and around Tripoli last weekend.
We share the deep concern expressed by the SecretaryGeneral and Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo about
the developments in Libya. The country’s political and
military leaders must put the interests of the Libyan
people first and put an end to the fighting.
Norway joins the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) in calling for an immediate cessation
of hostilities in and around Tripoli. We urge all parties
to exercise restraint, contribute to de-escalation and
return to the negotiation table.

22-476177/17

S/PV.9120

The situation in Libya

We remind all parties of the need to protect
the civilian population and civilian infrastructure.
Reported shelling of hospitals and medical centres is
of grave concern. Ambulance teams and medical staff
must be given unhindered access.
The latest round of fighting shows yet again that
this conflict cannot be solved by military means. A
political solution in Libya is the only way forward.
The Libyan people have made it clear that they want
elections, not violence and conflict.
Libyan leaders must redouble their efforts to
agree to a constitutional framework for elections and
to find peaceful solutions. We welcome the meeting
between the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and
UNSMIL in Sirte earlier this month, where ceasefire
monitoring and withdrawal of foreign forces, foreign
fighters and mercenaries from Libya were discussed.
It is essential that the withdrawal moves forward
and that the necessary disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration measures in place. We also call for
strengthened efforts aimed at unifying the armed forces.
The end of the oil blockade is a positive development.
The proceeds from Libya oil production must benefit
all Libyans and should not be held hostage to political
rivalry. We call on all actors in Libya to respect the
independence of economic and financial institutions
such as the National Oil Corporation and the Central
Bank of Libya.
In conclusion, let me thank Stephanie Williams for
her efforts as Special Adviser and again reiterate the
importance of appointing a new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya. UNSMIL needs
stable and predictable leadership in order to continue
to fulfil its mission in the country. Recent days have
shown the urgency of doing so.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. I thank the
Permanent Representative of India for her briefing. I
also welcome the Libyan delegation in today’s meeting;
we listened carefully to the briefing by the Libyan
Permanent Representative.
Let me join others in expressing our deep concern
with the troubling violence we have seen in recent days
in Tripoli, which resulted in many civilian casualties.
We call on all sides to de-escalate tensions and protect
civilians at all times.
8/17

30/08/2022

At our last meeting on today’s topic (see S/PV.9098),
the Libyan delegation voiced several concerns about the
way the Security Council had been treating the situation
in Libya. As the Council acknowledges the importance
of the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned dialogue for the
present and future of Libya, we must listen to the
Libyan parties’ concerns.
Brazil notes the positive role that the United
Nations Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) can play in
that regard, based on the consent of the State and in
partnership with local authorities. The PBC is well suited
to assisting countries in identifying and implementing
their own national peacebuilding priorities, many of
which are relevant for sustaining peace and stability
in Libya.
Resolution 2647 (2022), for example, which the
Council adopted last month, expressly underlines
the importance of institution-building, securitysector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, and the engagement of Libyan parties on
those issues with the relevant United Nations bodies in
support of peacebuilding.
In spite of the political divisions in Libya, the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
albeit under a precarious leadership arrangement,
has maintained its engagement with local authorities,
including in the economic, security and political
sectors, with a view to unifying institutions from both
sides. As we attempt to translate the Libyan-led and
Libyan-owned mantra into reality, we must bear in
mind that Libyan priorities should inform the Council’s
actions regarding the country. The appointment of
UNSMIL’s leadership is only one instance where views
from within Libya cannot be ignored, not least because
the holder of the position must inspire the trust of all
parties. Most importantly, UNSMIL must continue to
foster common political ground between the two rival
Governments so that they can agree on a constitutional
basis and the eligibility criteria that will allow Libya’s
long-delayed elections to be held.
We have heard calls from within the Council for
the continuation of Libya’s production and export of
oil, against a backdrop of political disputes over the
management of natural resources and their revenues,
as well as threats of disruptions to supplies. In the
absence of a unified Government policy on the
matter, the parameters for the management of natural
resources, as a corollary of Libyan sovereignty, should
22-47617

30/08/2022

The situation in Libya

be based on domestic preservation in the interests of
national development and the welfare of all Libyans,
rather than responding to foreign-driven interests and
pressures. The same is true for Libyan assets frozen
abroad. Brazil would like to point in that regard to
the conclusions by the Panel of Experts assisting the
Council in implementing the relevant resolutions.
One conclusion was that the active management of
Libyan frozen assets is not in line with paragraph 19 of
resolution 1970 (2011). However, the Council has been
unable to redress the situation.
Finally, my delegation notes that the Council’s
authorization of Member States’ implementation of
the arms embargo on Libya continues to give rise to
controversy. We stress once again the importance of
fully respecting the arms embargo and implementing
it in accordance with the terms set out in the relevant
Security Council resolutions. The Council has to find
unity as it calls on the Libyan parties to put aside their
differences and move forward in a genuinely Libyanled and -owned political process.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
and Ambassador Ruchira Kamboj, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, for their briefings.
We are extremely concerned about the latest
developments in Libya. The protracted tangle of
disagreements between the opposing sides, which
developed as a result of the internal political
stalemate, has brought the country to a new era of dual
competing authorities and a disastrous destabilization
of the situation. Libya was first rocked by a wave of
popular protests in which the people demanded that
the Government resolve the urgent tasks of unifying
State structures, ensuring security and improving the
socioeconomic situation. Now the armed clashes in
Tripoli over the past weekend — which included the
use of heavy weapons, among other things — are the
sad culmination of that process. The city has repeatedly
been used as an arena for armed groups to settle their
differences, but the scale of the current tragedy is
unprecedented in the past two years. As a result of
the fighting, dozens of people have been killed and
hundreds injured. While the situation has stabilized
slightly, there could be another spiral of violence at
any moment.

S/PV.9120

Any steps leading to further escalation in the former
Jamahiriya are categorically unacceptable. We call on
the Libyan leaders to return to dialogue and warn them
against using violence to achieve their goals, which
will lead nowhere and contribute only to deepening the
country’s divisions. Heated exchanges of accusatory
rhetoric and attempts to punish opponents after the fact
will hardly help the cause.
We would like to point out that the root causes of
Libya’s current plight are well known, although our
partners prefer not to mention them. The current chaos
is a direct result of the NATO military intervention
in 2011, when the provisions of the pertinent Security
Council resolution were grossly perverted. There
was nothing left of Libya. The country went through
a de facto dismantling of its statehood, the State
administrative system was destroyed and interregional
and intertribal relations were upended. Eleven years
later, we are still trying to overcome the disastrous
effects of that period, so any declarations calling for
peace are dubious at the very least. We wish to draw
attention to the passivity of the representatives of the
United Kingdom, in its role of informal sponsor, who
did not even try to convene the Council in the light
of the bloody events in Tripoli — just as is currently
happening in Baghdad. It seems that our Western
colleagues are far more concerned about other topics,
including ensuring the continuation of oil production,
rather than about the welfare and security of ordinary
Libyans and Iraqis.
We once again reaffirm our consistent approach
to a peaceful settlement in Libya. The central role in
coordinating the parameters of the political process
should belong to the Libyans themselves, without the
imposition of any external ready-made recipes. The
way out of the current complicated situation should take
the form of duly prepared national elections held on an
inclusive basis, but Libyan politicians still have not
reached a common position on the procedural aspects
of the elections. Establishing artificial deadlines, as
experience has repeatedly shown, does not produce the
desired results. We firmly believe that, in the current
critical situation, all States capable of influencing the
warring parties should do everything in their power
to restore order in Libya. It is no secret that a number
of influential countries have competing interests
that clash in Libya, which hinders efforts to achieve
stability there.

22-476179/17

S/PV.9120

The situation in Libya

For its part, Russia welcomes any negotiation format
that genuinely represents a road to peace, as opposed
to fruitless geopolitical projects with a hidden agenda.
It will be impossible to achieve balanced solutions
without inclusiveness, and that same principle is key to
the success of the national reconciliation process, which
presupposes the involvement of all leading political
forces in the country, including representatives of the
former regime. In that connection, we welcome the
efforts of the African Union to organize an all-Libyan
conference on national reconciliation. We will try to
provide whatever assistance we can in implementing
that step. Regarding the issue of eliminating the foreign
military presence, we have always advocated for a
synchronized, balanced, gradual and phased withdrawal
of all non-Libyan armed groups and military units
without exception, so as not to undermine the balance
of forces.
We are convinced that the central role in promoting
the Libyan settlement should be played by the United
Nations, whose most important instrument remains the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
Unfortunately, the Mission continues to operate today
without a Security Council-mandated leader, which is
fatal to its effectiveness. Against the backdrop of the
de facto dual Governments and the aggravated threat
of a full-scale armed conflict, it is unacceptable to
leave the United Nations presence in Libya without an
intermediary with the appropriate status and authority.
We hope that a new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of UNSMIL will be
appointed as soon as possible. We have agreed to the
candidate proposed by the Secretariat. That individual
will undoubtedly be able to help break the current
deadlock in the political process and bring together and
use the existing initiatives and ideas in the right way.
It is important that the appointee enjoy the support of
the key players in Libya and the region, as well as the
approval of the members of the Security Council.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing today and
welcome the presence of the Ambassador of Libya in
today’s meeting.
The political stalemate in Libya and subsequent
mobilization of armed groups are a matter of concern.
As we keep repeating, there can be no military or armed
solution to the issues facing the country. It is therefore
imperative that all the outstanding political issues be
resolved peacefully by the parties concerned, keeping
10/17

30/08/2022

in mind the larger interests of the Libyan people. We
hope that all the parties will work together to maintain
peace and stability in Libya. The immediate priority
for Libya is to hold presidential and parliamentary
elections as soon as possible in a free, fair, inclusive
and credible manner. In that regard, it is disappointing
that consensus still eludes the parties on transitional
measures governing the period leading to national
elections. We hope that all the outstanding issues
will be resolved and a consensus will be achieved
on the constitutional basis for holding the elections
without delay.
We remain concerned about the resurgence of
terrorist activity in Libya and reiterate that terrorist
groups and affiliated entities must not be allowed to
operate there unchallenged. Terrorism emanating from
Libya is bound to have cascading effects on the Sahel
region and it is therefore important for the international
community to focus on it and nip it in the bud at its
current stage in order to avoid collateral consequences
for the wider African continent.
The situation in Libya and the armed mobilizations
once again highlight the critical necessity for a full and
complete withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries.
We have yet to see signs of tangible progress on that
front. The continued presence of foreign forces and
mercenaries is detrimental to the peace and stability
of the country and the region. There have been blatant
violations of the arms embargo in Libya. In that regard,
the Panel of Experts on Libya of the Committee pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) affirmed categorically in its
recent report that
“[t]he remainder of the training provided by Turkey
to the Government of National Unity Affiliated
Forces is military or naval in nature and thus a
violation of paragraph 9 of resolution 1970 (2011).”
(S/2022/427, para. 77)
Moreover, in the same report, the Panel of Experts
“noted the continuous presence of Turkish-backed
Syrian fighters in Government of National UnityAffiliated Forces military camps in Tripoli.” (ibid.,
para. 30)
Such blatant disregard for Security Council resolutions
on Libya is cause for serious concern. Such activities
are also in violation of the ceasefire agreement agreed
to by the Libyan parties themselves in 2020, and we
22-47617

30/08/2022

The situation in Libya

S/PV.9120

believe that in the enduring political stalemate we are
seeing the adverse effects of such actions.

economic opportunities for Libyans have decreased
because of uncertainty about the country’s future.

We reiterate that Libya’s sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity must be safeguarded. The political
process must be fully Libyan-led and -owned, with
no imposition or external interference. India has
traditionally enjoyed close and mutually beneficial
bilateral ties with the Libyan people, and we remain
committed to supporting Libya and its people in their
endeavour to seek lasting peace and stability.

That ongoing instability is a reminder of the
urgent need to immediately appoint a new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya
in order to resume mediation efforts, with the united
support of the international community, including
the members of the Security Council. United Nations
leadership on the Libya file remains essential to
re-establishing stability and achieving progress on
the political process. The United States will continue
to fully support United Nations efforts to secure a
constitutional framework for elections and a concrete
timeline to election day. We reiterate that persons who
obstruct or undermine the political process, including
those providing support for armed groups or criminal
networks through the illicit exploitation of crude oil or
any other natural resources in Libya, may be subject to
United Nations sanctions.

Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for her update on the current situation in Libya. I
also thank Ambassador Kamboj for her briefing,
and the United States welcomes her leadership of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.
The violence that erupted in Tripoli on Saturday
and Sunday was the outcome of Libya’s political
leaders’ abject failure to place the common good above
their political interests and work towards long-term
peace and stability for the Libyan people. For months
now, inflammatory rhetoric and sporadic incidents of
violence among militias, foreign fighters and foreign
forces have punctuated a tense and unsustainable status
quo. On two occasions, first in May and now again this
past weekend, we have seen incendiary remarks and
unilateral action escalate into open violence, with the
latest incident claiming civilian lives and destroying
homes and buildings. The United States is deeply
concerned about the continuing belligerence of the
rival leaders and manoeuvring by militias for political
and military advantage, as well as the continued flow of
weapons and other military hardware into the country,
in contravention of the arms embargo.
The Libyan people are losing hope as to whether
Libya’s leaders can set aside personal ambition and
achieve agreement on a constitutional framework
for elections that would grant Libyans their rightful
opportunity to select their leaders peacefully. They are
losing hope that their country can be free of corruption
and foreign influence, their armed forces unified and
foreign fighters, forces and mercenaries withdrawn.
They are deprived of basic public services while the
powerful cut deals to divvy up hydrocarbon revenues
according to their own interests — particularly those of
the militias controlled by various factions — robbing the
Libyan people of their national wealth. At the same time,

Under the leadership of former Special Adviser
Stephanie Williams, the delegations from the House
of Representatives and the High State Council made
important progress on election issues. We urge Aguila
Saleh Issa, Speaker of the House of Representatives, and
Khaled Mishri, the President of the High State Council,
to continue their efforts by engaging constructively with
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and the
Special Representative, once he or she is appointed, to
finalize the eligibility requirements for the candidates
running in the presidential elections and commit to an
election calendar.
Libya is on a precipice. We call on all the parties
in Libya to refrain from violence and from actions
that would precipitate violence. We call on all who are
once again risking being dragged into violence to put
down their arms. We call on all outside Libya who have
encouraged violence through political, financial and
military support to cease their interference and respect
the arms embargo. We call on all the parties to turn
away from a path of war and to work together for peace
and stability.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her information on the
recent developments in Libya, as well as Ambassador
Kamboj for introducing the report on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.

22-4761711/17

S/PV.9120

The situation in Libya

We are outraged by the explosion in violence of the
past few days and the brazen use of heavy weaponry
in densely populated neighbourhoods of the Libyan
capital. We deplore the loss of life in the recent wave
of senseless violence, and we wish a speedy recovery
to the wounded. The protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure is an obligation to be respected by all
parties in all circumstances, and that is something that
must be repeated again and again.
The fighting of the past few days has been a
long time coming. The protracted political impasse
has intensified a legitimacy vacuum that in turn has
exacerbated an increasingly volatile security situation
in Libya. Sadly, what we are dealing with today is the
worst possible display of institutional rivalry through
militias. The divisions and stalemate in Libya generate
a false impression that the long-standing crisis can be
resolved by imposing a solution rather than through
dialogue, compromise and political process. These tragic
events in Tripoli clearly demonstrate that the country’s
future is closely intertwined with the success of the
political process and the holding of national elections.
The decision about who should run the country and how
its wealth should be distributed cannot and will not be
decided by guns but by ballots, and not by strongmen
but by the free will of the people. We firmly condemn
any and all actions that inject instability, insecurity
and violence. We condemn the use of force for political
purposes and for achieving political gains.
While foreign interference must cease in Libya, we
urge all the parties to take advantage of the support of
the United Nations to ensure the full implementation
of the ceasefire agreement and to restart the political
process. With full respect for Libyan sovereignty,
Albania reaffirms its support to the United Nations
mediation efforts to facilitate the intra-Libyan dialogue
that is so urgently needed to overcome the current
impasse. Libyan stakeholders must put the welfare of
the Libyan people first and above their own narrow
interests. That includes respect for human rights for
all Libyans. We reiterate our firm belief that elections
in Libya are the only way to do justice to the Libyan
people’s suffering, act on their demand for democracy
and respect their right to the national wealth and
resources. Only an elected and legitimate Government
will be able to deal with and meet the urgent needs of
the Libyan people, and that makes the electoral process
a matter of absolute priority.
12/17

30/08/2022

We commend the Secretary-General’s tireless
efforts to find a suitable candidate for the position of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Libya and move towards balanced, inclusive and
sustainable solutions to Libya’s situation. We reiterate
our support for a Libyan-owned and Libyan-led process
with United Nations facilitation and mediation. The
recent events show that every day without a solution
is a lost day for Libya. It is up to the Libyans and their
political class to make sure that every day matters.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council — Gabon, Ghana and Kenya.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo and Ambassador Ruchira Kamboj, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for their briefings. We
welcome the participation of Ambassador Elsonni,
Permanent Representative of Libya.
We are extremely concerned about the clashes
that have broken out in Tripoli in the past few days.
We offer our deepest condolences to the bereaved
families and call for an immediate cessation of the
violence. We call for Libya’s leaders to heed their
people’s desire for peace and security. That can be
achieved only by wholly embracing the belief that
the destiny of the Libyan people is to be united, and
therefore accepting that no one side of the political
divide, whether in Tripoli or Benghazi, will ever have
a monopoly on force or political domination. These
clashes may appear to offer temporary advantage, but
that is a dangerous illusion. All they really offer is an
opportunity for those who would benefit from a reversal
of the path to reconciliation. We therefore call for an
end to all inflammatory remarks by political leaders,
as well as the corresponding heightened movement and
mobilization of armed groups.
We recommend to all parties the mediating role of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and other
international support in that regard. We also invite Libya
to take advantage of the African Union’s offer in line
with resolution 2647 (2022). That is also in line with the
commitment of the African Union Peace and Security
Council expressed in its communiqué of 29 June. We
look forward to the speedy nomination of an African
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. It is
time to offer sustained mediation accepted by all sides
in order to enable Libya to end its transitional phase and
22-47617

30/08/2022

The situation in Libya

elect an inclusive Government. The elections require
a firm constitutional basis, adopted through inclusive
dialogue and consensus, if they are to be credible. We
call on all the relevant Libyan parties to make every
effort to deliver that kind of constitutional framework.
We are painfully aware that as we urge Libyans
to exert themselves in resolving their differences,
they are having to contend with external interests
that undermine their push for unity. We call on the
political leadership and the people of Libya to make the
courageous choice to resist those external influences.
Libya has suffered enough. Africa has suffered enough.
It is time we collectively resisted being divided by
powerful foreign interests that care only for their own
advantage and manoeuvres against each other. We
demand the immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces,
foreign fighters and mercenaries from the territory
of Libya. Their continued presence undermines the
territorial integrity of Libya and the peace and security
of the Libyan people. We commend the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission for its work in helping sustain the
ceasefire agreement and urge it to press on with the
implementation of the agreement and the reunification
of the armed forces. We urge close collaboration between
Libya, the United Nations, neighbouring countries and
the African Union in monitoring their withdrawal to
avoid the transfer of armed conflict into the region,
and to ensure the conduct of the corresponding work of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration to the
various countries of origin.
In preserving Libya’s frozen assets for the
country’s future generations, and cognizant of the
external interests competing for Libya’s resources
and wealth, we urge that any action on those assets be
undertaken in consultation with the Libyan authorities.
We also call for the protection of Libya’s oil sector from
politicization and manipulation by external influences.
We continue to be disturbed by the continuing
inhumane treatment of migrants, refugees and asylum
seekers both on land and at sea. We demand that those
involved, whether directly or indirectly, cease such
abuse of human rights. We want to see the United Nations
monitor more closely the resources and information
channels that enable it and expect the SecretaryGeneral’s report on migrant smuggling to shed more
light on the issue. We also call for considering more
practical ways of addressing its root causes.

S/PV.9120

Finally, we reaffirm our respect for Libya’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty and our support for
a truly Libyan-led and -owned peace process.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. DiCarlo
and Ambassador Kamboj for their thorough briefings.
We also welcome the participation of Ambassador
Elsonni in today’s meeting and thank him for his
important briefing about the situation in Libya.
We express our sincere condolences and sympathy
to the Ambassador and the Libyan people, including
the families of the civilian victims of the recent
clashes in Tripoli and of the fuel-tanker accident in
Bint Bayyah municipality earlier this month. Such
incidents unfortunately represent yet another aspect of
the daily suffering of our brother people of Libya, who
are still dealing with many hardships and crises, first
among them those related to the provision of energy,
water and electricity services amid the rising prices
of basic commodities. The security situation is also
increasingly dangerous, owing to the continued armed
clashes, particularly in the capital.
The United Arab Emirates condemns the recent acts
of armed violence in Libya and calls on all the parties
to immediately halt their military operations. We also
underscore the importance of the swift departure of all
armed groups and militias from civilian areas in the
city of Tripoli. And it is vital to ensure the security
and safety of unarmed civilians, especially women
and children, as well as civilian infrastructure and
medical facilities. They must not be exposed to any
further danger. In that regard, we want to remind the
relevant stakeholders and all the parties in Libya of
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
We call on them to exercise the utmost restraint and to
listen to the voice of reason and wisdom with a view to
finding a solution to the ongoing crisis. All the parties
should work to overcome discord, restore calm, engage
in serious dialogue, prioritize the national interests
and restore security and stability in Libya. A return
to fighting and escalation is not the solution and will
bring only devastation to all Libyans. In the light of the
current situation, we would like to focus our statement
on four critical aspects.
First, we call on all Libyan parties to take concrete
steps to unify the military institutions and address
the lawlessness and fighting among armed groups in
Tripoli and its suburbs. In that regard, we support the

22-4761713/17

S/PV.9120

The situation in Libya

statement from the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) about the immediate need to
cease hostilities, and we reiterate the firm position
of the United Arab Emirates on the importance of a
simultaneous phased, gradual and balanced withdrawal
of all foreign forces, foreign fighters and mercenaries
from Libya. We also call for maintaining the gains
through the comprehensive ceasefire agreement, the
outcomes of the road map and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Secondly, the time has come for the Libyan
parties to make the necessary concessions to reach
an agreement on the remaining contentious issues in
the draft Constitution and then hold parliamentary
and presidential elections. Those are the steps needed
to end the political stalemate. Considering recent
developments, the reasons for the obstacles in the
electoral process have become apparent to all. That
electoral process has become hostage to polarization,
alliances and shifting interests that do not serve the
aspirations of the Libyan people and are not in line
with the hopes of the nearly 3 million Libyan men,
women and young people who registered to vote in the
elections. We also stress the importance of the national
reconciliation project, led by the Presidency Council
and based on the principles of Libyan ownership and
inclusiveness. It has a fundamental role to play in
supporting the political process and ensuring lasting
peace throughout Libya.
Thirdly, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions and the concerns of Libyans, the rights of
the Libyan people and the protection of their resources
and frozen assets should remain a top priority. We
welcome all steps taken to unify and depoliticize
Libyan financial and other critical sectors, including the
energy and oil sectors. While prioritizing the security
and political situations in Libya, we should not neglect
the economic situation, which plays an important role
in supporting stability in the country.
Fourthly, we look forward to the appointment of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya to lead UNSMIL from Tripoli and enjoy sufficient
consensus in order to support Libyans in their efforts to
defuse tensions and advance the political process, as
well as the security and economic tracks.
In conclusion, we reiterate that our brother people
of Libya deserve to live in peace. We hope that all the
Libyan parties will take into consideration the measures
14/17

30/08/2022

needed to realize their people’s desire to achieve peace,
security and development in Libya.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I too
thank the Under-Secretary-General and the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya for their briefings. I also
welcome the Permanent Representative of Libya to
today’s meeting.
Like others, France has been following the renewed
tensions in Libya with concern. The violence that broke
out in Tripoli in the past few days demonstrates that
the status quo is untenable. We call on all stakeholders
to refrain from violence and to fully comply with
the ceasefire agreement of 23 October 2020. We
also encourage all Libyan stakeholders to engage in
constructive dialogue with a view to easing tensions
and preserving the country’s unity and stability. France
reiterates the urgency of reaching a viable political
solution, which means forming a unified, inclusive
Government that can exert its authority throughout the
territory and organize and ensure safe presidential and
parliamentary elections as soon as possible. We call on
Libyan stakeholders to finalize the constitutional basis
necessary for those elections without delay.
On the security front, it is crucial to preserve
the gains of the ceasefire agreement — first and
foremost, freedom of movement throughout the
Libyan territory, but also the dialogue among the main
security stakeholders. That is essential to launching a
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration process
and for making progress in implementing the plan for
the withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries. The
arms embargo must also be fully respected, and France
stands ready to contribute to all of those measures, as
well as to efforts to unify the Libyan armed forces.
On the economic front, the resumption of oil
production is a positive step forward that must
be sustained. France reiterates its call for the
implementation of an equitable and transparent
redistribution mechanism for oil revenue for the benefit
of the entire population.
France remains concerned about the violations of
the rights of migrants and refugees and will continue
to work to combat impunity. We point to the primary
responsibility of the Libyan authorities in that regard.
We will work with all members of the Security Council
to ensure the extension in September of the authorization
22-47617

30/08/2022

The situation in Libya

to intercept vessels suspected of smuggling migrants
off the coast of Libya.
In conclusion, it is more important than ever for the
Council and the United Nations to be on the spot, which
is why France calls for the swift appointment of a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya
and for all stakeholders to demonstrate the flexibility
needed to facilitate this long-overdue appointment.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo and Ambassador Ruchira Kamboj for
their briefings.
Mexico is deeply concerned about the armed
clashes that took place last weekend in Tripoli. We
especially deplore the civilian deaths and the damage
done to hospitals and other civilian infrastructure. We
call on the Security Council to condemn the violence
and demand respect for the ceasefire agreement and
international humanitarian law. This futile attempt to
break the political deadlock by force demonstrates the
high price that civilians have paid for the stalemate in
the negotiations on the legal framework for the holding
of free and inclusive elections. It is unacceptable that
the lives and heritage of more than 6 million Libyans are
under constant threat from the opportunism of militias
and the irresponsible conduct of some political actors,
not to mention the indifference and at times complicity
of the international community. We also reiterate our
concern about the situation faced by migrants in Libya.
In the light of the disturbing situation, Mexico would
like to make two points.
First, my country’s history and experience with
conflicts in Latin America has shown us that regional
mobilization is crucial in resolving situations such
as the one in Libya. We believe that regional bodies,
particularly the African Union and the League of
Arab States, should step up their efforts to revive the
political process in the country, in line with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and the
parameters agreed on in the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum. Regional action is particularly crucial given
the Council’s inability to reach an agreement on the
leadership and mandate of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
Secondly, my country reiterates the importance of
continuing to monitor and prevent the illicit trade in
weapons through the strict application of the embargoes
imposed by the Council. We urge all States to cooperate

S/PV.9120

to prevent arms, ammunition and explosives from
exacerbating the violence in Libya. The humanitarian
consequences of the irresponsible flow of weapons have
become apparent during this conflict and we were again
reminded of their destructive potential last weekend.
At the same time, the withdrawal of foreign fighters
and mercenaries and the unification of Libyan security
forces will be crucial to the continued stabilization of
the country.
In conclusion, we believe that the speedy appointment
of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General
is vital to continuing the work of bringing the parties
closer together and leading UNSMIL’s efforts. We call
on members to adopt a constructive and flexible stance
so that the Mission can contribute to establishing peace
and stability in Libya and the entire region.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I thank our briefers, UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and Ambassador Kamboj,
Permanent Representative of India, in her capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. I also
welcome the participation of the representative of Libya
at this meeting.
The violent confrontations that we have seen in
Tripoli in recent days are deeply concerning and serve
only to raise tensions while exacting a terrible toll on
the civilian population. We sympathize with those who
have lost loved ones or been injured over the past couple
of days. We unequivocally reject all attempts to gain
legitimacy or control over State institutions through the
threat of the use of force.
To Libya’s leaders we say that legitimacy can come
from the Libyan people and from the ballot box alone.
The current executive impasse can only be addressed
through the holding of free, fair and inclusive elections.
The fact that 3 million Libyans registered to vote in
December should have been incentive enough to find
agreement on a way forward, capitalizing on the
progress made in Cairo and Geneva. Today Libyans
are increasingly facing deteriorating living conditions,
with their access to basic services, including water,
food and health care, seriously curtailed. They neither
want nor can cope with another conflict. Responsible
and transparent governance is urgently needed. An
independent and unified judiciary is also key. We hope
that the recent decision to reactivate the Constitutional
Chamber will contribute to safeguarding Libyans’

22-4761715/17

S/PV.9120

The situation in Libya

rights and freedoms, paving a way towards elections as
soon as possible.
We remain gravely concerned about the human
rights situation in Libya, including recent reports
of arbitrary detentions and enforced disappearances
around the July demonstrations. Libya’s democratic
future is being jeopardized by the deepening restrictions
on civil society, which regrettably include an increase
in incidents of online hate speech and incitements to
violence targeting women activists. We condemn those
deplorable acts. Women’s full, equal, meaningful and
safe participation in public life, including a future
electoral process, must be guaranteed. We echo the
statements by former Special Adviser Stephanie
Williams calling for young people’s voices to be lifted
in that regard as well.
Restrictions on the activities of international
organizations working with migrants are particularly
worrisome in the light of the ongoing denials of access
for United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners
to detention centres. Recent reports of the SecretaryGeneral and the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on
Libya lay bare the abhorrent human rights violations
and humanitarian and protection concerns faced
by migrants and refugees in Libya. We call on the
authorities to grant full humanitarian access without
delay to all in need of assistance. We also call on the
Security Council to unanimously renew resolution 2240
(2015), on migrant smuggling and human trafficking
next month.
It has been nearly two years since the ceasefire
agreement delivered a fragile stability to war-weary
Libyans. It is now past time to fully implement that
agreement. We welcome the progress made during
a meeting earlier this month between the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission and the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in Sirte and the activation
of a joint operations room. We hope to see prompt
follow-up on the progress made, including with regard
to the action plan for the withdrawal of foreign forces
and fighters and mercenaries.
Finally, in April the Council tasked UNSMIL (see
S/PV.9025) with implementing important reforms
recommended by the strategic review. A special
representative is needed on the ground to carry out that
vital task and to steer the Mission through this delicate
phase of Libya’s transition. We express our gratitude
to Acting Head of Mission Zenenga for his ongoing
16/17

30/08/2022

efforts, and we also take this opportunity to once again
acknowledge the sterling work of Stephanie Williams
in her role as Special Adviser.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
Ambassador Kamboj of India, in her capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for their briefings. I
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Libya, Ambassador Elsonni, at this meeting. I would
like to make the following four points.
First, the Libyan crisis has entered its eleventh year.
The current peaceful situation was hard-earned and
should therefore be held especially dear by the Libyan
parties. Yet the recent clashes in Tripoli have resulted
in more than 200 casualties, and China is deeply
concerned about that. We call on the Libyan parties to
put their national interests and those of the people first,
exercise maximum restraint, resolve their differences
peacefully through dialogue and negotiations and spare
no effort to avoid violence. China supports the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission in continuing to play its critical
role in maintaining the ceasefire and facilitating the
withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries. We hope
that the withdrawal of foreign troops and mercenaries
from Libya can make progress provided that the balance
of forces is ensured.
Secondly, the only viable way to resolve the Libyan
crisis is through political means. China welcomes the
fact that the parties in Libya have reached agreement on
most of the items within the constitutional framework
for elections. We also hope that they will maintain
the momentum for dialogue and negotiations seen
during the previous reporting period and strive to
reach a middle ground and an agreement within the
constitutional framework without delay, with a view to
creating conditions favourable to holding the elections
as soon as possible. The Libyan parties’ commitment
to promoting reconciliation and rebuilding mutual trust
will be conducive to fostering the political process.
China welcomes the fact that the Libyan parties held a
preparatory meeting on reconciliation in the Republic
of the Congo under the auspices of the African Union
and reached a consensus on the next stage of work. We
are confident that Libya will be informed by and benefit
from Africa’s rich experience with reconciliation.
22-47617

30/08/2022

The situation in Libya

External interference has been a major root cause
of the absence of a solution to the Libyan issue for all
these years. The international community should abide
by the principle of a Libyan-led and -owned political
process, wholeheartedly listen to and consider the
concerns of the Libyan parties, provide Libya with
constructive assistance and avoid imposing solutions
from outside.
Thirdly, the United Nations is the main channel
for providing for good offices in Libya, and the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) should play
an active role in promoting dialogue and negotiations
among the Libyan parties. The speedy appointment of
a Special Representative of the Secretary-General will
increase the ability of the United Nations to provide its
good offices and restore UNSMIL to full functionality.
The fact that the position has remained vacant for so
long is extremely telling with regard to the complexity
and sensitivity surrounding the Libyan issue. China
encourages the Secretariat to step up its communication
and consultations and strengthen mutual trust with the

S/PV.9120

parties concerned, including those directly involved,
and hopes that the process of appointing the Special
Representative can move forward as soon as possible.
Fourthly, restoring and developing the economy
and improving people’s livelihoods are the main tools
for consolidating peace and stability in the country.
Oil is an important source of income for the Libyan
economy. China welcomes the full resumption of
Libyan oil production and urges the parties to increase
their consultations on the distribution of oil revenue to
ensure that its dividends benefit the entire population.
Libya has long-standing concerns about the losses
sustained by its frozen assets and has raised specific
claims. The Council and the Sanctions Committee
should actively study and address them.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

22-4761717/17
