S/PV.7326

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7326th meeting

Thursday, 4 December 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cherif . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chad)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Cai Weiming
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Maes
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2014/852)

14-66596 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1466596*

S/PV.7326

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in French): As this is the first
meeting of the Council for the month of December 2014,
I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute,
on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Gary
Quinlan, Permanent Representative of Australia, for
his service as President of the Council for the month
of November 2014. I am sure I speak for all members
of the Council in expressing my sincere appreciation
to Ambassador Quinlan and his delegation for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2014/852)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/852, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Following the
release on 26 November of the Secretary-General’s
periodic report (S/2014/852) on the activities of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), I should like to update the Council
on the latest developments in the peace process in
Darfur and the current security and humanitarian
situation in the region. I would also like to take this

2/7

04/12/2014

opportunity to describe the measures that the United
Nations has taken, in consultation with the African
Union and UNAMID, in order to implement the
Council’s recommendations in resolutions 2148 (2014)
and 2173 (2014), aimed at strengthening the mission so
as to streamline its operations.
On the political front, and with regard to the
peace process, direct talks between the Government
of the Sudan and armed movements in Darfur — the
Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi and the Justice
and Equality Movement-Gibril Ibrahim — began on
23 November in Addis Ababa, and for the first time
were held under the auspices of the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel. Council members
will recall that the Panel is facilitating the talks with
the goal of promoting a cessation of hostilities between
the armed movements and the Government of the
Sudan, and in this way to enable the movements to take
part in a future national dialogue. The negotiations
were suspended on 30 November to allow the parties to
consult with their respective leaders and bases on the
format of future negotiations.
Concerning relations between the Government
of the Sudan and the Justice and Equality Movement,
we note that they clearly both feel the need to speed
up finalization of the Movement’s disarmament
verification process. I should also note the information
we received yesterday on a joint political statement
calling on the Sudan to establish a State based on
citizenship and democracy and signed by a number of
groups, including Minni Minawi. We will have to study
its wording, because its various elements include the
groups’ determination to form a united front, and a call
for a boycott of the elections scheduled for April 2015
and for popular resistance. I repeat that it is too soon to
draw conclusions, but I believe it deserves more careful
scrutiny.
Regarding security, the report before the Council
describes a precarious situation, with clashes
between the Government of the Sudan and the armed
movements, deadly intercommunal conflicts and
increased criminality and banditry, all of which has
inevitably had a significant impact on civilians across
all five States of Darfur. While there has undoubtedly
been an overall decrease in military operations in recent
months, most likely as a result of the rainy season, there
have nonetheless been intermittent clashes between
Government forces and armed movements, as well as
reports of aerial bombardments. The report gives a

14-66596

04/12/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

figure of 55 cases of violence and attacks on civilians
recorded by UNAMID during the period under
consideration, of which 16 were allegedly perpetrated
by Arab militias, 23 by Government forces and the
remaining 16 by unknown armed elements. Internally
displaced persons, in particular, have continued to
express concerns about the deteriorating security
situation, particularly in the camps in North and West
Darfur.
That insecurity, along with the continuing
restrictions on movement imposed by the Government
forces, armed movements and militia groups, has had an
effect on the Mission’s ability to implement its mandate,
particularly regarding the protection of civilians. It
also continues to pose serious problems for the safety
and security of both our personnel and humanitarian
workers. There have been major concerns throughout
the reporting period about our inability to get direct
access to all the vulnerable populations in need of
protection. While the restrictions on movement have
unquestionably decreased — the rainy season being a
factor — the issue of obtaining free and unhindered
access to communities in need remains a concern
and an obstacle to implementation of the mandate. I
therefore continue to strongly urge the Government to
honour the terms of the status-of-forces agreement and
to give Mission personnel full and unhindered freedom
of movement throughout Darfur.
One incident that was given particular attention by
the media on 2 November was the alleged rape of over
200 women and girls on 30 and 31 October in Thabit,
North Darfur. Following repeated requests over a
number of days for access to the village and surrounding
areas in order to interact with the local community and
determine a factual account of events, a verification
mission was sent a week later, on 9 November. The
team’s findings, however, remain inconclusive and
require further investigation, in part due to the heavy
presence of military and police in the village. I
underscore that only a fully independent investigation
by UNAMID will effectively shed light on these serious
allegations, and I therefore urge the Government of the
Sudan once again to grant UNAMID immediate and
independent access to Thabit and its population so that
these reports can be verified.
Another deep concern is the continuation of
violent attacks by armed assailants against UNAMID
and United Nations personnel, in which three of our
peacekeepers and one national staff member have died

S/PV.7326

since our last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7250).
I take this opportunity to express my condolences to
the Ethiopian and Rwandan Governments and to the
families of those killed and injured in such attacks.
The Government of the Sudan must continue to do
everything in its power to identify and hold accountable
those responsible.
Intercommunal violence continues to affect and
displace civilian communities. In particular, the
conflicts between the Rizeigat and Ma’alia in East
Darfur, the Beni Hussein and Northern Rizeigat in North
Darfur and the Fallatta and Habbaniya in South Darfur
represent the most significant tribal conflicts. While
there was a reduction in the number of confrontations
during the reporting period, the clashes were markedly
more deadly, with a total of 377 fatalities recorded,
as compared to 93 confirmed deaths in the previous
period.
Criminality remains a major concern, with attacks
on villages and incidents of rape, hijacking and abduction
continuing throughout Darfur. In response to concerns
over the rising number of criminal incidents, on 15 July
the Government of South Darfur introduced emergency
measures, which included a state-wide curfew, a ban
on the movement of armed civilians, extensive searchand-detain operations in camps for internally displaced
persons (IDPs), and the establishment of a court to try
emergency cases.
While some of these measures have undoubtedly
helped to improve, howsoever modestly, the security
situation in South Darfur, the displaced have firmly
resisted all the Government’s attempts to enter the
camps. This includes the case of the Kalma IDP camp,
where in mid-August UNAMID engaged both with
state and local authorities in an attempt to de-escalate
tensions and avert violence, while it also intervened with
the camp’s leadership to reassure them of UNAMID’s
protection should search operations be conducted. As a
result, no search operations have been conducted in the
camp to date.
The humanitarian situation remains dire and
very worrisome. The number of people displaced by
conflict since the beginning of the year has risen to
more than 430,000, with close to 300,000 remaining in
displacement, in addition to some 2 million long-term
IDPs. The reporting period was also characterized
by heavy rains and floods that affected thousands of
IDPs in August. While humanitarian access remains
severely problematic, there were some improvements,

14-665963/7

S/PV.7326

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

with several inter-agency field missions undertaken
in all five Darfur states to assess needs and deliver
assistance. UNAMID continued to work closely with
humanitarian agencies to facilitate the delivery of
assistance to vulnerable affected communities through
the provision, inter alia, of escorts and logistical
support. I believe that this assistance has proved to be
very useful.
Over the past months, the Mission has further
recalibrated its activities towards the three strategic
priorities defined early this year. It has conducted
a comprehensive assessment and adjustment of
its structures, personnel and material capacities,
as reported in the letter dated 16 September from
the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of Security Council (S/2014/670). The UNAMID
personnel streamlining exercise has been completed.
In that connection, 1,260 posts have been identified
for abolition — 770 posts in the current budget year,
and the remaining 490 posts to follow in the next. An
additional 56 posts will be nationalized this budget
year. I also note that UNAMID’s aviation fleet has
been reconfigured through a reduction of four fixedwing aircraft and two helicopters, while 400 UNAMID
vehicles are being deployed to the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response.
UNAMID and the United Nations country team
have developed an integrated strategic framework
for 2014-2016, which is the principal mechanism for
planning, implementing and monitoring joint UNAMID
and United Nations country team initiatives. It focuses
on the three strategic priorities and is consistent with all
other relevant documents, including the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for 2012-2016, the
humanitarian strategic response plan for 2014 and the
Darfur Development Strategy.
I turn now to the matter of collaboration and
coordination between UNAMID and the Government
of the Sudan, which is necessary if we are to bring our
task to fruition. In that connection, it should be noted
that there were tensions between the Government and
the mission during the recent period, including with
regard to a problem I have already mentioned — access
by staff to Thabit to ascertain facts.
I should also point out that, on 23 November,
UNAMID received a note verbale demanding the
immediate withdrawal of two human rights experts
stationed at the mission’s liaison office in Khartoum,

4/7

04/12/2014

where they had a long-established role with the Sudan’s
National Commission on Human Rights and other
organizations on all issues related to Darfur. We had
no choice in the matter, but such a demand is clearly
unacceptable.
Moreover, the Government of the Sudan publicly
called for UNAMID’s exit — in those very words. I
should say that we currently have a strategic assessment
team in Khartoum that began its meetings over the
past two days. In particular, the issue of UNAMID’s
exit from the Sudan was discussed. I think that the
Government has clearly established that this is not
about leaving tomorrow, but that we need to agree on
a strategy. That is what we are attempting to pursue,
in line with the spirit of the Council’s latest resolution.
The strategic assessment will make it possible for us to
brief the Council on the progress we have made or not
made — I do not know yet either way — on the three
issues of strengthening military capacity, the level
of cooperation received from the Government of the
Sudan and the capacity to move forward along with the
country team, the agencies and the programmes.
Nevertheless, the fact itself that such a public
statement was made is something that colours the
overall picture somewhat. I also point out that last week
we received another note verbale from the Government
of the Sudan directing us not to deal further with any
Sudanese body without first turning to the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs. We need to assess the impact of that
demand, but it is certainly also something that is part
of the backdrop.
In conclusion, we must regret the security situation
and the fact that protection for the local population
remains weak. It is true that the main cause of all this
are the ubiquitous inter-communal tribal clashes, with
the attendant displacement of people they generate.
While the mission is making every effort to address
the problems facing humanitarian actors in the short
term, it is clear that concrete lasting solutions for the
population of Darfur are linked to progress on political
issues being addressed in the course of the discussions
recently begun in Addis Ababa. In practical terms, that
implies the aboslute need for a genuine ceasefire and a
comprehensive peace agreement.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Ladsous
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.

14-66596

04/12/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Elnor (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
at the outset, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I have every confidence that
your presidency will add new momentum to addressing
the issue of Darfur, as you come from a country of the
region that has participated in stabilizing the situation
in Darfur. I therefore thank President Idriss Deby Itno
for his efforts to contain inter-tribal clashes and to
maintain stability in Darfur, as evidenced at the first
two meetings held in Um Jaras. I should also like to
thank Mr. Ladsous for his comprehensive briefing
today.
The report before us (S/2014/852) details the efforts
made by the African Union-United Nations Joint
Chief Mediator to ensure that the groups that have not
signed on to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
join the peace agreement. We welcome the efforts of
Mr. Thabo Mbeki, Head of the African-Union Highlevel Implementation Panel. As I speak here today,
delegations are negotiating at Addis Ababa on behalf
of the Government of the Sudan. One is headed by the
Minister of State responsible for Darfur, Mr. Amin
Hassan Omer. It is to discuss with the armed movements
in Darfur that have not signed the Doha Document — the
Justice and Equality Movement-Jibril Ibrahim and the
Sudanese Liberation Army-Minni Minawi — in order
to get them to join the peace process. Information we
have received regarding those meetings indicates that
efforts are being made under the auspices of Mr. Mbeki
and Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Menkerios.
We hope that they will lead to positive results. The
second delegation is head by Mr. Ibrahim Ghandour,
aide to our country’s President. It aims to negotiate
with the popular movements in the north with regard
to the situation in Blue Nile and South Kordofan states.
The negotiations have allowed us to move forward, and
we trust that the Security Council will play an effective
role in the national dialogue announced by the Sudan’s
President.
Paragraph 2 of today’s report states that military
operations decreased overall in Darfur. However,
several paragraphs note that there is still instability in
certain parts of Darfur owing to inter-tribal violence
and banditry. Those phenomena have been referred to
in many statements in the past: they are very ancient
features of Darfur. There is also mention of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and of a
culture in Darfur of carrying weapons. That too is also
nothing new.

S/PV.7326

With regard to the humanitarian situation in the
region, paragraph 23 of the report highlights that
among the main reasons for the number of displaced
persons are the clashes between the Ma’alia and Hamar
and between the Ma’alia and Rizeigat in east Darfur,
and between Ma’alia and Rizeigat and Beni Hussein
and Northern Rizeiga in north Darfur.
We welcome paragraph 40 of the report, which
clearly states that the implementation of the Doha
Document has made it possible to make progress, in
particular with regard to security measures on the
integration into the Sudanese armed forces of former
combatants of movements that are signatories to the
Document.
Paragraph 42 mentions the progress with regard to
the implementation of the Darfur Reconstruction and
Development Fund. It also states that the the Darfur
Regional Authority reported that 70 per cent of the
315 development projects launched early in 2014 were
nearing completion, including in the areas of education,
health and water. In that regard, we thank brotherly
Qatar once again for the agreement it signed with the
United Nations Development Programme providing
$88.5 million for the implementation of reconstruction
and development projects in Darfur.
The positive developments that I have mentioned
with regard to the political process, as well as the
progress in the implementation of the Doha Document,
strengthen and support the onset of UNAMID’s
withdrawal, as I said in my statement to the Council
in August (see S/PV.7250). In that regard, we recall
that what we said regarding exit strategy was based
on clear references, primarily resolution 1769 (2007),
which mentions it very clearly, and resolution 2073
(2014), which renewed the Mission’s mandate. We
therefore reaffirm that the statements made by officials
of the Sudan referred to an exit strategy and not, as
Mr. Ladsous said, to an immediate exit.
As to the exit strategy to which the Council’s
resolutions refer, I recall that I met with Mr. Ladsous
personally two months ago and presented him with a
note in that regard, stating that it was time to discuss
an exit strategy, but not an immediate exit, as he
stated. Prior to that, the administration had sent a
mission review team specifically to consider the police
component. As we speak, a joint peacekeeping mission
of the African Union and the agencies concerned is
holding consultations in Khartoum as part of a strategic
review of the Mission and its exit strategy, specifically

14-665965/7

S/PV.7326

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the drawdown of the military component. When we talk
about an exit strategy, therefore, we are talking about a
joint effort to be implemented in coordination with the
African Union and the United Nations.
In addition, regarding what has been wrongly
discussed in some media concerning the closure of the
UNAMID human rights office, I would like to point
out that I met with Mr. Ladsous on this point, too, and
explained to him the nature of that decision. The reports
are false. I assure the Council that the main UNAMID
human rights office and its branches in Darfur remain
open and that they remain unaffected by the decision.
What happened, in fact, was that UNAMID opened a
small human rights branch office in Khartoum without
previously informing the competent authorities,
including the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, or even
coordinating with them. That branch was therefore
closed precisely because UNAMID is mandated and
deployed exclusively to the five states of Darfur, and
not to Khartoum.
In paragraph 57, the report notes allegations and
rumours disseminated by Radio Dabanga regarding
the village of Thabit, claiming that UNAMID
representatives had been prevented from entering
the village. We confirm that this information is not
correct. We authorized UNAMID and facilitated its
access to the village on 9 November in order to carry
out its investigation free of any interference or attempts
to influence its interviews and investigations. The
Mission remained in the village as long as it wanted and
then, having completed its mission, it left to prepare
and present its report.
It was therefore to our great surprise, upon
receipt of the report — which proved these lies to be
baseless — that some have denounced it because they
wished to see it reaffirm the lies of Radio Dabanga and
condemn the Government of the Sudan. If the report
did not confirm their version of events, they were
determined to condemn it. That is why we decided not
to let UNAMID return to the village once we were sure
that what it ultimately wanted was a report convicting
the Government of the Sudan, and that any report to
the contrary would not be accepted even if the Mission
visited the village several times.
The lies spread by Radio Dabanga, which are
known to UNAMID, which itself has been criticized
several times, have been accepted by some people. The
Sudanese Government condemns that radio station,
which is known to be affiliated with groups that refuse
6/7

04/12/2014

to sign the peace agreement and which is now advancing
an agenda for some states based on those lies. It is
therefore only logical to ask whether it is believable that
more than 200 women and girls could have been raped
in the village without anyone avenging the honour of
his wife or daughter, or reporting the incident? Despite
our belief that Radio Dabanga does nothing but spread
lies, we allowed UNAMID to travel to the village
and provided the necessary support to carry out its
investigation in total freedom. The Mission completed
its investigation, fulfilled its tasks and left the village.
We are therefore absolutely astonished by the
UNAMID report, which had for years been an
unimpeachable and unquestioned reference beyond
reproach or doubt. Some parties have requested that
UNAMID present a second report, since the first
exonerated the Government. The question now is
whether they would have asked the Mission to modify
its report if it had designated the Government as the
guilty party and confirmed the lies of Radio Dabanga.
Council members know the answer to that question. That
is why we refused to allow the Mission to return to the
village once we were totally convinced that the purpose
was to draft a report condemning the Government.
Thus, every time a report fails to serve that end, it will
be rejected by those who will request UNAMID to
redraft it again and again. This is provocative to us as a
sovereign State and we will not accept it.
The very unprofessional manner in which the report
was drafted — that is, insisting that it was necessary to
return to the village — is in itself is a major shortcoming
and shows the lack of professionalism in the Mission,
which should have immediately withdrawn from the
village if there had been a military presence or other
threat hindering its work. But that is not what happened.
The Mission carried out its investigation and presented
its report. Therefore, the gaps in the investigation or
in the way the report is presented are the Mission’s
own fault. The Council is very well aware of the many
shortcomings and gaps in UNAMID’s performance. A
professional approach would have led the Mission to
admit that it was unable to carry out its functions and
therefore could not present a report.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that we
submitted a comprehensive report regarding the
document of the Prosecutor of the Darfur Criminal
Court appointed pursuant to the Doha Peace Accord.
The Prosecutor headed a team and conducted
investigations into the matter The report, like the

14-66596

04/12/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

first UNAMID report, showed that the accusations
were unjustified. We call on the Council to ignore
rumours and misinformation, and to play its full role in
promoting peace by encouraging the parties that have
not yet signed the peace agreement to do so in order to
turn the page on the conflict in Darfur once and for all.

S/PV.7326

The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

14-665967/7
