58

General Asaemhly-Slxth Senion

i;l ,,· S,11stem is L!l(: progressive development of the in: .: ,i,..mt~ of the Tru'.,t Territ,lries towards self-governu,,·111 or independence as may he appropriate to the
pan1cular circumstauces of each Territory and its
peoples a111l the freeiy expressed wishes of the peoples
co1;, erncd, and as 1n;iy be provided in the terms of
1:ac,1 Trusteeship Agrr.:cnicnt,
1. Notrs, that i11 the case of no Trust Territory
other than that of 5ornaliland has the Administering
Autho1ity conn:rned :,ubmitted information as to the
time and manner in which the Territory is expected to
attain the objective of self- government or independence; and accordingly,
2. Invites the Administering Authority of each
Trust Territory other than Somaliland to include in
each annual report ,1n its administration information
in respect of :
( <•) The measures, taken or contemplated, which
are intended to lead the Tru"t Territory, in the shortest
possible time, to the objective of self-government or
independence ;
( b) The manner in which, in these respects, the
particular circumstances of the Territory and its people and the freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned are being taken into account;
(c) The adequacy of the provisions of the existing
Trusteeship Agreement in relation to all the foregoing
factors;
(d) The rough estimate of the time which it considers, under existing conditions, may be needed to
complek one or more of the va1;ous measures which
are meant to create the pre-conditions for the attainment by the Trust Territory of the objective of selfgovernment or independence :
( e) The period of time in which it is expected that
the Trust Territory shall attain the objective of selfgovernment or independence.
361st plena,ry meeting,
18 January 1952.

559 (VI). Report of the Trusteeship Council
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report of the Trusteeship
Council 14 covering its third special session and its eighth
and ninth sessions ;
2. Expresses its confidence that the Trusteeship
Council, in a spirit of genuine undertaking and cooperation, will continue to contribute--and with increased effectiveness-to achieving the high objectives
of the International Trusteeship System;
3. Recommf?nds that the Trusteeship Council consider at its next sessions the comments and suggestions
made during the discussion of the report at the sixth
session of the General Assembly, including the valuable
discussions in the Fourth Committee on various specific
trusteeship problems, with a view to arriving at a
speedy solution of those problems.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.

560 (VI). Information on the implementation of
Trueteeahip Council and General AHembly
resolutions relating to Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resoluliuns 436 (V) and 433 (V) of
2 December 1950 coocerning information on the implementation of Trusteeship Council and General Assembly resolutions relating to Trust Territories,
Havi.ng considered the Secretary-General's memorandum15 regarding information on the implementation
of Trusteeship Council and General Assembly resolutions relating to Trust Territories,
1. Takes note of the Sccretary--General's memorandum regarding infonnation on the implementation
of Trusteeship Council and General Assembly resolu·tions relating to Trust Territories;
2. Observes that in certain cases effect has not yet
been given to all Trusteeship Council and General Assembly recommendations and resolutions applicable to
Trust Territories;
3. Observes that the action thus far taken by the
Trusteeship Council does not give effect to the wishes
of the General Assembly as expressed in resolution
433 (V), paragraph 1 ( d);
4. Expresses the hope that the Administering Authorities which have not yet given effect to all such
recommendations and resolutions will implement them
as speedily as possible and inform the Trusteeship
Council of the steps which have been taken or which
it is supposed to take in that respect ;
5. Requests the Trusteeship Council, in order to
enable the General Assembly to have clearly at its disposal all the knowledge necessary for the fulfilment of
its duties with regard to the International Trusteeship
System, to include in each case in the appropriate section of its report to the General Assembly such conclusions as it may deem necessary regarding the action
taken by the Administering Authority and regarding
the measures which, in its opinion, should be adopted
in view of those conclusions.
361st plenary meering,
18 January 1Y52.

561 (VI). Rural economic development of the
Trust Territories
The General Assembly.
Noting the action taken by the Trusteeship Council 18
in respect of General Assembly resolution 438 (V) of
2 December 1950 on the rural economic development
of the Trust Territories,
Noting, in particular, the complex and exacting technical nature of the study in question,
Recommends that the Trusteeship Council consider
inviting the appropriate specialized agencies, particularly the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and the International Labour Organisation, as well as other experts if necessary, to assist it
in its study on the rural economic development of the
Trust Territories.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.
11

"See Official RectwdJ of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Supplement No. 4.

See documents A/1903 and Adds. 1 and 2.
See Official Rec01'ds of the Gmn-al Asstmbly, Sixth Session,
Sut;lrmmt No. 4, part I, chapter VI, section 2.
1
•
