m.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to report on the results of its negotiations to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
97th plenary meeting
JI December 1979
34/73.

Implementation of General Assembly resolution 33/60

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its conviction that the cessation of nuclear-weapon testing by all States in all environments
would be in the interest of all mankind as a major step
towards ending the qualitative improvement, development and proliferation of nuclear weapons, as a means
of relieving the deep apprehension concerning the harmful cqnsequences of radio-active contamination for the
health of present and future generations and as a contribution towards the cessation of the nuclear arms race,
Recalling the determination of the parties to the
Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water 0 and the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 1 expressed
in those Treaties to continue negotiations to achieve the
discontinuance of all test explosions of nuclear weapons
for all time,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject, in
particular resolution 32/78 of 12 December 1977,
paragraph 51 of resolution S-10/2 of 30 June 1978,
resolution 33/60 of 14 December 1978 and section IV
of resolution 33/71 Hof 14 December 1978,
Emphasizing the urgent need for all nuclear-weapon
States to cease the testing of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing the importance to a treaty prohibiting
nuclear testing of the study being carried out by the
Ad Hoe Group of Scientific Experts to Consider International Co-operative Measures to Detect and Identify
Seismic Events on a global network of stations for the
exchange of seismological data,
Recognizing the indispensable role of the Committee
on Disarmament in the negotiation of a comprehensive
test-ban treaty,
Noting with dissatisfaction that that part of the report
of the Committee on Disarmament8 relating to the question of a comprehensive test-ban treaty shows no progress in the consideration of this subject and that a full
report on the status of the negotiations between the three
nuclear-weapon States was not submitted,
1. Reiterates its grave concern at the fact that nuclear-weapon testing continues unabated against the
wishes of the overwhelming majority of Member States;
2. Reaffirms its conviction that a treaty to achieve
the prohibition of all nuclear test explosions by all States
for all time is a matter of the highest priority;
3. Expresses its conviction that positive progress in
the negotiations by the Committee on Disarmament on
such a treaty is a vital element for the success of efforts
to prevent both vertical and horizontal proliferation of
nuclear weapons and will contribute towards an end to the
arms race and the achievement of nuclear disarmament;
4. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to initiate negotiations on such a treaty as a matter of the
highest priority;
6

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 480, No. 6964, p. 43.
Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/34/27 and Corr.I), sect. ID.A.
7

47

5. Calls upon the three negotiating nuclear-weapon
States to use their best endeavours to bring their
negotiations to a positive conclusion in time for consideration during the next session of the Committee on
Disarmament;
6. Invites Governments of Member States to contribute to the further development of national and international co-operative measures to detect seismic events
aimed at setting up a global verification system of a
comprehensive test-ban treaty and to co-operate with
the Ad Hoe Group of Scientific Experts to Consider
International Co-operative Measures to Detect and
Identify Seismic Events for the fulfilment of its mandate;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session an item relating to the implementation of the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
34/74.

Implementation of General Assembly resolution 33/61 concerning the signature and ratifi•
cation of Additional Protocol II of the Treaty
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967, 2456 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2666
(XXV) of 7 December 1970, 2830 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971, 2935 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972,
3079 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3258 (XXIX) of
9 December 1974, 3467 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
31/67 of 10 December 1976, 32/79 of 12 December
1977 and 33/61 of 14 December 1978, all of which
contain appeals to the nuclear-weapon States regarding
the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol II
of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco),9
Reaffirming its conviction, now corroborated by international practice, that, for the maximum effectiveness
of any treaty establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
the co-operation of the nuclear-weapon States is necessary and that such co-operation should take the form of
commitments likewise undertaken in a formal international instrument which is legally binding, such as a
treaty, convention or protocol,
Welcomes the fact that Additional Protocol II of the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) has already been signed
and ratified by the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America,
France, the People's Republic of China and the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, thus fulfilling an aspiration
of the General Assembly.
97th plenary meeting
JI December 1979
34/75.

Consideration of the declaration of the 1980s
as the Second Disarmament Decade

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/62 of 14 December 1978,
Bearing in mind that the Disarmament Decade declared by its resolution 2602 E (XXIV) of 16 D~mber 1969, is coming to an end,
9

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068, p. 326.

General Assembly-Tbirty-folll1b Session

48

Expressing its disappointment that the purposes and
objectives of the Decade have not been realized,
Deeply concerned at the fact that a substantial part
of world resources, material as well as human, continues
to be wasted on armaments with detrimental effect on
international security and on efforts to achieve the new
international economic order,
Bearing in mind the preparations for the international
development strategy for the third United Nations development decade,
Stressing again the close relationship between disarmament and development,
Convinced that effective disarmament measures should
release resources from the unproductive arms race for
economic and social programmes, in particular for international economic co-operation,
1. Decides to declare the decade of the 1980s as the
Second Disarmament Decade;
2. Directs the Disarmament Commission, at its substantive session of 1980, to prepare elements of a draft
resolution entitled "Declaration of the 1980s as the
Second Disarmament Decade" and submit them to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session for consideration and adoption;
3. Determines that the draft resolution should embody, inter alia, an indication of targets during the Second Disarmament Decade for accomplishing the major
objectives and goals of disarmament, as well as ways
and means of mobilizing world public opinion in this
regard;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views
and suggestions of Member States and of relevant
specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency on possible elements in the declaration of
the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade;
5. Calls upon the Secretary-General to give all
necessary assistance, including the preparation of a working paper, to the Disarmament Commission in implementing the present resolution;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Declaration of
the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
34/76.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Denuclearization of Africa
A
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECLARATION

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa10 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its first ordinary session, held at Cairo from
17 to 21 July 1964,
Recalling its resolutions 1652 (XVI) of 24 November 1961, 32/81 of 12 December 1977 and 33/63 of
14 December 1978, in which it called upon all States to
consider and respect the continent of Africa, comprising
the continental African States, Madagascar and other islands surrounding Africa, as a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
10 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 105, document A/5975.

Recalling also that in its resolution 33/63 it vigorously condemned any attempt by South Africa to introduce in any way whatsoever nuclear weapons into the
continent and demanded that South Africa should forthwith refrain from conducting any nuclear explosion on
the continent of Africa or elsewhere.
Noting with concern that South Africa has persistently
refused to conclude adequate and comrrehensive safeguards agreements with the lntemationa Atomic Energy
Agency with a view to preventing the diversion of nuclear materials from peaceful uses to the manufacture of
nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices,
Alarmed by the report that, having bluntly and persistently refused to renounce the acquisition of nuclear
weapons, South Africa may have detonated a nuclear
explosive device,
Convinced that such a situation constitutes a grave
danger to international peace and security and a particularly dangerous threat to the security of African States,
Recalling its decision, taken at the tenth special session, that the Security Council should take appropriate
effective steps to prevent the frustration of the decision
of the Organization of African Unity for the denuclearization of Africa, 11
Noting with appreciation the report of the United Nations Seminar on Nuclear Collaboration with South
Africa, held in London on 24 and 25 February 1979, 12
Expressing its indignation that some Western countries
and Israel have continued to collaborate with South
Africa in the form, inter alia, of uranium extraction and
processing, supply of nuclear equipment, transfer of technology, provision of training and exchange of scientists
and external financial support for its nuclear programme,
Noting with satisfaction the resolution adopted by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity at its thirty-third ordinary session, held at Monrovia from 6 to 20 July 1979, 18 by which the Council
took further steps towards the implementation of the
Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa,
1. Strongly reiterates its call upon all States to consider and respect the continent of Africa, comprising the
continental African States, Madagascar and other islands
surrounding Africa, as a nuclear-weapon-free zone;
2. Vigorously condemns the reported detonation of
a nuclear device by South Africa;
3. Reaffirms that the nuclear programme of the racist regime of South Africa constitutes a very grave danger
to international peace and security and a particularly
dangerous threat to the security of African States, and
increases the danger of the proliferation of nuclear
weapons;
4. Condemns any nuclear collaboration by any
State, corporation, institution or individual with the
racist regime of South Africa since such collaboration
frustrates, inter alia, the objective of the Organization
of African Unity to keep Africa a nuclear-weaponfree zone;
5. Calls upon such States, corporations, institutions
or individuals, therefore, to terminate forthwith such
nuclear collaboration between them and the racist r~gime
of South Africa;
6. Requests the Security Council to prohibit all
forms of co-operation and collaboration with the racist
regime of South Africa in the nuclear field;
11 Resolution S-10/2, para. 63 (c).
12 See Official Records of the Security Council,

Thirty-fourth
Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1979, document S/13157.
13 A/34/552, annex I, resolution CM/Res.718 (XXXIII).
