S/2021/868

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 October 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 14 October 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and
the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the 8877th meeting of the Security Council
convened on 12 October 2021 under the item entitled “Peacebuilding and sustaining
peace: diversity, State-building and the search for peace”. The interventions of the
briefers and Council members will be published as an official record of the Security
Council (S/PV.8877).
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for the
8877th meeting, the following delegations and entities submitted written statements,
copies of which are enclosed: Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Brazil, Chile, Commonwealth
Secretariat, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Georgia, Germany, Guatem ala,
Haiti, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Japan, Jordan, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Malta, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peacebuilding
Commission, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Somalia, South Africa, Switzerland and Thailand.
These statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council in
accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from the
President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanen t Representatives of the
members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic, and reference to the document will be made in S/PV.8877.
(Signed) Martin Kimani
President of the Security Council

21-14977 (E)

190122

*2114977*

S/2021/868

Annex I
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan to the
United Nations, Yashar Aliyev
I thank the delegation of Kenya for convening this open debate.
As the concept note (S/2021/854) emphasizes, the majority of the situations
before the Security Council and its regional counterparts stem from domestic conflicts
that can threaten regional or international peace and security, many of which are either
caused by or become clashes over identity that exploit ethnic, racial, regional, partisan
or religious differences.
Similar characteristics are applicable to most inter-State conflicts, which are
often motivated by intolerance and hate-fuelled and racist ideologies.
Among other manifestations, ethnic cleansing and the destruction and
desecration of cultural heritage and religious sites as a method of warfare and a means
of colonization have become an integral part of a policy and strategy aimed at
eliminating diversity and achieving political goals.
The purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations constitute the
foundational normative framework in international relations. They are universally
binding and remain as important as ever for the maintenance of international and
regional peace and security and the promotion of sustained economic growth,
sustainable development, human rights and justice.
First and foremost, all States must strictly comply with their international
obligations, particularly those relating to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States and to non-interference in internal affairs. Respect for these principles is a
necessary prerequisite for preserving, building and sustaining peace and stability and
for developing and enhancing cooperation.
Furthermore, justice is a fundamental building block of peacebuilding and
sustainable peace. It is essential to address conflict-related abuses and violations by
all available means. Efforts to that end must be free of selectivity and politically
motivated objectives.
The scale and nature of sustaining peace calls for closer strategic and
operational partnership between the United Nations, Governments and other key
stakeholders, complying with national sovereignty and taking into cons ideration
national priorities and policies of States.
The challenges facing the world today, along with the need to effectively counter
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), recover from the pandemic, rebuild
sustainability and achieve people-centred outcomes in all countries, necessitate
strengthened global solidarity and multilateralism.
It is also critical that the United Nations continue mobilizing the world against
racism and confronting hate speech, hatred of all kinds, misinformation,
disinformation and the incitement to division, violence and extremism.
Intercultural and interreligious dialogue at the national and international levels
is one of the important avenues within the broader objectives of peacebuilding,
sustaining peace and reconciliation. Azerbaijan is keen to continue its efforts towards
promoting mutual understanding and respect for diversity.
Azerbaijan has suffered seriously from the devastating effects of the war
unleashed against it by Armenia in the early 1990s, at the core of which were unlawful
territorial claims, fabricated historical narratives and racist prejudices. A significant
2/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

part of the sovereign territory of my country was seized and remained under
occupation for nearly 30 years.
Serious violations of international humanitarian law have been committed in the
course of the aggression, resulting in the killing of tens of thousands of civilians and
the ethnic cleansing of all occupied areas of more than 700,000 Azerbaijanis. Most
captured cities, towns and villages of Azerbaijan were razed to the ground.
The consistent pattern and scale of grave human rights abuses by Armenia
against ethnic Azerbaijanis demonstrate the clear objective to expel, terrorize and kill
them based on ethnic animus, erase all traces of Azerbaij ani historical and cultural
heritage and create a mono-ethnic State comprised exclusively of ethnic Armenians
in Armenia and in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan.
Another act of aggression by Armenia last fall became a logical consequence of
the impunity it enjoyed for more than 30 years. Armenia’s armed attacks involved the
use of military force against densely populated Azerbaijani cities far outside the
theatre of active hostilities, killing and wounding hundreds of civilians and destroying
or damaging numerous civilian objects.
Azerbaijan launched a counteroffensive operation to liberate its occupied
territories, protect its people and allow the internally displaced persons to return to
their homes, acting in full accordance with international la w.
As a result, more than 300 cities, towns and villages of Azerbaijan were
liberated from the occupation. The statement of the President of the Republic of
Azerbaijan, the Prime Minister of the Republic of Armenia and the President of the
Russian Federation, signed on 10 November 2020, provided for a complete ceasefire
and termination of all hostilities; the withdrawal of the remaining Armenian troops
from the territory of Azerbaijan; the deployment of the peacekeeping forces of the
Russian Federation; the return of internally displaced persons and refugees; the
exchange of prisoners of war, hostages and other detained persons; and the
unblocking of all economic and transport connections in the region.
The almost three decades-old armed conflict has been resolved. At the same
time, Azerbaijan expressed its readiness for the normalization of inter-State relations
with Armenia based on mutual recognition and respect for each other’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity within their internationally recognize d borders, including
through the signing of a peace treaty based on these principles.
Domestically, Azerbaijan prioritized the reinforcement of its international
borders, the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the liberated territories and the
restoration of housing, essential services and transportation and communication
infrastructure there to ensure the safe return of the displaced population and a high
standard of living. Pursuant to the decree of the President of Azerbaijan of 7 July
2021, the Garabagh (consisting of the city of Khankandi and the districts of
Aghjabadi, Aghdam, Barda, Fuzuli, Khojaly, Khojavand, Shusha and Tartar) and East
Zangazur (consisting of the districts of Jabrayil, Kalbajar, Gubadly, Lachin and
Zangilan) economic regions were established in Azerbaijan.
Azerbaijan is a multiethnic country, and all its citizens and residents are entitled
to the full enjoyment of human rights and freedoms on an equal and
non-discriminatory basis, in accordance with the Constitution and legisla tion of
Azerbaijan. We consider diversity to be richness and will continue our efforts towards
maintaining civic cohesion and promoting inclusivity and human rights.

21-14977

3/76

S/2021/868

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I congratulate Kenya for assuming the Presidency of the Security Council this
month and for organizing this important debate on diversity and State -building for
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
My sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General and other briefers for sharing
their valuable insights on this issue.
We believe that peacebuilding and sustaining peace are an inclusive and broad based process where national ownership needs to be complemented by the meaningful
participation of all segments of society. Sustaining peace is further linked to the
sustainable development agenda. It is, therefore, essential to ensure that no one is left
behind in the quest for peace in our societies.
Respect for diverse cultures, religions and ethnic identities is the prerequisite
for stability and sustaining peace. Unfortunately, even in the twenty -first century, we
have been experiencing discrimination and violence against people due to their
culture, religion, race and colour.
In our neighbouring country of Myanmar, intolerance for and exclusion of
ethnic and religious minorities plunged the country into recurrent crises. The forced
displacement of Rohingya Muslims from Myanmar in the face of systematic
persecution and State-sponsored hatred is a classic example of failed nation-building
efforts. Only an inclusive approach to, acknowledgement of, and respect for diversity
in Myanmar society can help the country to come out of its persistent crises.
Bangladesh, as the leading troop- and police-contributing county, supports the
nation-building efforts in various conflict-affected countries through the
implementation of their mandates. Particularly in the transition context, our
peacekeepers support the capacity-building of the national and local institutions and
the empowering of the women and youth-led organizations. Bangladesh is also
actively engaged in the work of the Peacebuilding Commission in promoting its
advisory and bridging role.
In our national context, we have achieved notable success in establishing peace
through the inclusion of ethnic minorities in our national development process. The
Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord signed with the armed ethnic groups made it
possible to put an end to decades-long conflicts in the south-eastern part of
Bangladesh. Today, the ethnic minorities are an integral part of our national
development aspirations.
Allow me to share some thoughts on diversity, peacebuilding and sustaining
peace.
First, in order to preserve the diverse character of a society, it is fundamentally
important to establish equality before the law – in theory and in practice. There should
not be any law or practice that allows discrimination on the grounds of race, religion,
ethnicity or gender.
Second, ensuring the participation of all in nation-building is crucial. The State
should ensure that all segments of society are included in the nation -building exercise
without discrimination. Equally important is to uplift the vulnerable and marginalized
communities through affirmative actions. We must also ensure that the fruits of
development are shared by all.

4/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

Third, building inclusive and accountable institutions is important for achieving
and sustaining peace. The Peacebuilding Commission can be a critical enabler in
collaboration with the United Nations country team and other relevant partners to
come up with short-, medium- and long-term strategies to support national
institutions. The Commission can also contribute through its bridging role for a
coordinated approach by all stakeholders. All national and international stakeholders
should work together in a coherent manner for common political solutions.
Fourth, peacekeeping operations are no longer mere truce supervision. The role
of the peacekeepers in implementing the overarching political strategy is equally
important. In this regard, synchronization between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
is vital, particularly during the transition period. Therefore, capacity -building and the
training of the peacekeepers should be designed to facilitate peacebuilding activities
with a focus on the transition period.
Fifth, digital transformation helps to reduce corruption and ensure good
governance. However, digital space, especially social media, has also often been used
to instigate hatred and intolerance towards minorities, refugees and migrants. While
supporting nation-building efforts through digital cooperation, adequate support
should be provided to the recipient countries to develop a legal framework that can
fight online hate speech and other divisive phenomena.
Sixth, the role of women in ensuring inclusive n ation-building is crucial. They
can influence the community in order to maintain social cohesion and avoid conflict.
The implementation of the women and peace and security agenda in conflict -affected
and fragile situations can foster lasting peace.
Finally, adequate, predictable and sustained financing needs to be ensured for
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. The United Nations agencies, development
partners and international financial institutions need to work in a coordinated manner
to ensure inclusive development. There should be a smooth flow of official
development assistance in fragile contexts, to support the nation -building process.
Bangladesh will continue to work on fostering the fundamental tenets of
diversity in its engagement in international peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.
It is a national priority for us.

21-14977

5/76

S/2021/868

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the
United Nations
Brazil is thankful to the presidency of Kenya for organizing this high -level open
debate on the theme “Diversity, State-building and the search for peace”, under the
framework of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We also thank the Secretary General, António Guterres, and the other briefers for their insightful considerations.
Brazil seizes this opportunity to reaffirm its support for peacebuilding. In many
aspects, the sustaining peace agenda coincides with long-nurtured values of Brazilian
foreign policy, especially the peaceful settlement of disputes, the interdependence
between peace and development, and the primacy of prevention.
With a view to continuing to improve United Nations peacebuilding efforts and
capacities, Brazil would like to put forth three brief considerations.
First, our collective experience with peace efforts ha s taught us that the
conditions that may lead a society to the paths of peace or conflict are often extremely
complex. The analysis of the root causes or potential drivers of conflict and instability
always requires a comprehensive exercise aimed at achiev ing a broad understanding
of the interplay among the various social, economic, political, identity – as
highlighted in this debate – and cultural aspects of any specific situation.
We should, therefore, refuse simplistic arguments that elevate one single factor
as the main driver of instability and recognize that there is no single template for
preventing conflict or building peace.
Second, this means that much of what we want to accomplish with
peacebuilding has connections with topics that interest the whole United Nations
membership and should be discussed and implemented under the leadership of other
political forums, such as the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council,
in accordance with their respective mandates. The cross-pillar component of
peacebuilding and sustaining peace requires, however, full respect for sovereignty
and national ownership.
Furthermore, we should reject interpretations suggesting that sustaining peace
could be seen as an all-encompassing framework. Recognizing the interdependence
of the different United Nations pillars requires us to acknowledge each pillar’s
intrinsic value and specific mandate. Promoting development, empowering women
and youth, protecting human rights and preventing conflict might all contribute to
peacebuilding. But our efforts in each of those domains should also be assessed on
their own merits.
Third, the Peacebuilding Commission is uniquely positioned to bridge
discussions across the different United Nations pillars. In order to strengthen th e
effectiveness and coherence of the peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations, the
Commission should continue to enhance its advisory capacities with a view to
providing recommendations to the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council as it deems necessary.
To conclude, Brazil wishes to reiterate its appreciation for the opportunity to
take part in this discussion. We welcome the decision of Kenya to convene this
meeting in a transparent and inclusive manner, open to the participation of the whole
United Nations membership. We believe that this is a good practice worth replicating
and encourage the Security Council members to ensure full inclusivity in all future
discussions about cross-cutting matters related to peacebuilding.

6/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Chile to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Chile shares the view expressed in Security Council resolution 2282 (2016):
“inclusivity is key to advancing national peacebuilding processes and objectives in
order to ensure that the needs of all segments of society are taken into account”.
Chile considers it fundamental for Governments to develop and promote solid
institutions that support social and civic cohesion among the people within their
borders, thus benefiting from the rich diversity of the ethnic, racial and religious
identities found in every society and among the human beings that make up those
societies in all their diversity.
Today’s reality of more diverse and interconnected societies across the globe
poses the challenge of building peaceful and inclusive societies by facilitating access
to justice and development opportunities for all. In that regard, it is crucial to have
accountable institutions at all levels, as has been so aptly stated in Sustainable
Development Goal 16.
Diversity enriches people, communities and whole countries if their people have
a sense of belonging and contribute to their joint development while embraci ng
diversity. This requires an environment conducive to coexistence, but also governance
with respect for human rights as a fundamental tool to eradicate and penalize violence
and discrimination against people and communities. That is generally not an easy
thing to do, given the various crises facing societies with their many tensions,
including lies spread about facts and groups that may end up being particularly
harmful to various groups and the people in them. Various leaders have a fundamental
role to play in promoting that ethos of respect and tolerance in their societies; without
it there can be no effective inclusion. It is therefore crucial to develop a system for
early warnings about the vulnerability of and threats to minority sectors that are not
being integrated or are being threatened, so as to prevent larger conflicts, abuses and
violations.
Chile believes that through democracy, solid institutions and adherence to
international human rights instruments and the rule of law, structures can be bu ilt that
promote citizens’ participation and mitigate exclusion and alienation. Those factors
enable society and its members to flourish on the basis of mutual respect, finding
valuable basic common standards in social coexistence.
Coping effectively with the diversity of the population and integrating it is
essential to any progress towards peacebuilding and sustainable peace. Failing that,
it will be very difficult for countries in situations of conflict to make the transition
towards a post-conflict situation.
The international security prevention road map must always have a framework
rooted in international law. It must include the cooperation of regional organizations
and, of course, the principal bodies of the United Nations system involved in
peacebuilding, namely the Peacebuilding Commission, the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Security Council.
In that regard, Chile is taking concrete action to embrace the diversity and
interculturality found in our society, such as by taking initiatives to reinforce the
leadership of indigenous women, recognizing the educational role of traditional
teachers among indigenous peoples, creating new curricular bases for the teaching of

21-14977

7/76

S/2021/868

indigenous language and culture in elementary schools and strengthening the role of
the indigenous peoples’ traditional authorities.
Thus, of the 155 members of the constitutional assembly who are currently
drafting a future constitution for Chile and were elected on the basis of a quota
system, 17 are representatives of native peoples through “reserved seats” for those
communities. This is unheard of in the electoral history of Chile, and it is the first
time that such a legal provision is being established.
There is also legal recognition for the Chilean trib al population of African
descent, which has been another step towards the institutional inclusion of a
community into the social and political fabric of the country.

8/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

Annex V
Statement by the Commonwealth Secretariat
International peace and security based on an effective multilateral system rooted
in inclusiveness, equity, justice and international law is a founding principle of the
Commonwealth. Peace is enshrined in our Charter, sitting alongside tolerance, respect
and understanding based on the dignity of all human beings, as a cornerstone principle
of the Commonwealth family.
The high-level open debate of the Security Council is timely and welcome.
Across Commonwealth member States and beyond, the conditions for peace are being
challenged. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has reminded us in the
most powerful way how interconnected we are. Building and protecting peace is a
collective responsibility.
The pandemic, and its economic impacts, pose specific challenges.
As well as being a grave health crisis requiring critical and exceptional decisions
and measures to manage the spread of disease, the pandemic has enhanced some
social tensions, raised new grievances and put inequalities in the spotlight. This
dovetails with a global economic shock three times worse than the 2008 financial
crisis.
The Commonwealth Secretariat, working with member States and partners, is
of the clear view that global peace has been challenged and even deteriorated over
the past year. The immediate human, social and economic cost of the pandemic to
member States is evident, with violence and social unrest during the pandemic costing
Commonwealth countries over $2.4 trillion in purchase power parity.
A just and peaceful recovery from the pandemic will require practical local and
national action, but it also requires a global shift. The responsibility to recalibrate the
architecture of peace and security is more pertinent now than ever, offering the chance
to usher in a new golden age of humane multilateral diplomacy that promotes equity
and ensures that the recovery from COVID-19 leaves no country behind.
The Commonwealth Secretariat encourages the high-level panel to reflect on the
need to ensure that the pandemic recovery and concurrent peacebuild ing processes
are robust, green, resilient and inclusive. Multilateral efforts can focus on steering
from the current trajectory of uneven recovery to ensuring that the world recovers
together “for an equitable and sustainable world”.
Alongside this, the Commonwealth Secretariat encourages the high-level panel
to reflect on the impact of vaccine nationalism on low -income, vulnerable and small
States. We are confident that the goal of a more peaceful, resilient world will be
advanced if rich, powerful nations make sufficient vaccines available to the low income, small and vulnerable States that continue to grapple with the devastating
impacts of the virus on their economies and societies. Such a commitment, delivered
swiftly and without condition, would save lives, help to rebuild economies, build trust
throughout the multilateral system and improve the conditions for peace.
The pandemic struck as the impacts of climate change continued to intensify.
Climate change is rightly understood as the defining challenge of our times – both an
existential threat and a multiplier of existing social, political and economic
inequalities that brings forward the tipping point for conflict.
The small island developing States continue to disproportionately bear the
burden of climate change. Sea level rise is accelerating, with extreme weather hitting
harder and more frequently. Combating climate change must be the multilateral
21-14977

9/76

S/2021/868

system’s defining collective priority – the opportunity to make a real difference at the
forthcoming twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change in Glasgow cannot be missed.
The Commonwealth Secretariat encourages the high-level panel to reflect on the
fact that climate change impacts on the most vulnerable nations have intensified while
they deal simultaneously with the shocks of the pandemic. Climate impacts have
worsened conditions, hampered recovery efforts and increased the depth of
vulnerability.
We urge the high-level panel to ensure that the cross-cutting nature of these
interconnected crises are at the heart of its deliberations.
The Commonwealth Secretariat encourages the high-level panel to reflect on the
practical measures available to reduce gendered, intergenerational and intersectional
manifestations of structural and identity-based violence.
Multilateral efforts can help to scale up approaches that strengthen national and
local capacities for early warning mechanisms and evidence-based conflict prevention
architectures. The Commonwealth Secretariat works hard to incubate and deploy
integrated and home-grown peace initiatives with member States, building vertical
and horizontal social cohesion and strengthening State-society relationships. The
Secretariat’s peacebuilding experience, through the good offices of the Secretary General, fostered political respect and built confidence in peaceful elections held in
member States during the pandemic.
The Commonwealth Secretariat encourages the high-level panel to condemn the
ongoing scourge of violence against women and girls – a gross human rights violation
with devastating immediate and long-term physical, sexual and mental health
consequences. Some 1.2 billion of the world’s women are in the Commonwealth. Our
Charter, and mandates from heads of Government, underscore gender equality as
essential to the process of State-building and peacebuilding. The search for
sustainable peace must empower women to play a central role in peace initiatives,
frameworks, and policies and legislation.
The Commonwealth Secretariat highlights the “Commonwealth Says NO
MORE” initiative to the high-level panel, which equips member States to tackle a
spike in the incidence of domestic and sexual violence against women and girls, and
helps member States to support victims, survivors and those at risk. The Secretariat
also reiterates its commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals and encourages
the high-level panel to deliberate on the urgent work still required to achieve the
domestication of Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015), along
with their corresponding national action plans.
The Commonwealth Secretariat welcomes the positive impact of advances in
digital technology on access to education, freedom of expression, civic cohesion and
democratic participation. The Commonwealth cybersecurity declaration (2013)
underscores the positive impact of cyberspace, digital connectivity and citizenship as
a powerful tool for State-building and peacebuilding. Yet we recognize the downsides
of cyberspace, which can contribute to instability, unrest and violen ce.
Commonwealth member States have reaffirmed their commitment to a bold, practical,
multilateral approach to tackling cybercrime, cyberenabled terrorism and
cyberenabled violence against women and other vulnerable populations. Acting on
that mandate, the Commonwealth Secretariat, in partnership with member States, is
currently calculating the economic costs of violence against women and girls and
other vulnerable populations impacted by cyberbased violence.
The Commonwealth Secretariat encourages the high-level panel to deliberate on
the risk of cyberenabled terrorism and the significance of a whole-of-society approach
10/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

to countering violent extremism. Online misinformation, promoting divisive and
hateful narratives – often feeding off existing identity-based tensions, promoted and
shared in cyberspace – should be met with vigilance and action. The integrity of
cyberspace as a strong, free, healthy and democratic space in which constructive
dialogue on justice, equality and peace can thrive – citizen-to-citizen, citizen-togovernment, government-to-government – should be protected. The Commonwealth
Secretariat encourages the high-level panel to reflect on what more global technology
companies can do to contribute to this.
Finally, the Commonwealth Secretariat urges the high-level panel to reflect on
the role of young people in building peace. Some 60 per cent of the 2.5 billion people
who live in the Commonwealth are under the age of 30. Their efforts in conflict
prevention and in nation- and peacebuilding are increasingly critical to global peace
and stability. The Commonwealth peace programme advances youth agency on the
civic path to peace and the non-violent resolution of grievances.

21-14977

11/76

S/2021/868

Annex VI
Joint Nordic statement by Permanent Mission of Denmark to the
United Nations on behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway
and Sweden
We welcome this timely debate on diversity and peacebuilding, and thank
President Kenyatta for convening us here today.
The world is at a juncture. We are still grappling with the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, which has deepened inequalities and been used to spread
misinformation. The climate crisis is more acute than ever and disproportionately
affects the most vulnerable groups and those who are already marginalized.
Furthermore, we are witnessing an immense pressure around the world on human
rights. All of these factors together can drive division, fuel fragility and risk inciting
conflict and violence.
History has taught us how identity-based differences can be exploited in the
most horrid ways and lead to large-scale atrocities, such as genocide and ethnic
cleansing. Each time, the world has promised itself: “never again”. In fact, this is the
promise that the United Nations was built on.
To honour that promise, we must insist on conflict resolution and peacebuilding
practices that put the inclusion of marginalized groups at the centre – groups that are
facing additional barriers based on their ethnicity, religion, gender, age or sexual
orientation, for example.
Upholding freedom of religion or belief, including the fight to change religion,
or not to believe at all, is a fundamental prerequisite for peaceful coexistence. When
religious freedom is threatened, social cohesion suffers, and conflict gro ws.
The importance of the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
political decision-making and peace processes cannot be overstated. Not only is it a
goal in itself – it is also essential in the pursuit of lasting peace. Continued support t o
the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda is therefore crucial
– from providing support for women leaders and activists to holding perpetrators
accountable for sexual and gender-based violence.
At the same time, we must not forget the criticality of including youth. Engaging
youth in conflict prevention and resolution and in peacebuilding can contribute to
building inclusive and lasting peace.
Civil society is an important vehicle for forging social cohesion and bringing
grievances to light through peaceful means. It is therefore important that we empower
civil society – especially at the local level – to call for and contribute to the creation
of inclusive, peaceful societies.
All our efforts must be underpinned by a strong commit ment to human rights.
At the end of the day, respect for and promotion of human rights, including the
protection of human rights defenders, is one of our best prevention tools. It offers a
safeguard against the types of discriminatory and exclusionary prac tices that foster
divisive identities, suppress minorities and risk leading to violent conflict and
atrocities. Likewise, our conflict-resolution practices and political solutions must
build on international law, human rights and accountability. It is not an easy task but
is nonetheless necessary to achieve lasting and sustainable peace.
It is clear that we must make sure that the United Nations has the tools and
mechanisms in place to help prevent and address violent conflict driven by fractures
in the social fabric of societies. This entails a United Nations that is empowered and
12/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

able to speak out on serious human rights violations, including those driven by
discrimination and the exclusion of certain groups. As an international community,
we also need to act decisively when faced with early warning about emerging identity driven violence and possible atrocities. In these cases, it is paramount that the
Security Council come together in countering such violence and preventing further
escalation.
We encourage the Security Council to increase its engagement with the
Peacebuilding Commission. The Commission has a unique advisory, bridging and
convening role and deploys a comprehensive approach to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. Its engagement is guided by inclusivity, and we believe that the
work of the Council would benefit from drawing even more on the advice of the
Commission going forward.
Finally, we all have a responsibility to ensure that diversity does not turn into
division, large-scale violence and conflict. We all have a responsibility to honour the
promise of “never again”.

21-14977

13/76

S/2021/868

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the
United Nations, Cristian Espinosa
[Original: Spanish]
I congratulate Kenya for the manner in which it is conducting the work of the
Security Council in October and for holding this debate under the agenda item entitled
“Peacebuilding and sustaining peace”. I wish to highlight the valuable role that Kenya
played in conducting the Seventh Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and in the outcomes
achieved.
Given that the majority of deaths and most violence result from internal conflicts
and from crime, terrorism and violent extremism, it is clear that the efforts made in
this area are crucial but nevertheless insufficient for peacebuilding. I appreciate the
statement made today by the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
speeches given by Thabo Mbeki, former President of South Africa, and the other
distinguished guest speakers.
I would briefly like to make three points that are central to Ecuador.
First, this debate must be seen in the light of the outcome of the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture contained in the identical resolutions
75/201 of the General Assembly and 2558 (2020) of the Security Council. Ecuador
contributed to the negotiations that led to those resolutions adopted in December
2020.
If only we would intensify our global, regional and national efforts in
implementing those and preceding resolutions, we would move towards a safer world.
In addition, the Security Council must make use of the valuable tools and
analysis that States and multiple stakeholders developed in the Peacebuilding
Commission as part of the review. Ecuador has acknowledged in that context the role
played by women in resolving and preventing conflict.
I wish to highlight the contribution made by the Peacebuilding Fund in
strengthening institutional capacity in the areas along the border between Ecuador
and Colombia, which has in particular benefited women and children. This
Organization must step up its efforts in that area.
Second, Ecuador backs the preventive approach promoted by the Secretary General and agrees with several of the objectives set out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled “Our Common Agenda” that are underpinned by the Charter of the
United Nations and international law and justice.
As mentioned in that report, peace is the central promise of the Charter of the
United Nations. Therefore, the first step for all States is to renew their political
commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter and to move towards
reinforced and renewed multilateralism.
Thus, the Security Council must continue to encourage the strengthening of
regional and subregional activities and foster support by the United Nations for efforts
that are part of the global peace and security architecture.
Third, although diversity is often mentioned as a factor in conflict, I would like
to reiterate that, for Ecuador, the root cause of violence is intolerance. We therefore
recognize that diversity enriches a people and makes it stronger. Fostering the full
14/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

participation and contribution of all peoples is vitally important; sustainable
development will not succeed if it is not inclusive.
Intercultural dialogue, tolerance, education and respect for diversity are
essential for the international community and for States. We must intensify our efforts
to prevent, counter and eradicate acts of racism, discrimination, xenophobia and
intolerance in all their forms everywhere.
We are worried by the spread of misinformation, which threatens international
stability and security, has a direct effect on democratic institutions, on values and on
justice, and undermines sustainable development and the rule of law.
Finally, if Ecuador is elected in June 2022 to take up a vacant seat in the Security
Council for the period 2023–2024, we will contribute to the efforts of the Council to
build synergies to strengthen efforts to ensure prepared ness, prevention and response
capacity.

21-14977

15/76

S/2021/868

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the
United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
Egypt believes that cultural, religious and ethnic diversity is one of the most
important manifestations of the richness and power of humanity. It should be
strengthened through dialogue and mutual recognition, in order to promote peaceful
coexistence, and certain bad actors should not be allowed to use it as a tool to stoke
conflict and strife. Human progress over the ages has shown that mishandling
diversity, pursuing exclusionary policies and politicizing and employing diversity to
further power struggles and control economic resources undermine the social contract
and the cohesion of the social fabric and thus the stability of States.
Egypt therefore attaches high priority to the issue of building national State
institutions in a manner that respects diversity and tolerance and promotes dialogue
and peaceful coexistence across all segments of society. Building the institutions and
capacities of post-conflict States can galvanize the principle of national ownership
over reconstruction and peacebuilding efforts. Moreover, Egypt always emphasizes
the importance of upholding the logic and concept of stabilizing the p illars of the
national State in order to achieve the public interest, and always championing State
institutions over all other ideologies that are aimed at sowing disunity, division and
strife among the people of a single country. The experience of the Ara b region since
2010 is perhaps the best proof of that.
Egypt has actively contributed at the international and African levels, including
through the Aswan Forum for Sustainable Peace and Development, to establishing the
importance of building effective national institutions as a means of ensuring that
States are able to respond to their complex challenges, meet the needs and aspirations
of their citizens and avoid slipping back into conflict. As part of its leadership of
African Union reconstruction and development efforts, Egypt has put forward a vision
for giving effect to and reviving relevant African Union policy and adapting it to
contemporary developments. In addition, Cairo hosts the African centre for
reconstruction and peacebuilding activities and programmes Africa, and Egypt is
working with the African Union Commission to ensure that the centre begins
operating as soon as possible, so that it can mobilize international support for building
national capacities and institutions in the continent.
At the United Nations, Egypt, in its capacity as the current Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, has made building national institutions and capacities
one of its priorities. In May 2021, Egypt convened a meeting on building and
sustaining peace through institutions, which concluded by emphasizing the
importance of providing adequate support for national efforts to build effective,
accountable and inclusive institutions that are able to protect the capabilities and
interests of peoples, in order to enhance trust between the State and society and lay
the foundations of stability and sustainable development. The meeting also
highlighted that it was more necessary than ever to achieve that goal, in light of the
additional challenges resulting from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
In this context, we would like to put the following ideas and recommendations
to the Council:
(a) The Security Council should attach sufficient importance to a
comprehensive approach to peacebuilding that prioritizes th e principle of the national
State in order to achieve the interests of peoples and that champions the institution -

16/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

based State over destructive ideas that sow discord, division and strife among the
people of a single country.
(b) It should highlight importance of given due attention to regional
dimensions in peacebuilding efforts, particularly in areas where ethnic, cultural,
religious and other ties go beyond national State borders, while taking into account
the impact of the colonial legacy and the demarcation of borders, particularly in
Africa. The principle of regional cooperation should be promoted and the principles
of good neighbourliness and integrated common interests expressed.
(c) The Council should emphasize the importance of strengthening
partnerships between the United Nations, international finance institutions and
regional and subregional peacebuilding organizations, notably the African Union,
given that most peacebuilding issues concern Africa. In addition, the Council should
stress the importance of investing in capacity-building support and operationalizing
African tools, including the African Union Centre for Post -Conflict Reconstruction
and Development.
(d) It should emphasize the need to preserve peacebuilding gains in post conflict countries and prevent reversals by continuing to provide support for building
national institutions and capacities so that they are able to address the pandemic, the
severity of which has been exacerbated by inequality and social injustices.
(e) Given that achieving sustainable peace requires sustained support and
funding, we reiterate the importance of exploring all avenues for sustainable and
predictable funding for peacebuilding efforts and of taking advantage of the
opportunity provided by the upcoming high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on financing for peacebuilding.
(f) The Council should emphasize the importance of promoting the harmony
and consistency of international and regional efforts with nationally defined
peacebuilding objectives to ensure that support and funding are channelled to the
areas of most need in accordance with national vision and ownership, thereby
enhancing the effectiveness of efforts.
(g) It should note the importance of providing the United Nations sufficient
resources and capabilities on the ground, so as to enable it to support national efforts
to build the necessary capacity and institutions for providing basic public services to
citizens.
(h) The Council should continue to benefit from the important advisory role
played by the Peacebuilding Commission, particularly during transitions from
peacekeeping operations to other forms of United Nations presence, given the
Commission’s extensive and diverse experience in mobilizing support to address the
roots causes of conflict and to build peace in many States and regions. It should also
benefit from the Commission’s role as a forum for sharing experiences, lessons
learned and solutions.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that national sovereignty means that
States have a critical responsibility to fulfil their basic functions by providing public
services, being cognizant of the interests of all segments of society, promoting good
governance and managing diversity in a positive and effective manner that promotes
peaceful coexistence, defines obligations and preserves dignity, rights and freedoms.

21-14977

17/76

S/2021/868

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ethiopia to the
United Nations
We thank Kenya for organizing this important open debate on the theme
“Peacebuilding and sustaining peace: diversity, State-building and the search for
peace”.
We recognize the presence of the President of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta, chairing
this open meeting. We believe the topic of the meeting is relevant as well as timely.
It also carries a great weight of importance for most situations of political tension and
conflict, especially in multicultural countries. As we have witnessed in various
conflict situations, homogeneity is not a guarantee of peace, and cultural pluralism is
not necessarily a recipe for crisis. Intra-State and inter-State political tensions and
armed confrontations centre on clashing interests instead of multicultural traits. This
has been our own experience in the longstanding statehood and culture of government
that survived eras not only in the face of but because of the harmonious coexistence
of religious and language groups.
However, diversity has long been exploited to draw lines o f division and
confrontation, for the benefit of outsiders and, more recently, the local political elites.
As a result, it is safe to say, pluralism is yet to become an asset for forging unity,
building a State and ensuring sustainable peace.
The aggressive divide-and-rule methods that have been the hallmark of
colonialism created the oversimplified nexus between diversity and conflict in
multicultural societies. In addition to this, a faulty mechanism followed for creating
States, only on the basis of the wishes and needs of the colonizers, with complete
disregard for the historical, social and even natural factors on the ground,
undermining the most inherent communal cohesion.
The system of divide and rule outlasted colonial occupations and continues t o
date in different forms. The elite-led political system also inherited this perception of
cultural plurality as a problem to be dealt with, instead of as an asset to be exploited.
This is exacerbated by poverty, population pressure and competition over
resources. Ethiopia believes that the eradication of poverty is a prerequisite for the
successful promotion of governance based on the will of the people, and for the
affirmation of popular sovereignty. Economic growth and human development are
critical instruments of defence against radicalization and sensitization efforts to
trigger instability from pluralism.
Furthermore, the advances in globalization and information technology are also
availed of as a vessel to fast disseminate borrowed attitudes and values that instigate
conflict in multicultural societies. In this regard, the rule of law and governance that
copes with the technology employed to perpetuate division are critical.
Sustainable and progressing State-building requires policy space and freedom.
Multicultural societies are bound to experience frequent shifts in policies and the
adjustment of their systems in the effort to attain a workable balance in upholding the
interests involved in their context. States with the ability and a conducive regional
and global environment to advance context-driven policies succeed in managing this
balance.
The political economy ideologies promoted as a blueprint and condition for
legitimacy in the global platform fail to accommodate multicultural societies and a
host of aspirations for progress. States that are unable to carve out policy freedom for
themselves, and those that succumb to context-ridden dictates, fail to manage their
18/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

diversity and to prevent clashes. This has been evident in many multicultural societies
in Africa, and countries like ours with an ancient history and cultural diversity lack
global backing in our efforts to pave a path fitting our context.
The pursuit of this path is rarely smooth. In many instances, it entertains
political crisis and tensions. We can cite several examples in Africa and Asia attesting
to this circumstance.
In this regard, we see a great need for international cooperation to consider
multicultural societies and their endeavour to remove the seeds of confrontation and
tension and exploit diversity in the best interests of their people. This needs an
exercise in restraint in the tendency to dictate terms to developing multicultural
States. It also requires a people-centred, rights-based approach to development
cooperation.
The tenet “African solutions to African problems” is rooted in this reality. The
origins of conflict, challenges to peacebuilding and impediments to State-building are
shaped after the unique experience and historical antecedents of each country. The
lasting solutions to these intricate problems ought to emanate from each society’s own
introspection process.
Accordingly, Africa is yet to write its story on the basis of its own narrative and
self-defined path. Every single opportunity to resolve intra-State and inter-State
disputes on the continent is a chance to remedy root causes and find lasti ng solutions
for peace and security challenges.
To this end, regional organizations like the African Union play the most central
role in supporting States to build peace and augment State -building. The United
Nations bears a special responsibility to factor these attributes into its programmes in
multicultural societies.

21-14977

19/76

S/2021/868

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Georgia to the
United Nations, Kaha Imnadze
I congratulate the Republic of Kenya on taking over the presidency of the
Security Council, and thank the President for bringing the important subject of
peacebuilding to the forefront of the Council agenda.
Over the years, the United Nations has taken important measures to promote
sustainable peacebuilding worldwide, and these efforts have already yielded notable
progress. However, much work still lies ahead, as many conflict- and war-torn
communities and regions are susceptible to renewed wars and conflicts. Successful
and sustainable peacebuilding requires resolute collaborative m easures by affected
countries and the international community.
In this statement, I would like to summarize the current challenges in the
occupied Georgian territories and briefly outline measures taken by Georgia to
promote the peaceful settlement of the Russia-Georgia conflict.
The core of the problem is Russia’s illegal occupation of the territories of
Georgia – Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia. On a regular basis, we
witness unlawful and provocative actions from the side of Russia, includ ing
intensified efforts towards the de facto annexation of the occupied territories;
reinforced illegal militarization; active so-called borderization (erection of razor-wire
fences and other artificial barriers along the occupation line); the closure of s o-called
crossing points; the violation of human rights, including but not limited to torture and
the deprivation of lives on the basis of ethnicity; kidnappings and illegal detentions;
the restriction of freedom of movement and increasing isolation from t he rest of
Georgia; and ethnic discrimination and intensive Russification accompanied by the
prohibition of education in the native Georgian language.
People residing in the occupied Georgian regions have to endure unbearable
pressure, in some cases forcing them to leave their homes and join hundreds of
thousands of internally displaced persons and refugees already expelled from these
regions as a result of several waves of ethnic cleansing. The human rights and
humanitarian situation is particularly dire, given the fact that no international
presence, including human rights mechanisms, is allowed in the occupied territories.
Meanwhile, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic further deteriorates the
humanitarian conditions of the conflict-affected people.
In these critical circumstances, we often see the destructive steps undermining
the existing negotiation formats – the Geneva International Discussions and Incident
Prevention and Response Mechanisms – through disrupting the substantive
discussions and walking out of the negotiations when it comes to the issue of
internally displaced persons and refugees.
Despite Russia’s attempts to avoid the responsibility and create a narrative of
so-called “new realities”, the European Court of Human Rights recently (21 January
2021) delivered a judgment legally establishing the fact that Russia is occupying and
exercising effective control over the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia. The International Court of Justice found Russia res ponsible for
the violation of human rights on the ground, including for ethnic cleansing as well as
for hindering the return of internally displaced persons to their homes.
Determined to resolve conflict peacefully, Georgia is using all diplomatic,
political and legal instruments at its disposal and is firmly pursuing the
comprehensive peaceful conflict resolution policy that relies upon the tasks of (a) the
20/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

de-occupation of the two Georgian regions; and (b) reconciliation and engagement
between the war-torn communities.
Georgia remains in full compliance with the European Union-mediated ceasefire
agreement of 12 August 2008 and adheres to the non-use of force principle, having
reaffirmed this commitment numerous times at the executive as well as legislati ve
levels, still awaiting reciprocity from the Russian side. Georgia is trying to fully
utilize the formats of peace negotiations and engages constructively and proactively
in the Geneva International Discussions to reach tangible results for the lasting p eace,
security and human rights protection of the conflict-affected population.
At the same time, Georgia is fostering the reconciliation and engagement policy
with the people living in the occupied regions of Georgia. In this light, the peace
initiative entitled “A step to a better future” is a vivid example of our determination,
which aims at improving the humanitarian and socioeconomic conditions of people
living in these regions and promoting people-to-people contact, interaction and
confidence-building between the divided societies.
In order to ensure more effectiveness in our efforts, the Government of Georgia
launched the process of developing an inclusive and comprehensive State strategy for
de-occupation and sustainable peaceful conflict resolution, which includes promoting
reconciliation, confidence-building and engagement between the divided
communities across the occupation line. We believe that this process will assist in
finding ways and creating grounds for lasting peace and security.
Meanwhile, in this process, the strong stance and results-oriented engagement
of the international community is essential to defend the core principles and values
that unite the United Nations family and give a proper response to severe violations
of the fundamental norms and principles of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. We believe that such mutual efforts will result in better progress
towards sustainable and lasting peacebuilding in our region.

21-14977

21/76

S/2021/868

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Germany to the
United Nations
Germany welcomes the Kenyan initiative to focus the open debate of the
Security Council on peacebuilding and sustaining peace and the central role of
diversity and inclusion in all peacebuilding efforts, from conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and mediation to reconciliation and State-building.
Germany would like to highlight four points.
First, successful and sustainable peace efforts can only be guaranteed by the
inclusion of all members of society, in particular marginalized groups, as well as by
the promotion and protection of everyone’s human rights.
The voices and perspectives of persons with disabilities, LGBTI persons, and
religious and ethnic minorities are crucial for truly “leaving no one behind”. The
inclusion of women is particularly important, as it is crucial to have a gender
perspective reflected throughout the whole peace and reconciliation process.
Women’s leadership and participation are necessary for the success of efforts t o build
and sustain peace. The voices of youth should also be heard, as they are the future.
Numerous examples of conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts in different
regions of the world have shown that human rights play a crucial role throughout t he
entire peace and conflict cycle. They are a central element in conflict prevention.
Human rights violations undermine peace and, as such, serve as important early
warning systems. Respect for human rights is essential for building resilient and
inclusive societies and protecting all of their different segments, including the most
vulnerable groups.
Second, this recognition needs to be translated into concrete action,
institutionally and on the ground. Germany would therefore like to reiterate the need
for strengthened collaboration across all three pillars of the United Nations: peace
and security, development, and human rights. Member States should be encouraged
to share good practices within the Human Rights Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, in line with their respective mandates, on the interlinkages between
sustaining peace, development and human rights, with a particular focus on the
inclusion of all parts of society in peacebuilding processes.
The Peacebuilding Commission has been actively engaged, pushing to prioritize
the broader inclusion and participation of youth, women and other often marginalized
groups in peacebuilding, transitional and post-conflict environments. Germany is a
major contributor to the Peacebuilding Fund of the Secretary General, which has a
proven track record of engaging in projects advancing the inclusion of women, youth
and other marginalized groups. More such projects are needed, and mechanisms to
derive lessons learned from successful projects for other peacebuilding contexts
should be established.
In its efforts on bilateral conflict resolution, stabilization and peacebuilding
support, Germany also places major emphasis on the inclusion and participation of
all parts of society, in particular marginalized and particularly vulnerable groups. As
one of many examples, in Colombia, we have supported the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research (UNITAR) in its youth-led peace and reconciliation
approach. The work of UNITAR contributes to the peace process through
strengthening the resilience and conflict prevention capacities of at -risk youth,
families, marginalized communities and broader society. Germany is also helping the
African Union to develop the African Peace and Security Architecture, and in the
22/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

realms of conflict prevention and mediation, conflict management and post -conflict
peacebuilding, to help empower female mediators to actively engage in peace
processes. Furthermore, since June 2021, we have been funding the Principles for
Peace Evidence Consortium, one of the four major building blocks of the Principles
for Peace initiative, which constitutes a collective effort to develop a new set of
principles to better enable local, national and international actors to craft more
inclusive approaches that result in long-term sustainable peace. Germany has also
contributed to the Our Common Agenda initiative that was aimed at the inclusion of
young thinkers in shaping the future of multilateralism.
Third, building lasting peace is also about preventing c onflict. Prevention
fundamentally relies on the capacity to anticipate events and prepare a timely,
effective reaction. Recognizing the concepts of early warning and early action is
fundamental to be prepared for situations of erupting or evolving conflict . This
includes both analytical and data-driven approaches. Germany, together with the
United Nations and a number of partners, has just launched the Complex Risk
Analytics Fund to improve the latter.
Last but not least, in order to effectively prevent conflict, we also have to adapt
to current challenges. Because of its potential to polarize societies, disrupt elections
and fuel disbelief in global challenges such as climate change and the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19), and thus to be a stumbling block in our peace efforts, the rapid
spread of disinformation is a great source of concern and should be addressed in a
whole-of-society approach. Governments, journalists, civil society and academia play
an equally integral part in fostering a pluralistic medi a environment and enhancing
societal resilience against information manipulation.
Germany is looking forward to the continued discussions on the peacebuilding
architecture in view of further strengthening our joint focus on successful examples
of the inclusion of all parts of society, particularly marginalized groups, in local,
national and regional conflict prevention, conflict resolution and peace efforts.

21-14977

23/76

S/2021/868

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
Guatemala is grateful to the delegation of the Republic of Kenya, as the
President of the Security Council of the United Nations for the month of October
2021, for convening this high-level open debate on the theme “Peacebuilding and
sustaining peace: diversity, State-building and the search for peace”. We also thank
the distinguished panellists for their presentations.
Guatemala shares the criteria mentioned in the concept note circulated by the
delegation of the Republic of Kenya that the Security Counci l and its associated
peacebuilding bodies are to effectively undertake conflict prevention and resolution.
This organ must consider initiatives, methods and frameworks that reflect an
appreciation for the surge in conflicts driven, or worsened, by differen t causes.
The Security Council recognized that inclusivity is the key for advancing
national peacebuilding processes and objectives in order to ensure that the needs of
all segments of society are considered and included. The Council has also reaffirmed
that national ownership and leadership in peacebuilding, whereby the responsibility
for sustaining peace is broadly shared by the Government and all other national
stakeholders, are paramount for the development of a society. The challenge of
sustaining peace calls for close strategic and operational partnerships between the
United Nations, national Governments and other key stakeholders.
Experience in the field has demonstrated that providing a platform for inclusion,
participation, and giving a voice to citizens and involving them directly in the
provision of services can significantly improve citizens’ perceptions of the State. The
perception of the population, particularly at the local level, is improved when they
are consulted, when they feel heard and, most important, when they are brought
directly into the process itself.
In Guatemala, the Agreement on a Firm and Lasting Peace, signed on
29 December 1996, introduced the necessary basis for contributing to strengthening
the process of national reconciliation and democratization in the country, and the
recognition of the identity and rights of the indigenous peoples as the basis for the
construction of a multi-ethnic, multicultural and multilingual nation.
Other substantive aspects of peacebuilding during the national process were
discussed and approved, constituting a dialogue on economic and social issues of
Guatemalan society and its future development, under conditions of social justice,
participation and tolerance. It should be noted that the nation al process could not only
address technical aspects related to the end of the armed conflict, it also addressed
substantive issues related to modernizing the country.
Guatemala reiterates its position that building peace is never a straightforward
mission and, unless effective policy actions are taken to support countries at the
highest risk, the hard-won gains on the ground in peace, security, development and
human rights may be reversed. The Security Council should continue exploring ways
to strengthen prevention, early detection systems and operational action to avoid
conflicts, considering the interdependent approach with peace and security,
development and human rights.
To conclude, Guatemala takes this opportunity to highlight that sustaining peace
calls for close strategic and operational partnerships, including with international,
regional and subregional organizations, international financial institutions, civil
society organizations, women’s groups, youth organizations and the private sector,
24/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

taking into account national priorities and policies, as recognized by this Council in
the context of the Review of peacebuilding architecture of 2015. In this regard,
Guatemala believes that the Peacebuilding Commission should engage with the
Organization of American States as the main regional multilateral forum of the
Americas.

21-14977

25/76

S/2021/868

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Haiti to the
United Nations, Antonio Rodrigue
[Original: French]
At the outset, on behalf of the Government of Haiti, I would like to congratulate
the Government of Kenya for taking the initiative, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council, to organize the present high-level thematic debate on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, on the topic “Diversity, State-building and the search for
peace”. This is a subject of indisputable importance that lies at the heart of the
Security Council’s efforts to maintain international peace and security.
In a constantly changing world faced with diverse global threats and c omplex
and evolving security issues, peacekeeping operations, as a key means of conflict
management, have irrefutably proven their necessity since their establishment.
However, it must be acknowledged that much remains to be done to ensure that
these operations are truly adapted to the complexity of new challenges, to new threats
to international peace and security, to the various contexts in which they are deployed,
and to the difficult and often hostile environments in which they operate.
Updating the working methods of such operations is all the more necessary
given the increasingly internal nature of conflicts, as indicated in the concept note
provided by Kenya. Hence, the importance of the topic selected by Kenya for today’s
debate, with its focus on diversity, State-building and the search for peace as
prerequisites for the establishment of lasting peace in a country in conflict.
There are increasingly calls everywhere for a new doctrinal approach to
peacekeeping. It is clear that new and promising avenues for peacekeeping and
peacemaking must be explored. In its concept note, Kenya, which we wish to
congratulate on its presidency of the Security Council during the month of October,
sets out several such avenues, which are of great interest.
Sustaining peace cannot consist solely in preventing the outbreak,
intensification, continuation or recurrence of conflicts, as the concept note rightly
reminds us. Peacekeeping would necessarily be incomplete if it did not also include
activities aimed at addressing the root causes of conflict.
A close look at active peacekeeping operations shows that most of them no
longer merely involve the deployment of an interposition force or the monitoring of
ceasefires between belligerent forces. Rather, they require the implementation of a
broad range of interrelated activities designed to support the political process and,
ultimately, to lead to the establishment or restoration of the rule of law and to advance
progress towards peace, security, stability, democracy and the revival of development.
Such is the case, for example, in Haiti, where the United Nations has been
present since the deployment, in 2004, of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), which was succeeded, in 2017, by the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH). Currently, the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti (BINUH), which plays an advisory role, is continuing the
Organization’s work by helping the Government to determine how best to promote
and strengthen political stability, good governance and the rule of law, to combat
insecurity and reduce community and armed gang violence, to protect and promote
human rights and to conduct inclusive dialogue.
At a time when the country is facing a multidimensional crisis exacerbated by
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the Government of Haiti wishes to
26/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

reiterate the importance that it attaches to strengthening international solidarity. Haiti
continues to count on the support of the Security Council and the entire United
Nations system in its efforts to advance the reconstruction process and make sustained
progress towards democracy and the rule of law, which is the only way that it can
achieve social and economic modernization, poverty reduction and sustainable
development.
I would like to stress that the debate on sustaining peace cannot exclude the
issue of extreme poverty, which plays a major role in many intra -State conflicts.
Internecine civil wars have their origins in economic misery, social injustice, political
oppression, marginalization and exclusion. In order to break the vicious cycle of
poverty, more substantial assistance must be provided to developing countries in
conflict situations or in post-conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding phases, failing
which “sustainable peace” may remain an empty phrase.
Lastly, the objective of sustainable peace is inseparable from that of sustainable
development. The Republic of Haiti reiterates its commitment to a vision of
sustainable peace which, in the face of current challenge s, requires global responses
that make it possible to address the root causes of conflict and that focus on peace,
sustainable development and human rights in an integrated manner, as stated by the
Secretary-General.
It is up to the international community to meet this challenge by establishing
collective solidarity mechanisms, which are essential to achieving sustainable peace.
In that regard, the Africa-Caribbean Community (CARICOM) summit held on
7 September 2021, chaired by Kenya, represents a unique initiative to strengthen
global solidarity and cooperation. I particularly welcome the leadership shown by the
President of the Republic of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta, in bridging divisions and
bringing together the peoples of Africa and the Caribbean.
In that spirit, I thank the countries of Africa and of CARICOM, as well as all
countries that stand in solidarity with the people and Government of Haiti in its quest
for peace, security, political stability and sustainable socioeconomic development.

21-14977

27/76

S/2021/868

Annex XIV
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of Indonesia to the United Nations, Mohammad K. Koba
I thank all briefers for their insightful briefings.
My delegation commends Kenya’s initiative in bringing the spotlight to this
important issue. As the world’s third-largest democracy with a diverse society which
has been living in harmony, this issue is close to Indonesia’s heart.
Based on our own peacebuilding experience, including in nurturing peace and
harmony throughout 300 different ethnic groups across 17,000 islands, we would like
to raise the following points.
First, ensuring national ownership.
A lasting peace starts from the affected community. The international
community should work hand in hand to enhance a nationally owned and led
peacebuilding effort.
To this end, we need to work together to strengthen the capacities of institutions
in conflict-affected countries, so that national stakeholders can take a holistic
approach in addressing the root causes of conflicts. This includes investing in national
capacities for conflict prevention.
This should continue to be one of the priority mandates of special political
missions and peacekeeping operations of the United Nations.
For this to succeed, we need strong national ownership and the inclusive
participation of all local stakeholders, as they have a better understanding of the risks
of conflict that must be addressed. We also need partnership, resources, and the
sharing of experiences with international stakeholders.
Second, ensuring a sustainable transition through inclusive approach.
Indonesia firmly believes that all elements of a community have a stake in
strengthening peacebuilding efforts. This is especially important in a diverse and
plural society. Any peacebuilding efforts would be futile should they leave any parts
of the society behind.
Learning from Indonesia’s experience, promoting peaceful dialogue among
different groups within society is essential to build such an inclusive approach and
ensure a sustainable peace between communities.
On this note, Indonesia is deeply concerned by the growing proliferation of
hoaxes, fake news and misinformation. This is especially harmful in a diverse society
as it embarks on its transition to peace.
Misinformation weaponizes diversity and disrupts peaceful dialogue between
communities. We call upon all stakeholders to work together to mitigate this growing
challenge and further strengthen peaceful dialogue between communities.
Third, the role of regional and subregional organizations.
Indonesia has always been a firm believer that neighbours know best. Countries
in a region often face similar challenges. Such challenges are sometimes also
transboundary and interconnected in nature.
Regional and subregional organizations have deep knowledge, unique
perspectives and strong local connections that are crucial to supporting peacebuilding
efforts.
28/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

In our own region, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), which
was established in 1967 at a time when Southeast Asia was marred by disputes and
distrust, has today become among the fastest-growing economies and engine of global
growth.
The key to this success is the collective efforts of ASEAN and its culture of
dialogue and consensus-building – what we call the ASEAN way – which dispelled
the elements of distrust and set off a remarkable cycle of peace, trust and prosperity.
We believe that regional organizations, in which the culture of dialogue is
embedded, could further leverage their role in preventing, managing and resolving
conflict, as well as collectively addressing its root causes. We call upon the Security
Council to continue supporting efforts by regional and subregional organizations in
this regard.
To conclude, Indonesia reiterates its commitment to strengthening our joint
efforts in utilizing diversity to foster peacebuilding efforts.
We call upon all stakeholders to work together to nurture diversity and pluralism
as unifying elements that lead to peace and prosperity.

21-14977

29/76

S/2021/868

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
The correlation between diversity and conflict might not be better described
than by the Constitution of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO), which states “wars begin in the minds of men”.
This fact has also been proved by the United Nations, according to which “three quarters of the world’s major conflicts have a cultural dimension”.
Such cultural elements as religion, ethnicity, race, language and the like are
often among the major drivers for violence in many conflicts or act as catalysts for
further fanning and fuelling wars.
Unfortunately, the negative impacts of such elements in conflict or post -conflict
situations are even worse when they are combined with other factors like external
interference.
A quite pertinent question is how these impacts, either as a cause of conflict or
its exacerbation, can be addressed and, instead, how they can be used as factors for
conflict resolution, peacebuilding and ensuring a sustaining peace.
Again, the answer can be found in the UNESCO Constitution, in which it is
stated that “it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must be constructed”.
Accordingly, what is needed is to raise awareness about the importance and
benefits of cultural diversity as a driver for peace, not a cause for war, and as a source
of unity, not a factor for disunity.
It is exactly for this reason that UNESCO has rightly proclaimed, in article 1 of
the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity, that “cultural diversity is as
necessary for humankind as biodiversity is for nature”.
Through that Declaration, UNESCO has also affirmed “that respect for the
diversity of cultures, tolerance, dialogue and cooperation, in a climate of mutual trust
and understanding are among the best guarantees of international peace and security”.
Indeed, if cultural diversity is either neglected or abused, the consequences
would be catastrophic. The living example of this is the situation in Afghanistan.
It is precisely for this reason that the international community is now strongly
calling for the full respect for the rights of all ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities and women in that country, as well as the establishment of a truly inclusive
government there.
As the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran said, in his statement during the
seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly, “if an inclusive government having
an effective participation of all ethnicities should not emerge to run Afghanistan,
security will not be restored to the country”.
The success of peacebuilding in all societies with different ethnic or religious
or linguistic minorities depends, among other things, on ensuring the rights of all
minorities in a just manner, and Afghanistan is no exception.
Seizing this opportunity, I would also like to highlight the importance that the
Holy Qur’an attaches to human diversity, where it states: “O mankind, we have
created you male and female, and appointed you races and tribes, that you may know
one another” (49:13).

30/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

In fact, the value of humanity does not stem from the differences in hair or skin
colour or blood type or sex or race and the like. While such differences are real, they
should not be abused to incite hatred, division, violence and war, whether within or
between nations.
This fact has eloquently and beautifully been explained, in the thirteenth
century, by the great Iranian poet Saadi, who said:
Human beings are members of a whole
In creation of one essence and soul
If one member is afflicted with pain
Other members uneasy will remain
If you have no sympathy for human pain
The name of human you cannot retain.
As stated in article 1 of the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity, c ultural
diversity is “the common heritage of humanity and should be recognized and affirmed
for the benefit of present and future generations”.
Therefore, the recognition of cultural diversity and the rejection of its
exploitation to incite hatred and violence or to cause or intensify conflicts must be a
guiding principle in all efforts aimed at conflict resolution, peacebuilding and
ensuring sustaining peace.
In practical terms, peacebuilding is a national responsibility, and the best that
external players can do is to assist a country that has emerged from a war, to prevent
a possible recurrence of conflict and to consolidate the foundations of a durable peace.
All such support and assistance must inevitably be provided based on the
explicit request and consent of the respective country, as well as the priorities and
strategies it has defined to that end.
More importantly, these efforts must be in accordance with the basic principles
of international law, particularly full respect for the sovereignty, u nity, political
independence and territorial integrity of the concerned country.
Likewise, the principle of national ownership must be fully and strictly observed
in all such efforts.
We share the concerns over the exponential rise of fake news in recent years and
its role in disseminating hate speech, which can have negative impacts on conflict and
post-conflict situations.
We also seriously warn about systematic attempts by certain States aimed at
cultural assimilation, which can undermine cultural diversity, violate the rights of
minorities and lead to exclusion and injustice, all of which are among the causes of
conflicts or their intensification.
As a country which has always strongly supported the recognition of cultural
diversity and has been a pioneer in calling for dialogue among civilizations and
cultures, the Islamic Republic of Iran stands ready to further contribute to the
preservation of cultural diversity and using it as a source of unity and solidarity within
and among nations.

21-14977

31/76

S/2021/868

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
We thank the Kenyan presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
timely open debate and express our appreciation to the briefers for their insightful
remarks.
There is, nowadays, an increasing awareness that peace and security issues have
to be addressed through a multidimensional and integrated approach, paying due
consideration to the concept of peace continuum and to the peace -humanitariandevelopment nexus.
Peaceful prevention and the negotiated settlement of disputes are the most cost effective tools to promote peace and security. In order to be successful, these
processes need to be genuinely inclusive, encompassing all parties and all actors of
national communities.
Women’s participation, in particular, is crucial to guaranteeing such inclusivity.
There is plenty of evidence that, when women are meaningfully involved, peace talks
are more likely to address root causes and yield more sustainable results.
Notwithstanding this reality, women remain underrepresented, if represented at all, in
peace process efforts, in spite of their constructive contribution to conflict resolution
at the grass-roots level. In the last few years, Italy has stepped up its efforts to
mainstream the participation of women in peace processes in all our relevant policies
and activities. We are strongly engaged in consolidating our Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network, which responds to the pressing need to foster women’s
participation in peace processes, mediation efforts and peacebuilding in a region that
is key for global peace and stability. Launched in 2017, the network brings together
a multigenerational group of more than 60 qualified women mediators from
21 countries from all the shores of the Mediterranean area and provides for training
and capacity-building, as well as networking opportunities. We are very proud of the
results the network has achieved so far: new members have joined, the first three local
antennas – in Cyprus, Turkey and Kosovo – have been established and new ones shall
open in the near future.
Religious leaders and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) also play an
essential role in fostering prospects for peace and promoting dialogue and
reconciliation, as their unique position enables them to engage and represent large
segments of society. A notable example is the support provided by the organization
Comunità di Sant’Egidio to the Central African Republic peace process, which is
aimed at favouring reconciliation while ensuring accountability. The work of the
Italian NGO Rondine Cittadella della Pace is another testimony to the important
contribution that the so-called “second-track diplomacy” can bring to conflict
prevention, education for peace and the promotion of human rights.
Even after peace is achieved on the ground, with the cessation of hostilities and
violence, reconciliation must be constantly nurtured and consolidated. Long -term
peace requires dialogue and trust-building initiatives. It is a complex and delicate
process that takes time and cannot be rushed. It must be nationally owned and not
imposed. It must take place at all levels, from national to grass -roots levels, and be
socially and gender inclusive. In order to foster the prospects for sus tainable peace
and reconciliation in crisis contexts, it is key to ensure that all segments of society
are able to get their voices heard and contribute to shaping the future of the society
in which they live.
In some cases, effective peacebuilding processes depend on well-managed
transitions from peacekeeping operations. Therefore, exit strategies should be clearly
32/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

outlined in missions’ mandates, based on a realistic analysis of the goals that the
mission is supposed to achieve, in close cooperation with the Government of the host
country and with the meaningful involvement of national and local actors. In this
respect, the implementation of the recently adopted Security Council resolution 2594
(2021), the first ever stand-alone resolution on the transition that follows the
deployment of United Nations peacekeeping missions, is key.
Italy also shares the concerns about the dangerous impact that disinformation,
fake news and hate speech can have in contexts of crisis, including through new
digital technologies on the Internet and on social media. Consistently, we support
United Nations action to combat hate speech, in particular through the
implementation of the relevant United Nations strategy and plan of action, launched
in 2019.
Finally, it must be considered that conflicts and crises are increasingly
interrelated with the deterioration of social, economic and environmental conditions.
According to the World Bank, by 2030 almost half of the world’s poor will be residing
in countries affected by fragility, conflict or violence. Therefore, it is more and more
essential to accompany all initiatives related to conflict prevention and mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, with parallel and adequate co mmitments to
addressing the root causes and long-term drivers of instability in the field of
sustainable development.

21-14977

33/76

S/2021/868

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I would like to express my appreciation to Uhuru Kenyatta, President of the
Republic of Kenya, for convening this open debate.
Today’s open debate gives us a unique opportunity to highlight how diversity
and inclusion are an essential component of effective State-building and a
precondition for sustaining peace. It also provides a good opportunity to reflect on
what we have learned from the ongoing human security crisis, exacerbated by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has worsened tensions between
identity groups and disproportionately affected vulnerable people, including women
and girls.
Today, I would like to make three points on diversity and State-building.
First, it is fundamental to ensure inclusive decision -making that respects
diversity at the national, subnational and local levels. Decision-making processes
encompassing traditionally excluded identity groups, such as ethnic minorities,
women, youth and other marginalized groups, ensure that the needs of all segments
of society are taken into account. This, in turn, enhances the legitimacy of the decision
taken and public trust in the Government, which are prerequisites for just and peaceful
societies. By contrast, history has repeatedly shown that the exclusion of certain
identity groups in decision-making can lead to social unrest and, eventually, to violent
conflict.
Second, building inclusive and fair institutions at national and local levels is
critical. Institutions that equally benefit all without discrimination are the best
safeguard against political, security and socioeconomic challenges. They will
contribute to mitigating the root causes of conflict and help to prevent violent
extremism and terrorism. It is particularly important to build effective and impartial
security and judicial institutions to fully realize the rule of law and fight against
impunity. It is equally important to build systems in the social sector to ensure equal
access for all identity groups to basic services, including education and health. In
addition, the capacity-building of personnel to properly manage and utilize
institutions should also be emphasized as an indispensable element of institution building.
Third, we must promote partnerships among diverse actors at the international,
regional and national levels in order to help countries benefit from the integrated,
coordinated and coherent approaches of a wide range of partners in their State building endeavours.
In order to address effectively these three points, the Security Council should
take full advantage of the significant potential the Peacebuilding Commission has in
ensuring better coordination among different actors within the United Nations and in
strengthening partnerships beyond the United Nations system. Inclusive State building is a long-term process and encompasses the interlinkages between peace and
security, development and humanitarian issues, and human rights. This is exactly
where the Peacebuilding Commission has a comparative advantage. The Council
could engage with and seek advice from the Commission more actively to ensure
coherent system-wide efforts in support of inclusive State-building.
Japan has long supported State-building with a diversity and inclusion lens in
Africa. The seventh Tokyo International Conference on African Developme nt in 2019
was a milestone, as Japan introduced the New Approach for Peace and Stability in
34/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

Africa, which emphasizes the importance of supporting African countries to address
the root causes of conflict and drivers of fragility. Japan is looking forward to
furthering the discussion on State-building towards the eighth Tokyo International
Conference on African Development, to be held in Tunisia next year.

21-14977

35/76

S/2021/868

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the
United Nations, Mahmood D. Hmoud
Let me begin by congratulating the Republic of Kenya for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of October. I also express my
profound gratitude to Kenya for convening this timely meeting. Embracing diversity
is indeed the key to a peaceful world.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis has already created multiple ripple
effects, impacting countries and peoples in every corner of the world, as well as the
role of multilateralism and the future of the United Nations. We be lieve that the
United Nations has a key role to play in bringing the lessons of the current crisis to
bear on the design of new paradigms that place greater emphasis on the broader
challenge of addressing human needs through the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and other frameworks for international cooperation.
We express our deep concern over the additional challenges posed by the
socioeconomic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in areas of conflict, particularly
on the most vulnerable populations. The pandemic has exacerbated pre-existing
vulnerabilities, including the situation of women, children and local communities.
The crisis is reversing development and peacebuilding gains, aggravating conflicts
and undermining efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
Peacebuilding applies to all phases of conflict. United Nations peacekeeping
missions, which Jordan has proudly been part of for decades, have long helped to
create a space for peace to be developed; however, peacekeeping missions alone
cannot produce lasting peace. Sustaining peace must also involve a larger,
multidimensional strategy in which national Governments and stakeholders do their
part to fulfil responsibilities and commitments on the ground.
Socioeconomic development through economic and human development is
indispensable for State-building and sustaining peace. The latter requires robust
education systems and resilience-building to increase the capacity of communities
potentially exposed to conflict to adapt and recover.
Jordan underlines the importance of inclusivity to ensure that the needs of all
segments of society are taken into account and further reaffirms the importance of
accountability for sustaining peace and State-building.
Inclusion is the path to the coexistence we need to build strong successful States.
It is our strongest defence against turmoil and our greatest promise of a future of
prosperity, security and peace. Diversity must also be recognized without affecting
equality before the law.
In 2015, upon the initiative of Jordan, the United Nations Security Council
adopted resolution 2250 (2015), which is the first resolution on youth, peace and
security. The resolution emphasizes the importance of youth as agents of change in
the maintenance and promotion of peace and security. It highlights participation,
partnerships, prevention, protection, and disengagement and reintegration as the five
pillars for action related to young people’s contribution to peace processes and
conflict resolution.
In this context, we welcome the fact that the normative framework calling for
the participation and empowerment of women and youth in peacebuilding processes
has continued to take shape, though much more needs to be done to meaningfully
include them during local, national and regional peacebuilding efforts and peace
processes.
36/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

We encourage all Member States to strengthen and sustain efforts that recognize
the potential of young people as key drivers of positive change and give them the
space to exercise it in peace processes and peacebuilding efforts, at both decision making and implementation levels.
Almost as fast as the Internet and other technologies evolve, forces of hatred
find ways to abuse them: recruiting the vulnerable; trafficking weapons and illegal
goods; planning and directing terrorist actions; and publicizing atrocities that have
shocked the human conscience worldwide. We need to act, and that demands the
combined capabilities and strategic insights of technology companies, civil society
and Governments worldwide.
Much of what we see online about religion today is all about what separates
people. Around the world, suspicions are inflamed by what different groups do not
know about others. One of the goals of the Aqaba Process, which was launched in 2015
by Jordan, is to improve counter-radicalization efforts, raise awareness and explain the
true values of Islam while focusing on counter-messaging, providing non-Muslim
countries with an opportunity to better understand how to tackle sensitive, religious,
social and cultural issues.
Effective management of religious tolerance and cultural diversity is a major
catalyst for creativity and innovation. Religious and cultural diversity can be an
enrichment for societies and is required to contribute to peacebuilding and solidarity
through dialogue and common initiatives.
In 2010, King Abdullah II of Jordan introduced the World Interfaith Harmony
Week during the twelfth plenary meeting of the sixty-fifth session of the General
Assembly in New York. He affirmed that “it is essential to resist forces of division
that spread misunderstanding and mistrust especially among peoples of different
religions. The fact is, humanity everywhere is bound together, not only by mutual
interests, but by shared commandments: to love God and neighbour; to love the good
and neighbour”.
In conclusion, we do not need treaties and agreements, but we do need the spirit
of partnership to build and sustain peace. It is imperative that learners of all ages
understand that these are global, not local, issues and that they, as global citizens,
have a global responsibility and need to become active promoters of more peaceful,
tolerant, inclusive, secure and sustainable societies.

21-14977

37/76

S/2021/868

Annex XIX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
I would like to start by congratulating Kenya on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month, and to welcome President Kenyatta to the United
Nations and thank him for his effort giving this topic the attention that it deserves.
There is no better time than today to discuss peacebuilding and sustaining peace
in the context of diversity, State-building and the search for peace. Our world is rife
with conflict and suffers a dearth of peace.
As Kenya rightly noted in its concept paper for this debate, the majority of
situations before the Security Council stem from domestic conflicts. Unfortunately, a
sizeable number of these conflicts come from our region, the Middle East. While there
are numerous factors that are the root causes of these conflicts, like occupation,
interference in internal affairs of other countries and conflict over resources, what the
majority of these conflicts have in common is the prominence of their ethnic, religious
and cultural aspects.
Clashes over identity are used by different parties to gain power or to strengthen
their hold on power. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated
these conflicts. As a study by Mercy Corps has found out, the pandemic has
diminished trust in government leaders and institutions, increased economic
hardships and resource scarcity, and disrupted and eroded social cohesion.
This new reality makes prevention and support for peacebuilding more urgent
than ever. To counter the instability and insecurity that the pandemic has unleashed,
in addition to existing conflicts, our work on building and sustaining peace takes on
a new urgency that requires a “whole-of-international-community” approach and a
“whole-of-society” approach.
The world was going in the wrong direction even before the pandemic, and
conflicts were multiplying, leaving behind a trail of suffering, killed or injured, record
numbers of displaced people and a rise in hate speech, nationalism and racism.
The United Nations General Assembly and Security Council worked in parallel
and responded with resolutions (General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security
Council resolutions 2282 (2016), 2413 (2018) and 2558 (2020)) that vowed a
commitment to taking a more comprehensive approach to peace and to working
towards building peace and solving conflicts. They also pointed to the responsibility
of all of us to work together to build and sustain peaceful and resilient societies, with
an emphasis on the role of the different stakeholders, especially women, youth and
civil society.
The pandemic proved to be a crisis multiplier and also a revealer. It exposed
countries’ and societies’ vulnerabilities and awakened us to the reality that
multilateralism proved to be our weakest link – and not the strongest, as we had hoped
for – when we needed it most.
The pandemic also showed that diversity, which was supposed to be a source of
strength in our societies, became a source of division and exclusion.
To tackle the challenges that conflicts around the world present to peace and
peacebuilding, we need to draw on the principles of the United Nations and the work
of the General Assembly and the Security Council on the issue because they re present
the will of the international community.

38/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

But peace is not the work of Member States or individuals alone, it is a “whole of-system” approach and a comprehensive approach that is inclusive and sustainable.
For peace to take hold, certain criteria are necessary. First among them is
inclusion. In diverse societies and countries, a major source of conflict is exclusion
and the feeling of communities, whether ethnic or religious, that they are left out and
left behind because of their beliefs or ethnicity.
Diversity should be a strength in a certain country and not a weakness. National
ownership of peacebuilding processes must be inclusive of all sectors of society and
all its components, especially women and youth. Women have to be part of peace
processes, and their effectiveness in delivering peaceful solutions is supported by
research. Peace also cannot be an elite domain; it has to be an equalizer and include
all of society, regardless of one’s status in society.
Equality and fairness can go a long way in cementing the cohesion of society
with all its components and creating a healthy culture of peace.
Another driver of conflict is injustice. The absence of or a weakened rule of law
that causes injustice and oppression can lead to conflict, especially when people are
forced to seek justice outside the rule of law and the State system, like in cases of
revenge. Justice is a foundation and a prerequisite for peace. If there is no justice,
there is no peace.
A major threat to diversity, peace and cohesion is the rise of fake news, or what
is being branded at the United Nations as the “infodemic”, or the use of social media
to spread misinformation and disinformation about the pandemic or other aspects of
society and life. The barrage of fake news that was amplified during the pandemic not
only threatened social cohesion in societies, but it also led to violence, spread
divisions and weaponized diversity.
Peace and peacebuilding have to start and end with stopping this infodemic and
instead spread a culture of peace and understanding. Instead of telling us what is
wrong with the other side, information should teach us to respect and value the
differences of our cultures and views. Instead of violence, it should teach populations
peace and coexistence. The role of peacemakers is critical in fighting this scourge of
fake news. The voices of peacemakers and peacebuilders should be louder and
stronger than the voices of division and exclusion.
Peace must drown violence and conflict in a sea of information about what
brings us together and not what keeps us apart. Multilateralism must become our
guiding principle and not only an aspiration. Only together can we build peace and,
as Martin Luther King said, upon receiving his Nobel Prize, “sooner or later all the
people of the world will have to discover a way to live together in peace, and thereby
transform this pending cosmic elegy into a creative psalm of brothe rhood”.

21-14977

39/76

S/2021/868

Annex XX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein to the
United Nations, Christian Wenaweser
Thank you for bringing this topic to the attention of the Council today, which is
understudied given its prevalence among Council situations. For our comments, we
base ourselves on your analysis that the majority of Council situations begin as
intercommunal tensions with roots in ethnic, racial, regional, partisan and religious
differences. While factually accurate, this in no wa y takes anything away from the
fact that diversity is every country’s strength. To fully realize this strength,
communities within a country, in particular those that are in a minority within a State,
must be able to benefit from governance arrangements th at allow them to flourish and
that are in line with international human rights standards.
Liechtenstein sees this process of seeking out governance arrangements as an
extension of the right of self-determination, expressed internally within a State.
Applied in such a manner, expressions of self-determination can include selfgovernance, autonomy and devolution arrangements within a State, and as a
preventive measure, with the aim of preventing internal tensions over questions of
governance from developing into violent conflict. By applying a “self-determination
lens” to the causes of and solutions to conflict, the United Nations can significantly
strengthen its conflict prevention and resolution architecture. Three elements of this
approach are worth highlighting for the Council’s consideration.
First, the Council should encourage relevant actors to uphold the human rights
of minority communities as a means of enhancing conflict prevention. This is not only
the right thing to do under international human rights law, it is also a powerful way
to defuse tensions, prevent conflict and facilitate economic prosperity as well as
sustainable development, given that many conflicts grow out of forms of inequality,
injustice and exclusion from power, opportunity, services and security that
specifically affect minority groups and indigenous peoples. Important work on the
link between conflict prevention and the protection of the human rights of minorities
has been undertaken by the Special Rapporteur on minority issues, and the topic
should inform the Council’s efforts to prevent conflict, including its recurrence, for
example in post-conflict peace processes and transitions.
Second, the Council should ensure that efforts to prevent and resolve conflict
are inclusive. Figures from the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) show that women’s participation increases
the probability of peace agreements lasting two years by 20 per cent, and by 35 per
cent the probability of a peace agreement lasting 15 years. 1 The lesson here is simple:
inclusion works. And, of course, processes should not only be inclusive of women,
but of all affected groups, including youth, ethnic and religious minorities and
indigenous peoples, as well as civil society. In doing so, peace processes create the
broadest mandate possible and expand a constituency for peace that lasts. Inclusion
is a significant strand of the work of both the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Council, and Liechtenstein hopes that both will continue to uphold high standards for
inclusion in the situations on their respective agendas.
Third, the Council can encourage internal governance arrangements that meet
the aspirations of relevant communities, and that are in line with internatio nal human
rights standards. Forms of self-governance, decentralization and devolution of powers

__________________
1

40/76

https://wps.unwomen.org/participation/.
21-14977

S/2021/868

not only contribute to upholding target 16.7 of the Sustainable Development Goals, 2
but as is noted in the publication of the United Nations and the World Bank entitled
Pathways for Peace, “self-governance arrangements such as federalism have proven
effective in many cases in reducing local violent conflict”. 3 One way to meet the
aspirations and uphold the human rights of such communities is therefore to devolve
power meaningfully to a level at which it can be practically exercised in the service
of sustainable peace.
As part of our engagement on this issue, Liechtenstein earlier in 2021 published
a handbook on self-determination in conflict prevention and resolution. The handbook
sets out a range of practices for States, mediators and others interested in preventing
and resolving conflict seen through the self-determination lens, as well as case studies
of relevant conflicts. We stand ready and able to engage with Council members further
on the recommendations raised therein. Going forward, the Council could also
consider other steps within the United Nations system to enhance its consideration of
the topic of this open debate. For example, the Council could encourage the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs to consider how questions relating
to self-determination, seen in a broad sense, as already discussed, may be relevant to
the causes of and solutions to conflict, including in mediation processes. Further
collaboration with the Peacebuilding Commission, which has dealt from time to time
with issues relating to self-governance and autonomy in conflict resolution, may also
enhance the Council’s capabilities in this regard.

__________________

Target 16.7: “Ensure responsive, inclusive, participatory and representative decision -making at
all levels”, https://indicators.report/targets/16-7/.
3
United Nations and World Bank. Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing
Violent Conflict, Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2018. p. 146.
2

21-14977

41/76

S/2021/868

Annex XXI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Malta to the
United Nations, Vanessa Frazier
I begin by congratulating Kenya on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and by thanking you for organizing today’s high-level open debate on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
In December 2020, the General Assembly and the Security Council adopted the
twin resolutions on peacebuilding, in which the international community reiterated
its resolve to continue to work collectively and to invest in peacebuilding and
sustaining peace in a holistic manner. Over the past few years, we have witnessed a
number of factors and risk multipliers that are threatening international peace and
security. Human rights violations, climate change, environmental degradation,
terrorism, radicalization, violent extremism, socioeconomic problems and a lack of
opportunities are all compounding already difficult, at times desperate, situations.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further amplified existing
fragilities, especially in regions of conflict, and exacerbated inequalities.
Unfortunately, its aftermath will be with us for years to come, and we therefore have
the responsibility to intensify our efforts to contain and mitigate any setbacks in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development insofar as is
possible. We must, more than ever, continue to invest to help fragile States and
societies become more resilient and adaptive to sudden shocks.
Neither can we forget about the disproportionate impact that conflict has on
women, children and other vulnerable groups. We reiterate that gender-related issues
must always be at the forefront of our considerations, and we take this opportunity to
thank Ireland, Kenya and Mexico once again for their initiative to form, for the first
time, a trio of presidencies committed to keeping the limelight on this important issue.
The fact that these three elected members come from different regional groups further
underlines the universal importance of the women and peace and security agenda.
In this context, we emphasize the role that women have to play at all stages of
the political process, from negotiating peace to implementing peace agreements to
peacebuilding. This will be one of Malta’s priorities if entrusted to serve on the
Security Council from 2023 to 2024, and we will spare no effort to ensure the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women in peace processes.
Youth, too, have a fundamental role to play in contributing to the peacebuilding
process and in shaping the societies they live in. Furthermore, all efforts must be made
to provide them with the right conditions to thrive and succeed, especially since
limited access to education and the lack of employment opportunities may lead to
disillusionment, radicalization and extremism. It is crucial that youth feel that they
are an integral part of society and understand that th eir accomplishments will also
contribute to the collective good and advancement of their communities.
Malta also highlights the importance of State-building and of establishing and
maintaining transparent, efficient and accountable State institutions.
Over the past few years, we have also witnessed a rise in populism and the
propagation of the “us versus them” rhetoric. Such discourse, which dehumanizes
entire groups of people and exploits existing fractures in society to achieve short -term
political gains, has become more apparent than ever in recent years. The advent of
social media has played its part in facilitating the spread of falsehoods and
misconceptions that only serve to sow suspicions and widen divisions within

42/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

communities. The use of social media to promote hate speech, racism, xenophobia
and intolerance is especially worrying.
Advances in the digital world have simplified our lives in many ways and
opened the door to new opportunities for trade and cooperation. On the flipside, they
have also significantly increased the rate at which disinformation and misinformation
is spread. Such developments have underscored the fact that we must be vigilant to
make sure that our citizens have access to factual and accurate information. To this
end, partnerships with civil society, the private sector and social media companies are
crucial.
This is also why we have picked literacy as another priority for our term on the
Council. Digital literacy equips people with the right tools to analyse information,
question sources, counter disinformation and participate fully in democratic systems.
Through literacy we can truly empower present and future generations to actively
participate and contribute towards inclusive, equal and sustainable societies. Literacy
is equally essential in addressing violent extremism and in further raising awareness
of the ever-changing dynamics linked to our efforts aimed at peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
In closing, Malta reiterates that peacebuilding is of paramount importance. We
are fully committed to it, and it is in this spirit that we have started to contribute to
the Peacebuilding Fund from 2021. With our contribution, we want to send the
message that peacebuilding is an integral part of our multilateral project and that w e
have a collective interest to invest in it. We strongly believe that if we all contribute,
we can and will achieve significant results.

21-14977

43/76

S/2021/868

Annex XXII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the
United Nations
The Kingdom of Morocco commends Kenya for the convening of a very timely
Security Council high-level open debate focused on the theme “Peacebuilding and
sustaining peace: diversity, State-building and the search for peace”, particularly in
an exceptional conjuncture marked by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, during which countries are experiencing an unprecedented array of new
challenges, which, in turn, are exacerbating existing ones.
Morocco, thus, highly welcomes the light shed by the Security Council on the
undeniable impacts of emerging threats on international and regional peace and
security, including climate-change-related risks, which have the severe ability to
hamper social cohesion, in addition to the long-term environmental damages they
inflict on entire regions and subregions.
In this regard, the search for peace should become a compelling driver for the
international community, particularly to find ways to prevent conflicts. This will, in
the long-term, allow for precious resources to be allocated to the socio economic
development of countries in transition and peacebuilding contexts, as well as to fill
vacuums which a growing number of armed and terrorist groups and trafficking
networks prey on and exploit for their vicious agendas. It is worth highlighting the
particularly destructive effect caused when such illegitimate non -State actors resort
to excruciating violence as well as arms, such as small arms and light weapons.
Indeed, the COVID-19 pandemic has pushed countries worldwide, and
especially in fragile contexts in Africa, to the limits of their capacity, thus exerting
greater and additional pressures on already overburdened vital areas like health care,
education, employment, sanitation, security and law enforcement. The pandemic has,
regrettably, brought in a set of restrictive, but indispensable, containment measures
which have considerably hampered the mobility and the daily lives of citizens, as well
as the delivery of United Nations and international assistance and programmes.
Moreover, the global economic slowdown has also had the potential of further
triggering food shortages and insecurity.
The damaging potential of these combined factors on inclusion, the search for
peace and the building of the capacities of States Members of the United Nations
constitutes, regrettably, a real concern and risks reversing decades-long peacebuilding
and sustaining peace efforts, as well as hampering the realization of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
Morocco has, thus, consistently drawn attention to the fact that the
socioeconomic development of countries in fragile or peacebuilding contexts is also
paramount and cannot be overshadowed by the pandemic. Women and youth continue
to be the front-line victims of this global and local crisis, particularly as they remain
a country’s first and natural peacebuilders.
In such a complex landscape, inclusion and building the capacities of States
Members of the United Nations constitute major means of building and sustaining
peace. They are paramount to safeguarding peacebuilding and sustaining peace efforts
and processes, at all stages of conflict, in support of countries in fragile, transition
and peacebuilding contexts. Experience has proven that building the capacities of the
States Members of the United Nations goes hand in hand with the consecration of
institution-building, well-being and resilience; national reconciliation processes;
continuity in the State delivery of basic social services; good governance and social
cohesion; inclusivity through the integration of major peacebuilders – women and
youth – into national peacebuilding efforts; and conflict prevention mechanisms.
44/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

Inclusion and building the capacities of States Members of the United Nations,
in all areas, are true peacebuilding and sustaining peace measures that prevent a
relapse into conflict in the long run and pave countries’ way to the realization of
resilience, economic development and the Sustainable Development Goals. This
applies even more as fragility can, simultaneously, be a c onsequence as well as a root
cause of conflict. Therefore, building the capacities of States Members of the United
Nations is not a stand-alone goal. It goes hand in hand with other mutually reinforcing
peacebuilding and sustaining peace efforts and processes at the local, national,
regional and international levels.
In this regard, close cooperation with partners – from the international
community, regional and subregional organizations, as well as international financial
institutions and civil society – remains a critical tool to ensure a coordinated,
coherent, integrated and results-oriented response to the nationally identified
capacity-building needs and priorities of States Members of the United Nations.
Partnerships are particularly required when rapid and concerted actions are expected
on the ground, as has been dramatically demonstrated by the COVID -19 pandemic.
In this regard, and in order to fulfil its assisting role in the most successful
manner, the United Nations needed to undergo a series of major reforms which were
introduced by the Secretary-General, namely with the aim of improving the delivery
of the Organization’s mandate and to ensure greater collaboration across the human
rights, peace and security, and development pillars, as well as to bring tangible results
for people on the ground.
Indeed, the United Nations can only act in complement to nationally designed
capacity-building and peacebuilding processes, and in full respect of the national
sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity of concerned Member
States. Indeed, it is paramount to reiterate that States remain at the forefront of their
own peacebuilding and sustaining peace processes and hold full ownership and
leadership over their national priorities. Morocco also wishes to stress that the
contribution to national capacity-building efforts can only be successful if guided by
important parameters such as the respect of intrinsic history, culture and society.
Morocco, thus, commends the invaluable role that th e Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding Fund are
playing as hinges facilitating greater coherence across the United Nations and its
pillars, mobilization as well as impact on the ground, in support of nationally d efined
capacity-building priorities.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate the full commitment of Morocco to local,
national, regional and global peacebuilding and sustaining peace efforts and
initiatives. The Kingdom of Morocco, under the leadership of King Mohammed VI,
spares no efforts to enshrine the important elements of prevention, inclusion and the
peaceful resolution of conflicts, along with the pre -eminence of the human element
and sustainable development, at the heart of its foreign policy.
Morocco has, thus, been substantively and meaningfully engaged within the
framework of a dedicated bilateral, South-South, triangular, multilateral and
international cooperation, with numerous brother countries, particularly in Africa. At
the core of these long-standing partnerships remain experience- and knowledgesharing in various vital fields such as the judiciary and the security sector, and
providing different types of training, either in Morocco or directly in the country that
expresses its interest in this regard. Morocco will continuously call upon all financial
and multilateral actors to scale up their commitment in support of national
peacebuilding priorities, particularly at a time when the pandemic has created new
vulnerabilities while exacerbating existing fragilities worldwide.

21-14977

45/76

S/2021/868

Annex XXIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Nepal to the
United Nations, Amrit Bahadur Rai
At the outset, I would like to thank the Kenya presidency for organizing this
high-level open debate on the theme “Peacebuilding and sustainable peace: diversity,
State-building and the search for peace”.
I thank the Secretary-General and the distinguished briefers for their
comprehensive briefings.
The world has seen a rise in violent conflicts, particularly d omestic armed
conflicts, in the past decade. There exist a multitude of conflict drivers which have
prompted the involvement of non-State actors in conflicts, making them more
complex, protracted and intractable. Today’s conflicts are ever more driven by e thnic,
cultural and religious differences and identity misinterpretation. Exclusion,
marginalization and inequalities in communities have added to existing grievances,
leading to tensions and clashes.
In such a complex situation, building and sustaining p eace have been ever more
challenging.
Acceptance of “diversity” as a fabric of a nation-State is the fundamental
element of social harmony and durable peace. Each community must have a sense of
ownership in building a State; in return, the State should ta ke care of every individual
in line with the principle of equitable, just and fair treatment.
State-building is a long and arduous process. Participatory and transparent
dialogues among all stakeholders are necessary to establish strong national ownership
and reinforce their commitment to sustainable peace. The international community
should support national efforts in addressing the underlying causes of conflicts. The
primary responsibility lies with the State to identify early warning signs of conflict
and address them through the involvement of relevant stakeholders.
Nepal emphasizes the promotion of an inclusive and participatory approach in
national policies and governance to avert a sense of exclusion and denial among
vulnerable groups. We stress that the Government should recognize cultural, ethnic
and religious diversity as a foundation for national cohesion and strength. The free
will of people should be respected in nation-building. There is no viable alternative
process other than inclusive, transparent and participatory dialogues to build a
cohesive nation.
With the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the 17
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in 2015, the international community
acknowledged the mutual relationships between peace and sustainable development.
Goal 16 explicitly articulates the importance of peaceful, just and inclusive societies
which are free from fear and violence.
We need to remain committed to achieving these goals, including through our
efforts under the peacebuilding architecture.
Nepal appreciates the United Nations resolutions and frameworks under the
peacebuilding architecture, including the twin resolutions on sustaining peace
(General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016)).
We also commend the role of the Peacebuilding Commission for promoting synergies
among the United Nations, international and regional ag encies, and national
Governments with a view to achieving sustainable peace.

46/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

The international community should do more to ensure predictable and
sufficient financing for peacebuilding to better deal with complex and urgent issues
ranging from security and governance to essential services and economic
development in post-conflict situations.
Nepal recognizes the importance of international financial institutions,
including the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, regional organizations,
civil society organizations and the private sector, in assisting the national Government
during the State-building process. All actors should join hands in a synchronized
manner to implement the integrated peacebuilding strategy developed and owned by
the national authority.
Today’s peacekeeping has remained an effective tool to contribute to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. As one of the largest troop- and policecontributing countries, Nepal takes pride in its contribution towards peacebuilding in
conflict-affected zones. It is important to integrate peacebuilding components into all
stages of peacekeeping missions. This will contribute to the smooth transition from
conflict to sustainable peace.
Nepal’s own experience of a nationally led peace process and nation -building
efforts demonstrates the significance of promoting social harmony, tolerance and
understanding among diverse actors. Nepal’s decades-long armed conflicts ended
through a comprehensive peace accord in 2006.
Being a multi-ethnic, multilingual, multicultural and multireligious country,
Nepal has succeeded in creating a cohesive and harmonious Nepalese society, united
by the spirit of “unity in diversity”.
The Constitution of Nepal, promulgated in 2015 by the Constituent Assembly,
guarantees an array of civil, political, social, economic and cultural rights of people.
The Constitution outlawed any kind of discrimination based on class, caste, region,
religion, language and gender identity. We promote social and cultural solidarity,
co-existence and harmony.
As provided for in the Constitution, today, a women’s participation rate of 33
per cent in federal and provincial government and 40 per cent in local government is
guaranteed. There is also provision for the inclusion of ethnic minorities and
marginalized populations in government jobs as well as in the State architecture.
In our experience, diversity has turned into a force for national unity, not a
division.
It is important to ensure the participation of women and youth in nurturing the
values of understanding, tolerance and respect. Investments in education, awareness raising programmes and employment generation are critical to sustain peace.
Nepal reiterates that inclusive policies in the State architecture help prevent and
mend the causes of conflicts by ensuring opportunity and a rightful place to every
individual in State-building.
To conclude, all stakeholders, including parties to the conflicts, should engage
in dialogue and build consensus with a view to building an inclusive, just and
prosperous State. The international community should enhance its support to bolster
national efforts. Nepal stands ready to share its experience and lessons learned in
building peace and sustaining it in the post-conflict situation.

21-14977

47/76

S/2021/868

Annex XXIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Netherlands to
the United Nations, Yoka Brandt
The Kingdom of the Netherlands congratulates Kenya for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of October, and wishes to express
its appreciation for organizing this important high-level open debate on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, specifically on diversity, State-building and the search for
peace.
Diversity is what enriches us. It is about equality and dignity. Unfortunately,
diversity is too often a source of conflict.
As we know, the peacebuilding and sustaining peace agenda within the United
Nations seeks to address a myriad of challenges along the humanitarian , development
and peace nexus in order to strengthen the resilience of communities and support
prevention efforts – challenges that are being exacerbated by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, with rising youth unemployment and growing inequality,
particularly for women.
Important answers to these challenges lie, among other aspects, in robust and
tailored conflict resolution, political mediation and specific economic development
approaches, as also identified in the concept note for this open de bate. To properly
address these challenges, we need a strong and effective United Nations, especially
in the area of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. It is also relevant in this regard to
refer to Goal 16 of the Sustainable Development Goals, which indicates the important
role that institutions can play in peacefully managing diversity, for instance through
access to justice for all and building effective, accountable and inclusive institutions
at all levels.
The Netherlands is proud to be a member of the Peacebuilding Commission,
which serves as a platform to convene all relevant actors within and outside the United
Nations. The Peacebuilding Commission needs to be able to fully implement its
convening, bridging and advisory roles according to its manda te, in which the respect
for and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms play a crucial role.
In the context of this open debate, the Kingdom of the Netherlands would like
to address the following three points: (a) inclusion; (b) adequate fina ncing; and
(c) prevention.
The first point is inclusion. We cannot talk about diversity without addressing
inclusion. In order to prevent conflict, sustain peace and be effective in our
interventions, we need to be as inclusive as possible.
Discussions about, and interventions on, peacebuilding and sustaining peace
should be holistic in nature and involve the perspective and analyses of all
stakeholders, especially those of civil society, youth and women, and local
stakeholders. It is essential to make sure that they are meaningfully involved in
decision-making and in determining relevant actions in order to ensure sustainable
outcomes and have a tangible impact on the ground.
The United Nations should also increasingly and more deeply cooperate with
the international financial institutions. It is critical that the international community
respond to challenges in an integrated manner. The United Nations and international
financial institutions have shown that close alignment, within each respective
mandate, provides for effective outcomes on, among other aspects, joint analyses.

48/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

The Kingdom of the Netherlands emphasizes the importance of the successful
implementation of the World Bank Fragility, Conflict and Violence Strategy for 2020
to 2025. This requires conflict-sensitive approaches with attention paid to drivers of
fragility. Collaboration with other actors, such as United Nations partners,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and the International Monetary Fund, is key,
as it can facilitate a joint response that is relevant within each local context and
adheres to the “do no harm” principle. In this light, we also welcome the new strategy
on fragile and conflict-affected States of the International Monetary Fund.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands commits itself to enhancing inclusion,
specifically in the context of our membership of the Peacebuilding Commission from
2021 to 2022.
The second point is adequate financing. The United Nations peacebuilding and
sustaining peace efforts remain underfinanced, despite continuous calls to increase
funding. This is worrying as needs continue to rise.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands, as a top donor to the Peacebuilding Fund,
welcomes the Secretary-General’s recommendations regarding the need to invest in
peacebuilding, as set out in his report entitled “Our Common Agenda” and in his 2018
and 2020 reports on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We need to move towards
tangible action on these recommendations and work towards adequate, sustainable
and predictable financing, in preparation for the high-level meeting on peacebuilding
financing in 2022. A point of interest for the Kingdom of the Neth erlands is the
importance of financing mechanisms that, when appropriate, ensure a smooth
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
The third point is prevention. Conflict prevention is an integral part of the
United Nations work on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, as is also made clear in
the Secretary-General’s report entitled “Our Common Agenda”. This work should
include a structural analysis (using appropriate data analysis tools) of the causes of
conflict, and structural interventions and actions that address the root causes of
conflict, such as lack of access to natural resources, inequality, the effects of climate
change and population growth. The relevance of our efforts in this area only increases
as the risks of human rights emergencies grow, with the COVID-19 pandemic
accelerating higher levels of hunger, poverty, unemployment and instability.
All in all, the United Nations work on peacebuilding and sustaining peace is
broad and ambitious, but there is more to be done. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
believes inclusion, adequate financing and prevention are core pillars of the work that
lies ahead, with a strong United Nations at the forefront.

21-14977

49/76

S/2021/868

Annex XXV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations, Tijjani Muhammad Bande
At the outset, allow me to congratulate Kenya for assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October and commend the initiative to convene
this important open debate on the theme “Peacebuilding and sustainable p eace:
diversity, State-building and the search for peace”. We also commend members of the
Security Council for their consistent support to national and regional actions in
strengthening peace and stability in West Africa and the Sahel.
Diversity in itself has the potential to be among a nation’s greatest assets.
However, all too often, the inability to harness diversity towards shared prosperity
has been the conduit to engender exclusion and long -term grievances that could lead
to conflicts. The purest form of peace and security remains intrinsically linked to
stable governance and strengthened rule of law institutions.
In this regard, my delegation wishes to echo the statement made by our
President, Muhammadu Buhari, during the general debate of the seventy-sixth session
of the United Nations General Assembly, alerting that the worrying trend of
unconstitutional takeovers of power, sometimes in reaction to unilateral changes of
constitutions by some leaders in West Africa, threatens to erode the democratic gains
of past decades.
We fully support the efforts of the Secretary-General to facilitate political
dialogue as a solution to the ongoing crisis in Ethiopia with a view to returning the
country on the right path towards development. In this regard, we w elcome the
appointment by the Chairperson of the African Union Commission of our former
President, Olusegun Obasanjo, as the High Representative for the Horn of Africa to
promote peace, security and stability on behalf of the region. Developing strong,
effective, accountable and inclusive institutions is an indispensable component of
State-building and sustaining peace. This helps to strengthen the trust between the
people and government as well as assist in addressing the root causes of grievances.
As part of efforts to restore security and promote development in the North -East and
Niger Delta regions of Nigeria, the Government established the North -East and Niger
Delta Development Commissions. These initiatives aim to promote indigenous,
lasting solutions to the socioeconomic difficulties in the regions. Nigeria has also
recently adopted the Petroleum Industry Act of 2021, which not only provides a clear
road map for restructuring the oil and gas industry in the country, but also grants an
equity stake to the indigenes of host communities in the Niger Delta. These funds will
be domiciled in an indigenous Host Communities’ Development Trust for the benefit
of these communities.
As a country with over 500 native languages and two dominant religions under
the same national roof, Nigeria continues to strive to build a common future for all.
The legacy of our National Youth Service Corps has been to unite the country through
a year-long cultural exchange and orientation of our youth from various ethnicities in
the country. The scheme has helped bridge the critical gaps among the various ethnic
and religious affiliations in Nigeria.
The Government of Nigeria is also promoting unity and inclusion, especially for
youth and women, through several initiatives, including the signing into law on
31 May 2018 of the “Not Too Young to Run” bill, which reduced the age requirement
to contest for elective positions in the country. Furthermore, the current
administration has enacted the Discrimination Against Persons with Disab ilities
(Prohibition) Act of 2018 in line with our obligations under the Convention on the
50/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

Rights of Persons with Disabilities to promote the protection of the rights of persons
with disabilities.
Nigeria is committed to collaborating with international p artners to shrink the
inequality gaps in the country. This has been increasingly necessary amid the ongoing
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has placed immense pressure on
the country’s health system and threatened to worsen access to health care for
vulnerable populations in the country. We appreciate the donations of COVID -19
vaccines by wealthier nations to the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX)
Facility and commend the United Nations Development Programme and the
Government of Japan for their contributions to the Inclusive and Multisectoral
Response to COVID-19 Project, which has improved the availability of medical
supplies and equipment to bolster the health-care response to COVID-19 in the
country.
Concerted efforts are required to help conflict-affected States build capacity to
better deal with the menace of the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
which continues to exacerbate conflicts and insecurity across the world, especially in
Africa. In this regard, we welcome the convening of the Seventh Biennial Meeting of
States to Consider the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects in July 2021, under the chairmanship of Keny a, which recognized that the
debate on illicit weapons also needs to include ammunition and the emergence of new
technologies in arms manufacturing.
We understand that local authorities must take the lead in promoting peace and
security and, in this connection, Nigeria reaffirms its commitment to tackling the
challenges of small arms and light weapons in the country and the subregion. As a
result, the Federal Government recently approved the creation of a national centre for
the control of small arms and light weapons to provide an institutional mechanism for
policy guidance, research and monitoring of all aspects of small arms and light
weapons.
In conclusion, let me state that in managing diversity, it is important to recognize
that the pathway to development and social cohesion is paved with tolerance and
sacrifice on the part of both Government and the citizenry. Building States’ capacities
and legitimacy to manage challenges in diverse societies remains a complex but
achievable endeavour. With the political will to advance national peacebuilding
processes and objectives through inclusivity, Governments stand a strong chance of
addressing the needs of all segments of their society.

21-14977

51/76

S/2021/868

Annex XXVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations, Munir Akram
I extend my special thanks to the presidency of Kenya for convening today’s
open debate on an innovative topic which has considerable relevance for international
peace, stability and development.
Ethnic, cultural and religious diversity within States is an expanding reality. The
desire of some to build homogenous societies has become unrealistic with the rise of
globalization, migration and multi-ethnic and multireligious societies. Despite these
new trends, or perhaps because of them, moves to build pluralistic societies have
encountered serious setbacks in recent years. The rise to power of right-wing and
neo-fascist groups through electoral processes in certain countries is a disturbing
phenomenon if one recalls the history of the last century.
In South Asia, we witness the rule by a populist, supremacist government,
elected on the basis of an agenda of religious exclusivity and hatred for other religious
and caste communities. It brands the Muslim minority and certain “castes” as racially
inferior and even as “untouchables”. This is contrary to every principle of equality
and human rights. The campaign to extinguish the freedom sought by the Muslim
majority in occupied Jammu and Kashmir is ominously termed as the “final solution”.
Alarmingly, these extremist ideologies also seek to destabilize neighbouring
countries through a concerted campaign of disinformation and fake news as a weapon
of foreign policy. The international community must recognize the scale of the threat
that “Global Hindutva” poses to the ideals of democracy, peace, diversity and State building in the region and beyond.
In resolution 2282 (2016), the Security Council very aptly underlined the vital
importance of “inclusion” in State-building. This relationship has become more
relevant in the wake of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The virus has
exacerbated social and economic inequalities which threaten the very fabric of
national cohesion in several countries around the world.
In these difficult times, vaccine equity is the first and foremost prerequisite for
advancing inclusivity, especially in conflict-affected countries. In responding to the
vaccine needs of developing countries, the world must act in a way that is responsive,
emphatic and effective.
Second, fragile countries require consistent, substantial engagement and
development support to meet the basic needs of their people and prevent a reversion
to social turmoil and conflict. They require adequate financing to generate economic
activity and overcome liquidity constraints. Member States and multilateral
institutions should support these endeavours through such means as comprehensive
debt restructuring, expanded official development assistance and the reallocation of
a larger proportion of unutilized special drawing rights to these countries. The
freezing of the resources of countries coming out of conflict is parti cularly deplorable.
It is a recipe for chaos and renewed conflict.
Third, physical infrastructure, such as transportation, energy, and water and
sanitation facilities, is integral to promoting stability and State -building. It is
critically vital to encourage regional and international infrastructure investments to
rebuild conflict-affected countries. Neighbours should be important partners in a
country’s transition from conflict to peace, and then to stability and prosperity.
Regional partnerships can play a key role towards this end.

52/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

There is also empirical evidence to show that investments in social
infrastructure projects, such as rule of law, health and education projects, could
promote sustainable economic growth in fragile countries. The 2030 Agend a for
Sustainable Development also endorses this view.
In a diverse society, education is the common thread that can unite people. It
could help in developing common values and shared interests, transforming a diverse
group of people into a nation. Pakistan has recently taken a landmark decision to
introduce a single national curriculum across all elementary, primary and secondary
schools in the country. It outlines a single system of education for everyone in terms
of curriculum, medium of instruction and mode of evaluation. Now the elite and the
poor, those enrolled in private schools and those in State-run education centres have
an equal chance of gaining quality education. The initiative aims to strengthen
national unity and assimilation and build a common set of core values. More
importantly, it sends across a message of the State’s empathy toward the less
privileged segments of society.
It is in the same vein that the Government of Pakistan has initiated several social
protection and poverty alleviation programmes, such as the Ehsaas (Empathy) and
Kamyab Jawan (Accomplished Youth) programmes, under which the Government
provides stipends and interest-free loans to citizens from low-income backgrounds.
Pulling people out of poverty is at the heart of the Government’s efforts to build a
stable, strong and prosperous Pakistan.
States facing internal dissent can take practical steps towards sustainable peace
and stability by promoting national dialogue and reconciliation. Such processes
should aspire to strengthen the link between the State and the citizen. The State must
act as a guardian and provider of social services to every citizen. It must also offer all
citizens a stake in the political and economic architecture of the country. For example,
several conflict-affected countries are rich in natural resources. By distributing the
benefits of these resources equitably, these States could incentivize marginalized
groups to renounce violence and contribute to the State-building process. Building
peace is more than just ending conflict. It is about building trust and harmony and
strengthening the social contract between the State and its people by providing them
with security, the rule of law and the opportunity for sustainable growth. The United
Nations, through its peacekeeping and special political missions as well as its country
teams, can support State authorities in fulfilling this “social contract”.
The United Nations peace and security and development pillars should continue
to work in tandem to help countries with security sector reform, transitional justice,
disarmament, remobilization and reintegration efforts, and the extension of State
authority. The role of the Peacebuilding Fund is vitally important in financing these
activities. There is a dire need to enhance the investment capacity of the Fund by
increasing its donor base and promoting the concept of blended finance. The Fund
can make a long-term impact on national peace and stability if its investments are
supported by larger funding from institutional investors, notably multilateral banks,
private equity firms, foundations and charitable organizations.
The implementation of Goal 16 of the Sustainable Development Goals is
extremely relevant in promoting just, peaceful and inclusive societi es around the
world. It is also vital to ensure that the national wealth of developing countries stays
within their borders. Capital outflows deplete the meagre resources of low -income
countries and perpetuate the bitter struggle for subsistence among thei r masses. The
international financial architecture should be restructured to ensure that it can support
developing economies in retaining national wealth and promoting local investments.
This is key to generating employment, promoting social order and building responsive
institutions in these countries.
21-14977

53/76

S/2021/868

Currently, $1 trillion flows out annually from developing countries and
$7 trillion is parked in tax havens in advanced economies. We must end illicit
financial flows from developing countries and ensure the return of stolen assets.
These laundered assets, if returned to developing countries, could be channelled
towards the cash-starved State-building needs of these countries.
The Prime Minister, Imran Khan, has consistently urged the international
community to take decisive action on the capital repatriation of stolen, and the illegal
transfer of, assets of developing countries. He has warned that inaction could lead to
mass migration from poor to rich countries.

54/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

Annex XXVII
Remarks by the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Osama Abdelkhalek
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Kenya on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council. I am pleased to submit this statement, in my capacity as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, to this important open debate on the theme
”Diversity, State-building and the search for peace”.
Diversity is the greatest strength of humanity. However, unfortunately,
throughout history it has very often been manipulated, politicized and
instrumentalized for mobilization to compete over resources and power. This could
lead to exclusion, grievances, undermine the social contract and stability and
ultimately spark conflicts.
The Peacebuilding Commission, in exercising its unique advisory, bridging and
convening roles, has advanced a comprehensive approach to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace: an approach that embraces diversity and inclusion. This was evident
in the 2016 and 2020 twin resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. They emphasized that inclusivity
is key to advancing national ownership and leadership of peacebuilding processes in
order to ensure that the needs of all segments of society are taken into accoun t. The
twin resolutions also underlined that development, peace and security and human
rights are interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
The Commission has also provided, through its country- and region-specific
engagements as well as thematic discussions, a unique platform to share crossregional scalable experiences, good practices, lessons learned as well as innovative
approaches and solutions to addressing the root causes of conflict and to advancing
inclusive peacebuilding processes.
Earlier this year, the Commission convened a meeting on the theme “Building
and sustaining peace through institutions”, focusing attention on institution -building
efforts. 1 In this connection, I wish to share the following points for the consideration
of the Council.
First, the engagements of the Commission have shown that inclusivity and
respect for diversity are key to building and sustaining peace. It is through inclusive
national dialogues that conflict-affected countries can address present, past and
potential future grievances. Such efforts should equally enhance the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women and youth in peacebuilding.
Second, the Commission remains extremely concerned about the challenges to
preserving hard-won peacebuilding gains around the world due to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is exacerbating existing grievances and
inequalities and eroding social cohesion and peace. The Commission, therefore, calls
for ramping up collective efforts in supporting nationally owned and led endeavours
to prevent, mitigate and build back better from crises and conflicts.
Third, United Nations field presences should be fully equipped to effectively
work with various partners, in line with national peacebuilding priorities, to
implement peacebuilding-related activities aimed at supporting the building of

__________________
1

21-14977

See press statement of the Peacebuilding Commission (19 May 2021). Available at
https://www.un.org/peacebuilding/sites/www.un.org.peacebuilding/files/documents/2105199_pbc
_press_statement_on_institution_building.pdf.
55/76

S/2021/868

national and local institutions and capacities critical to ensuring equitable and
peaceful transitions, equal access to public services and sustainable development.
Fourth, there is a need for the further alignment of resources and efforts of the
United Nations and international financial institutions with national peacebuilding
priorities, strengthening of partnerships with regional and subregional organizations
and inclusion of all segments of society.
Last but not least, peacebuilding efforts should be accompanied by
communication strategies that use new and traditional media, including social media
platforms, to promote peaceful coexistence and counteract incitement, hate, hate
speech, misinformation and fake news.
In conclusion, the Commission is well positioned to continue to advise the
Security Council, when and where relevant, including during the review of
peacekeeping mandates and transitions, with a view to bringing a peace building
perspective that complements the deliberations of the Council and better informs its
actions.

56/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

Annex XXVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Peru to the
United Nations, Manuel Rodríguez Cuadros
[Original: Spanish]
As the Secretary-General, António Guterres, and the former President of South
Africa, Thabo Mbeki, have done before me, I would like to thank you for having
introduced into the debate of the Security Council a fresh perspective on crucial issues
related to international peace and security, one that is fundamental, timely and
pressing, on the topic of diversity, State-building and the search for peace.
The initiative is very valuable; I am convinced that the debate to which it should
give rise will have a very positive effect on the search for new ways to fulfil our
common task of preserving peace where it exists, and restoring it where it has broken
down. The value of the initiative lies in the fact that it establishes a link between the
processes underlying cohesion and peace within States – which are a function of their
social, ethnic and cultural structure and diversity – and international peace and
security.
A large proportion of the conflicts in the present transitional international
system either have internal causes or are direct confrontations, wars or situations of
violence within States that, because of their seriousness and the external linkages of
the States concerned, impact and undermine international peace and security. Because
of those conflicts, the State is no longer the only key player. As the Secretary-General
has pointed out:
Each week, this chamber echoes with updates on the grinding conflicts that scar
our world and their devastating humanitarian toll. One undeniable trend is the
sharp increase in the number of non‑State armed groups at the heart of these
conflicts. Rebels, insurgents, militias, criminal gangs, and armed trafficking,
terrorist and extremist groups. Many coalesce around joint identities or shared
beliefs. Others are opportunistic, driven by the profits of crime or the promise
of power. We’re seeing also a rise in military coups … as the joint United
Nations‑World Bank study Pathways for Peace found”.
A responsible vision aimed at building and sustaining peace in a world that is
plagued more often than not by uncertainty requires thinking about and focusing on
the causes of internal conflict and the economic, social, political, cultural and
humanitarian conditions that lead to a breakdown of the social contract, which, in
turn, tends to lead to a breakdown in social, local, regional and national cohesion, all
of which breeds conditions for conflict and the use of force.
National societies in which respect for the ethnic, cultural and linguistic
diversity of their populations prevails, in which the social contract is geared towards
the fulfilment of everyone’s aspirations in all their diversity without excluding
anyone, are a reliable guarantee for international peace and security.
Their approach to peace is rooted in respect for human rights. As Jean-Paul
Sartre once said, if human rights were to be summed up in one sentence, it would be
“respect for others”. Those others are not just individuals, but social groups, local
societies, ethnic groups, culturally varied social collecti ves, and vulnerable groups,
including women and girls, poor people and people who are being excluded or who
are the victims of racism and xenophobia.
Respect for others is the essence of peace. Violence and war, on the other hand,
are extreme expressions of disdain, hatred and intolerance towards others. In itself,
peace is an inclusive concept. It is built in States and in societies whose various
21-14977

57/76

S/2021/868

societal, ethnic or pluricultural components are adequately represented and have
satisfactory access to power and the use of power and, in particular, are adequately
served by the distribution of income and have their needs fulfilled adequately. History
shows that tolerant societies in inclusive States with a high degree of social coherence
are less likely to see internal or external violence.
It is not a matter of creating idyllic or utopian societies that would be the
epitome of what Immanuel Kant described in Project for a Perpetual Peace. It is
rather a matter of realistic possibilities tested by history. Inte rnal social peace needs
reasonably equitable societies in which all sectors of the population feel respected,
taken into account and included by those in political power and by the market. At the
same time, that realistic and transformational vision includ es priorities already
established in the consensus set out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
It cannot be that in today’s digital world, in which humanity has created more wealth
than ever before in history, millions upon millions of people suffer from chronic
hunger, have no access to health care, education or housing, face a lack of respect for
their specific cultural features in a wider context of respect for human rights, and lack
access to a State that guarantees their freedom and well-being. That reality poses a
threat to peace and complicates peace, because it erodes social cohesion.
The danger that we face – hence the relevance of the initiative taken by the
President of the Security Council, Martin Kimani – is that the consequences of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which are yet to emerge in full, suggest that, in
many developing societies, but also in the industrialized world, social cohesion has
broken down or has been weakened in the extreme, or is showing cracks, which makes
social conflict more likely.
Hence also the relevance of the Secretary-General’s proposal to create a new
agenda for global governance underpinned by a new social pact. Not only must that
pact be international in nature, it must be a priority for political action within States.
This is not merely an economic and social task. It is also political. And it is a
matter of power structures. All social sectors must be given access to national
governance. The political participation of vulnerable sectors must gro w, particularly
for women and poor people. A new type of governance must be embraced in which
government and opposition, the executive and the legislature do not assume an a priori
mindset of confrontation and zero-sum politics, which is the fastest route to political
breakdown, a weaker democracy and rising social conflict. A vision of human rights
as they relate to governance is one in which government and opposition, each from
their own perspectives, open themselves up to dialogue, understanding and mutu al
concessions so as to launch and implement an inclusive agenda. Far from
undermining social cohesion, it strengthens and asserts it instead. This implies giving
priority to a social agenda and to respect for others. Eradicating the language of hate.
In international relations and in domestic politics.
State-building requires respect for diversity and inclusion of all the sectors that
make up a society. Including, as a priority, vulnerable populations.
This is, no doubt, a complex and multidimensional process that must be adapted
to the particular features of every situation, taking into account specific ethnic,
cultural and religious aspects, differences in world view, political and philosophical
affiliations, and differences in standing between the various social sectors within
national, regional and local socioeconomic structures. It is about decentralized
inclusive policies to affirm social and national cohesion through diversity.
Incidentally, all of this must be done with a focus on human rights, com bining respect
for diversity and for specific national and local characteristics with respect for human
rights, while the State effectively fulfils its duty to act as a guarantor.

58/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

To build realistic world peace, it is not enough to eliminate hotspots of
international conflict through successful negotiations or effective preventive action.
World peace must also be built by eliminating conflicts and active or passive violence
within each country, each State. The path that history is showing us in that regard is
not one of cultural, ethnic or linguistic exclusion, or exclusion from certain rights,
but of painstakingly built social cohesion, starting from the local level of rural and
urban populations and going up to the regional level and the national level of the State
itself. It is the sum total of internal situations of peace based on social cohesion;
non-exclusion is and will remain a major guarantee for world peace.

21-14977

59/76

S/2021/868

Annex XXIX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Poland to the
United Nations, Krzysztof Maria Szczerski
The world today is facing a great deal of instability, fuelled by the evolving
nature of challenges to international peace and security. Ongoing conflicts have
become more complex, protracted and fluid, spreading across borders to affect
broader regions. Their multifaceted character requires taking into account not only
the political, but also the sociocultural, economic and environmental aspects of
growing tensions and unrest.
The activity of non-State armed groups, terrorism and violent extremism,
cyberthreats, intercommunal violence, internal displacement and refugee flows,
chronic environmental and food insecurity are just a few examples of the challenges
that we face. We need to address not only each of them individually, but also their
mutually reinforcing dynamics.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has been an unprecedented test
of the national and international capacity to manage these compound risks. It has only
deepened the pre-existing vulnerabilities of conflict-affected and fragile countries,
threatening to reverse development and peacebuilding gains.
The 2020 Security Council resolution on the review of the peacebuilding
architecture confirmed that effective peacebuilding requires the cross -pillar
commitment of the entire United Nations system and should be mainstreamed in
various United Nations actions at all stages of conflict. Peacekeepers play the central
role in preparing the ground for peacebuilding actions. In this vein, we are fully
convinced that peacebuilding considerations should be an essential element of any
peacekeeping mandate.
Building political dialogue with the host nation within a peacebuilding process
should be implemented holistically, embracing all actors, from local communities to
high political levels.
Community engagement should be fostered at the earliest stage of
peacebuilding. It is crucial that all peacebuilding actors consult systematically with
civil society at national and local levels in order to identify peacebuilding pr iorities,
as well as the needs in terms of capacity-building. Special attention and recognition
should be given to the participation of women and youth, who are frequently part of
the movements demanding change, but, at the same time, tend to be excluded f rom
peacebuilding processes.
Conflict prevention and peacebuilding are the areas of Poland’s special
commitment. Protection and inclusion of the most vulnerable groups remain among
our top priorities. National reconciliation and peacebuilding cannot work if certain
vulnerable groups or minorities are discriminated against or marginalized. This
regards displaced persons, members of ethnic and religious minorities, women, youth
and people with disabilities, among others.
Poland would also like to underline the role of religious leaders who are working
hand in hand with communities, and who can play an important part in conflict
prevention and reconciliation. Therefore, there is a need to build common platforms
for dialogue and cooperation. Religions and beliefs are often perceived as a factor in
conflict, but we should not forget that they may be a part of the solution.
Another critical aspect of the peacebuilding process is the alignment of
peacebuilding strategies with national recovery strategies and dev elopment plans.
More attention should be given to the economic dimension of peacebuilding, as well
60/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

as to the impact of economic challenges on sustaining peace. Developing sustainable
funding strategies and exploring innovative financing options, including in the
context of peacekeeping missions, is key in this regard.
It is therefore crucial to align the core business of the private sector with the
strategic goals of the international community. Development assistance alone is not
sustainable in tackling comprehensively all post-conflict challenges, especially
economic stagnation.
In terms of the practical options for resource pooling in conflict prevention and
sustaining peace, we might consider leveraging more private resources for
development in the form of blended finance. In this regard, all stakeholders should
continue to invest in new methods of generating financial resources and innovative
tools for information gathering, data analytics and machine learning, to better define
where the risks and threats to peace and security are most urgent and where the
assistance of the international community is most needed.
It is equally important that the United Nations remains closely engaged in
supporting countries in transition in meeting sustainable development challenges. It
is our obligation to preserve their gains and achievements.
Poland endorses the work of the Peacebuilding Fund. It has proven to be an
efficient tool for addressing peacebuilding challenges with holistic action. We fully
support the Peacebuilding Fund strategy for 2020–2024 with its emphasis on the
inclusion of women and youth.
Four years after the adoption of the 2016 resolutions on sustaining peace, we
can observe that progress has been made with regard to a more holistic, cross-pillar
approach towards conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The peace
and security pillar has become more coherent and its capacity to support all stages of
the peace continuum has improved. Nevertheless, there is still work to be d one on our
commitment to developing preventive policies.
In order to effectively mitigate threats, it is pivotal to foster risk assessment
capacities within various United Nations bodies, including the Security Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission and missions in the field. The role of structural
prevention, resting upon all three United Nations pillars, is also crucial. Reducing the
risk of conflicts requires resilient and accountable state institutions, good governance,
social cohesion, as well as inclusive and sustainable development anchored in the
protection of human rights.
In closing, I would like to highlight that fostering peace and reconciliation
should be our highest calling. As a firm believer in peacebuilding efforts being the
most efficient way to ensure lasting stability and human security, Poland stands ready
to engage in any initiative within the United Nations framework aimed at supporting
post-conflict reconstruction and development efforts.

21-14977

61/76

S/2021/868

Annex XXX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Portugal to the
United Nations
Portugal welcomes this very timely discussion. Globalization and digitalization
have brought many advantages to our daily lives, but have come at a price. While
enhancing our sense of community they have also exposed, very clearly, our
differences, exacerbating cleavages and the feeling of exclusion of many.
They have given us the power of information. But they have also given some
the power of disinformation. Digitalization has removed many of our social filters,
diminished empathy and, in some cases, respect for diversity. The semi -anonymity it
provides, allowing more hostile and impulsive reactions, paves the way to an increase
of social conflict and hate speech. In a space already manipulated by artificial
intelligence and algorithms, it can easily trigger a violent escalation that threatens
peace.
Governments may develop digital tools to deal with social media involved in
stoking violence through incitement, hate speech or fake news. But that will only be
a palliative in a society already torn apart by racial, social and gender-based tensions
or conflict. To guarantee long-lasting peace, we need to tackle the root causes of
conflict, involving all stakeholders in the process, embrace diversity and promote
inclusion.
In this quest it is essential to cooperate with regional and subregional
organizations, local governments and, especially, civil society, which are all very well
positioned to understand the root causes of conflicts, as the Security Council
recognized recently in a presidential statement (S/PRST/2021/9), following the open
debate on 19 April, entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in maintaining international peace and security”.
It is therefore essential to include them all from the very beginning in the peace
process. They ensure inclusivity and local ownership. With a deeper knowledge of
the reality in the field, and of potentially conflicting i ssues, they are instrumental to
promoting confidence, trust and dialogue by strengthening the fragile structures of
cultural diversity.
Civil society, in particular, can play a key role in the process, bearing in mind
that better and more effective results for long-lasting peace are achieved when they
are not imposed top down but evolve at grass-roots level. They may develop projects
that focus on the “good”, that promote cross-cultural education, that enhance the
bonds that exist between different groups and enable a different and higher sense of
belonging despite differences.
We already have the tools and Portugal fully supports the Secretary -General and
his Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative, as it stresses the importance of
cooperating with host countries and of keeping an open and clear dialogue with local
authorities and communities.
But we cannot forget the importance of sustainable financing and we all should
be part of that effort, be it by reinforcing the Peacebuilding Fund, or by a sustaine d
development aid program at bilateral level.
In a globalized and digitalized world, there is no such thing as a distant or a
geographically localized conflict. We all are affected, and we all are at risk. We all,
therefore, must make our best efforts to guarantee long-lasting peace.

62/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

Annex XXXI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic]
With worsening conflicts around the world leading to calamitous humanitarian
consequences, the international community, particularly the Security Council, has a
growing responsibility to avert conflicts and put a final end to them. In order to do so
effectively and sustainably, the root causes of conflicts and means of addressing t hem
must be examined. As studies confirm and daily experience proves, one of the most
important ways of preventing conflicts is to ensure social unity and not to let religious,
racial, linguistic or any other differences escalate into discord, conflict and strife.
To that end, the State of Qatar believes that the most effective way to prevent
such discord in the long run is to spread a culture of peace and tolerance among the
members of society and to promote quality education for all. This, of course, inc ludes
education for girls. In our view, supporting the right to education is more important
in conflict and emergency situations. Accordingly, the State of Qatar has played a
prominent role at the international level in promoting and protecting the right t o
education, particularly in emergencies, and has made successful efforts to provide
educational opportunities for girls.
The State of Qatar is aware of the importance of promoting factors that foster
stability and inhibit the emergence and escalation of conflict, such as social, political
and economic inclusiveness, and of building effective State institutions that are founded
on the rule of law and good governance. Qatar, in its foreign policy, has accordingly
emphasized those factors, devoting much of its humanitarian and development efforts to
projects that promote the building of State institutions, particularly in post -conflict
States, and that provide opportunities for vocational training, employment, sports and
other areas that channel young people’s energies towards constructive ends that support
their States and communities, rather than allowing them to fall prey to extremist and
divisive forces. The State of Qatar supports United Nations programmes and activities
aimed at achieving sustainable development, such as the Sustainable Development Goals
Accelerator Labs Network. It also attaches great importance to supporting international
efforts to reduce the impact of climate change and other factors that exacerbate social
fragility and undermine stability. As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
opened the door to further undermining of economic and social stability around the
world, Qatar has, since the beginning of the pandemic, sought to cooperate with its
international partners with a view to mitigating the pandemic’s impact.
In order for States and societies to flexibly respond to the challenges that
undermine their stability, all segments of society must be politically, socially and
economically engaged and not marginalized. Accordin gly, the State of Qatar, in its
frequently high-profile efforts to resolve disputes through mediation, is always aware
that the desired solutions should be inclusive of all members and ethnic, religious and
political components of society. Qatar strives to ensure that women are involved in
peace talks as part of its support for the women and peace and security agenda and
out of its belief in the need to involve women in peacemaking and peacebuilding. In
a similar vein, Qatar supports youth engagement, with Doha hosting in 2022 a highlevel global conference on comprehensive peace paths for youths.
In conclusion, we welcome the growing interest shown by the Security Council
and the United Nations in general in strengthening the foundations of sustainable
peace, including through the Peacebuilding Commission and peace processes, a trend
that will undoubtedly have a positive impact on the achievement of sustainable peace.
21-14977

63/76

S/2021/868

Annex XXXII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
Thank you for bringing our attention to this salient topic. The Republic of Korea,
as a long-standing member of the Peacebuilding Commission, has been a staunch
supporter of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. For instance, in 2 019, we initiated
the resolution of the Economic and Social Council entitled “Support to the Sahel
region” to call for more attention for the linkage between sustainable development
and peacebuilding in the Sahel.
As my delegation values and understands the importance of peacebuilding
endeavours in our search for peace, Korea would like to emphasize that peacebuilding
and sustaining peace concern not just a single region and have become even more
relevant now than before.
In this regard, Korea particularly welcomes Kenya’s decision to host a highlevel open debate in the Council today. The critical question will be how the
international community can better embrace diversity and reflect different voices in
our efforts to build sustainable peace and development. Today’s topic is directly tied
to the increasingly hostile environment our peacekeepers are operating in. It also
urges us to consider how we can better engage with local communities in our efforts
to address the root causes of conflict.
Against this backdrop, my delegation would like to highlight the following three
points.
First, inclusivity is one of the keys to sustaining the political process. A
successful political process can only be achieved when we reinforce the diversity of
the stakeholders and empower women, youth, and other vulnerable populations. This
is even more so in transition settings. With that said, Korea would like to reiterate the
critical role of the United Nations peacekeeping missions in the transition period to
engage with grass-roots civil society. Therefore, we must bolster our effort to expand
the role of the engagement platoon and support United Nations entities’ engagement
with local communities, especially women and youth. United Nations entities should
also actively cooperate with regional organizations in advancing the political process.
Simultaneously, the host government must do its part to engage the community more
during the policy and decision-making processes.
Second, regarding State-building, Korea would like to highlight the significance
of the rule of law. The rule of law is the cornerstone of every society – it is the basic
foundation upon which people are protected and social trust can be built. Without the
rule of law, good governance cannot take place, and people can hardly trust judicial
institutions, government authorities, or even each other. Ensuring t he rule of law is
essential to bringing people together. That is precisely why the role of the United
Nations police is so important. They provide the necessary assistance to reinforce the
rule of law in the host country. In this regard, my delegation urge s Member States to
come up with concrete contributions in the run-up to the peacekeeping ministerial,
especially in the police area.
Third, the Republic of Korea would like to underscore the crucial hinge role the
Peacebuilding Commission has played in supporting countries in conflict. It is
imperative that we emphasize and make the best use of the Commission’s advisory
role to the Council. Thanks to its bridging and convening mandates, the Commission
has been an indispensable venue to encourage more active engagement with the local
communities. It has become a place where Member States are not simply talking

64/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

“about”, but rather “with” people on the ground. We hope that this Council will
engage more with the Commission, especially during the transition peri od.
In conclusion, Korea would like to stress once again that we need an entire
society’s participation to sustain peace. In particular, by ensuring the participation of
women and youth, we can strengthen the resilience of the entire political system as
well as societies. Lastly, Member States are more than welcome to continue their
discussion with regard to sustaining peace and peacebuilding at the upcoming
ministerial meeting on peacekeeping, to be held on 7 and 8 December in Seoul,
Republic of Korea. My delegation wishes the ministerial be a valuable platform for
boosting the momentum of the international community’s efforts to build sustainable
peace.

21-14977

65/76

S/2021/868

Annex XXXIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Sierra Leone to the
United Nations
The process of Sierra Leone’s exit from the formal agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission is a clear demonstration of the tremendous progress Sierra Leone has
made as a country since the end of the civil war in 2002. Sierra Leone’s exit represents
a remarkable success story not only for itself, but for the United Nations, our
development partners, donors, neighbouring countries and the wider international
community.
Sierra Leone has indeed made significant gains in its peacebuilding
consolidation efforts since it was placed on the Commission’s agenda on 23 June 2006
and has been generally acclaimed as a success story. These gains are manifestations
of our democratic, peace and security, and development trajectory.
Indeed, our success story would not have materialized without the active support
of the United Nations and its specialized agencies, the Security Council, partners,
international financial institutions, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund among others. Sierra Leone therefore stresses the need for proper
coordination at all levels to foster peace, security, and development.
This statement thus seeks to share insights and experiences and how such
experiences can inform the practical pursuit of peacebuilding a nd sustaining peace.
It is worthwhile to note that the emergence of intra-State conflicts based on
identity and diversity requires a careful application of conflict resolution mechanisms
that take into consideration all interests and concerns of the aggri eved parties. This is
because each and every human being has an identity and belongs to a race, a region,
a country, an ethnic group and in some cases to a religion and a party. The interests
and concerns of people that make up a society flow along these i dentity questions,
which should be dealt with holistically and impartially.
In Sierra Leone we believe that all human beings are the same and equal before
God and every man has right to freedom of association, which is why Sierra Leone
encourages all Member States to be tolerant to existing diversities, with a common
goal toward the attainment of sustainable peace, development and security because
these aspirations transcend entrenched diversities.
In the context of Sierra Leone, intermarriages have bee n a key vehicle in
achieving an appreciable level of religious and ethnic tolerance. Intermarriages bridge
the gap of ethnic divide. Sierra Leoneans see the other tribe to which their partner
belongs as their in-laws and so accord them the respect and love that they deserve.
Also, even though various tribes make up the population, no tribe is considered
superior or inferior to the other. With this mindset, we live peacefully with one
another.
However, one would desire to understand the labyrinth of issues that
precipitated the civil war in Sierra Leone. Overwhelming evidence now exists to
spotlight bad governance as the major factor that made the civil war possible. The
effects of bad governance, resulting in a non-functional economy and a moribund
State, was a state of affairs that was felt beyond tribal and regional boundaries and so
there was a palpable need for change in the governance architecture of the country.
Coming from this grim experience, going forward the current Government is
working assiduously to consolidate a good governance framework to prevent the
country from sliding into conflict. While being mindful of the intent of certain
individuals and groups, in their selfish quest for political power, to manipulate
66/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

identity and diversity – regionalism, tribalism and partisan differences – to achieve
their goal, Sierra Leone has largely managed the issues of identity and diversity to
maintain and build peace and maintain civic cohesion to further strengthen peace and
inclusive governance in all spheres of society. This consideration weighs supreme in
the Government’s decision to establish the National Commission for Peace and
National Cohesion following the enactment of the enabling legislation. Sierra Leone
calls on Member States that have similar problems to replicate a similar mechanism.
In Sierra Leone we recognize the importance of engendering a culture of peace
to foster sustainable development. In this regard, we have embraced the new deal
principles and Sustainable Development Goal 16, which stresses the importance of
developing inclusive national processes and structures for stable governance and
effective development by forging healthy partnerships between all levels of actors in
the development process, from local community through distri ct, national and
international levels.
It is clear that peace cannot be sustained in any country or region if there is
widespread economic and social deprivation and lack of enjoyment of basic human
rights, such as the freedom of expression. Therefore, as States Members of the United
Nations, we need to adhere to and follow through with the principles of freedom,
justice, democracy, tolerance, solidarity and multilateralism, cooperation, pluralism,
cultural diversity and dialogue. Following this call to t he letter will in turn secure our
shared peaceful future.
It is our duty as States Members of the United Nations to focus our efforts on
preventing conflict and sustaining peace through effective implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals and focus on recovering and building back better in
the age of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
We need a robust and integrated approach that encompasses and strengthens
coherence between political, security, development and human rights aspects and the
rule of law in tackling the fundamental causes of every crisis. In this regard, there is
no gainsaying that we need to take into full consideration the relevance of the
economic, political, and social dimensions of conflict.
It is also important to shift our focus from investing resources in responding to
crises, to the far more cost-effective and humane business of preventing conflict. We
call for stronger mediation and more proactive conflict prevention measures in the
United Nations and the need to invest more in regional engagements. We believe that
the Security Council needs to allocate more resources towards conflict prevention
efforts and to place more emphasis on engagement on the issue of regional conflict
resolution.
In concluding, it is important to underscore the point that the United Nations
system needs to scale up cooperation and support for the development and
transformation of fragile States as way of achieving peace, security and sustainable
development.

21-14977

67/76

S/2021/868

Annex XXXIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Slovakia to the
United Nations, Michal Mlynár
I would like to thank you for organizing this important high -level open debate
on the theme “Peacebuilding and sustainable peace: diversity, State -building and the
search for peace”, which will provide an opportunity to share the insights and
experiences of different actors and how these can inform the practical pursuit of peace
building and sustaining peace.
The number of conflicts and crises is on the rise and more people than ever have
been forced to leave their homes due to injustice, lack of inclusivity, human rights
violations, inequality, exclusion, climate change, poor management of natural
resources and the absence of political settlements and capable institutions.
Slovakia attaches great importance to a comprehensive approach to sustaining
peace, particularly through the prevention of conflict and addressing its root causes,
national reconciliation and unity including through inclusive dialogue and mediation,
gender equality and respect for, and protection of, human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
It is important to underline the primary responsibility of national Governments
and authorities in identifying, driving and directing priorities, strategies and activitie s
for sustaining peace, and in this regard, to emphasize that inclusivity is key to
advancing national peacebuilding processes and objectives in order to ensure that the
needs of all segments of society are taken into account.
Therefore, a critical determinant of success is fostering inclusive national
ownership. For effective conflict prevention and peacebuilding, States need to be able
to manage internal conflicts, whether ethnic, racial, religious, or even socioeconomic,
among diverse populations. Moreover, States perceived as favouring one or some
groups over others, or of failing to provide adequate basic services to all of their
citizens, can become susceptible to identity conflict.
The national responsibility for efforts to sustain peace must be bro adly shared
across all key social strata and divides. A wide spectrum of political opinions and
national actors, in particular women and young people, must be heard. Early attention
needs to be given to gender equality and to increasing women’s voice in po litical,
social, and economic development in fragile and post-conflict settings.
Slovakia is convinced that the security sector is a key component in government
responses to various challenges in fragile countries and regions. For years, Slovakia
has identified security sector governance and reform to be one of the key elements
for effective conflict prevention and successful post-conflict rebuilding and
stabilization. The direct experience from many countries clearly shows that nationally
led and inclusive security sector governance and reform is a key to developing
security sector institutions that are capable of effectively responding to specific
security needs and can actively manage drivers of fragility. In this context, we need
to accord priority support to broadening inclusion and diversity so that peacebuilding
processes are nationally owned in the fullest sense.
We have to reaffirm our collective commitment to addressing the root causes of
conflict, fragility, and violence and to creating clear pathways out of fragility and
towards greater resilience, as a means of achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. In this context, it is important to mention the Sustainable Development
Goals and their role in accelerating progress in this area. Sustainable Development
Goal 16 clearly indicates the important role that State institutions can play in
68/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

peacefully managing diversity. With regard to building States’ capacities and
legitimacy to manage challenges in diverse societies, the main aspiratio ns of this
goal – promotion of peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development,
providing access to justice for all and building effective, accountable, and inclusive
institutions at all levels – are of utmost importance.

21-14977

69/76

S/2021/868

Annex XXXV
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia,
Mohamed Abdirizak Mohamud
Allow me to begin by congratulating the Republic of Kenya on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of October and to commend the
Permanent Representative of the brotherly country of the Republic of Ireland for their
exemplary leadership at the helm of the Council in September.
This debate on peace and sustainability is a fitting testament to the importance
of this body that has worked consistently in pursuit of the noble effort of sustaining
peace across our fragile and delicate globe.
It is an honour to address the Security Council and contribute to an import
debate, made all the more poignant as a Somali, representing the Somali nation. A
nation this body has supported during its darkest moments, as it searched for peace.
A nation, I am delighted to state, which is once again emerging from the ashes of civil
war and strife, confident of its future, boosted by the hopeful aspiration of its dynamic
and vibrant people for peace and prosperity.
No country is an island on its own and naturally Somalia’s future is very much
intertwined with those of the nations of our region: our peace is their peace, our
prosperity is their prosperity, their security is our security.
Securing and sustaining peace for our region remains an important aspect of
realising the aspirations of our people but we must all be clear, particularly in the
context of our region: achieving peace requires not merely the silencing of the guns
but a commitment to combating want and fear, a commitment to freedom of religion
and expression and a commitment to human rights, in which our citizens have nothing
to fear from their legitimate government.
In this context achieving sustainable peace is not a one-dimensional Statebuilding process, driven by the need to construct state institutions with the support of
external assistance, but a multidimensional effort derived from the context and
realities on the ground, led by the legitimate authority of the State to promote national
ownership.
State-building, therefore, is not merely developing the mechanism of State
institutions but fundamentally promoting a deepening of democratization and
balancing the equation of rights and duties between citiz ens and government.
Effective representation, transparency and accountability of government institutions
requires improving the knowledge that citizens have of governance. This encapsulates
the concept of deepening democracy; this is the right path simply because democracy
works.
This is all the more imperative given the complex peace and security
environment faced by our region. This includes long-standing inequalities; poverty
and food insecurity; environmental degradation; urbanization and demographic
pressures that have been further exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID -19).
Sustainable peace requires national ownership that supports multilateralist
action at the regional and international level in a manner adherent to international
law. A dependable rules-based order at the State, regional and global levels, accepted
by all, remains a prerequisite for security and stability and by extension for achieving
sustainable peace.
It is vital that all Member States abide by international law and adhere to Article 2
of the Charter of the United Nations: namely, the core principles of sovereign equality
70/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

of States and non-interference, the prohibition on the threat or use of force and the
obligation to settle international disputes peacefully in preservin g international peace
and security.
This is the foundation upon which a peaceful, equitable and prosperous
international community is built. This must be the common responsibility of all
member states to strengthen the international order based on the respect for
international law.
To contradict or refuse to abide by international law is to threaten peace and
stability itself. Put simply, history has shown that failure to follow existing
international law, precedents and rulings in good faith results in threats of insecurity,
conflict and tensions around the world.
The Horn of Africa region faces several realities that characterize its regional
environment, which must be addressed collectively in order to achieve our collective
goal of long-term peace. The first reality is the relationship between the States
members of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development that will be a
determining influence in the security situation and economic advancement of the
region.
More emphasis must be placed on the importance of multilateral and
interregional organizations to promote common interests. There must also be an
acceptance that for States like Somalia, with the longest coastline in Africa,
sovereignty and the protection of its natural resources, as well as promotion of
sustainable development, can be addressed to the extent that Somalia asserts its rights
over its maritime territory and can ensure that others respect those rights.
Just in the morning of 12 October, the International Court of Justice issued its
binding verdict on the maritime dispute between Somalia and Kenya. The Federal
Government of Somalia has always expressed its willingness to abide by the ruling
of the International Court of Justice and to accept its finality on this unfortunate
dispute with our neighbour.
The Federal Government of Somalia has always sought to secure the rights of
the Somali nation through recourse to peaceful methods of dispute settlement and
views the decision of the International Court of Justice as a vindication o f the
important role of the United Nations in upholding international law and mitigating
threats to peace.
Therefore, the long-term security, peace and prosperity of our region depend on
fostering greater ties and cooperation in all sectors from security and social issues to
trade. Somalia stands ready to move forward in enhancing our neighbourly relations
beyond this ruling.
Finally, the simple truth remains: the bonds with our neighbours far outweigh
issues that may divide us and are in keeping with the noble goal of the Council in
seeking to address threats to international security. The Somali nation seeks stability
for the Horn of Africa region and is willing to address whatever concerns may threaten
stability as long as they are within the confines of international law and are morally
just.
Finally, I would like to congratulate the Somali people of the occasion of sixty seventh anniversary of our national flag day.

21-14977

71/76

S/2021/868

Annex XXXVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Mathu Joyni
I would like to thank the Kenyan presidency of the Security Council for
convening this timely open debate on the theme “Peacebuilding and sustainable
peace: diversity, State-building and the search for peace” and we congratulate
Kenya’s strong leadership of the Council during this busy month. We also thank the
briefers for their insightful briefings.
At the outset, let me underscore that it is South Africa’s view that peacebuilding
is one of the key pillars in the maintenance of international peace and security, and in
addressing the common challenges as articulated in the Secretary -General’s latest
report entitled “Our Common Agenda”. As correctly highlighted by this meeting’s
guiding concept note, effective peace and conflict-preventing State-building is
imperative, which has been clearly identified by the Member States in at the recent
general debate. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the effects of which
are being felt across the world, has impacted sustainable and economic development,
employment opportunities, poverty reduction, delivery of basic services – all of which
are important to address barriers to lasting peace and stability.
On the African continent, the pandemic has undermined the progress made thus
far towards achieving durable peace and development, particularly in conflict affected countries. It has also impacted progress in achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals and the region’s aspirations espoused in the African Union’s
Agenda 2063.
South Africa’s own process of reconciliation and reconstruction was
underpinned by the establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. It
presented an opportunity to facilitate reconciliation between perpetrators and
survivors of human rights violations, facilitating exchanges between diverse ethnic,
gender, racial, religious and other communities.
For South Africa, overcoming decades of division and mistrust and seeking a
better future for all relies on a continuous process of promoting the notion th at there
is “unity in diversity”. It is for this reason that South Africa views peacebuilding as
part of the sustaining peace continuum that includes conflict prevention.
Lasting and durable peace can only be achieved with the involvement of all
stakeholders including the full, meaningful, and equal participation of women as well
as youth and communities who have been historically and remain marginalized.
National ownership and inclusive, local-led solutions are essential for the
creation of early warning and early response tools to address the challenges faced in
conflict situations. These are often exacerbated by exclusion based on gender,
especially for women and girls, ethnicity, race, religion, ability, or other identities.
These communities experience first-hand their challenges, and supporting them to
create their solutions will better allow them to address the multilayered and unique
challenges they encounter.
In this regard, it falls to the international community, policy makers, regional
and subregional bodies as well as the United Nations to consider intersectional
approaches. In the context of the global health crisis towards achieving recovery from
COVID-19 and other challenges, these approaches will enhance efforts to address
structural inequalities, root causes of conflict, strengthen conflict prevention and
peacebuilding mechanisms.

72/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

In enhancing skills and implementing joint initiatives to mitigate and resolve
conflicts sparked by exclusion, it is important that the international communi ty
support conflict-affected countries to achieve their national priorities and
development goals.
The United Nations, through its bodies such as the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Security Council, should continue to harmonize their engagement with the
African Union and regional economic communities and regional mechanisms on
institution building. This can strengthen efforts, particularly in the areas of promoting
good governance, combating corruption, conflict prevention, mediation,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Cooperation with regional entities will also
reduce any overlapping and duplication of efforts and could foster trust between
diverse communities and between communities and authorities, which are also
essential for confidence building and reconciliation. Additionally, when peacekeeping
transitions take place, it is also imperative that peacekeeping operations continue to
work closely with national stakeholders to set priorities, build domestic capacities
and strengthen local institutions.
Mobilizing partnerships and institution-building are also key elements of
success for peacebuilding. Of increasing importance in the peace and security
landscape is the role of technology, social media and communications, which play a
role in social cohesion, nation building and reconciliation. They also play an equally
important role in fuelling divisive rhetoric and hate speech, misinformation, and
misrepresentation. Governments, regional and subregional organizations and the
private sector industries dominating the ownership of these platforms and all relevant
stakeholders, such as the media and journalists, as well as civil society must
strengthen partnerships to counter the negative impact that these technologies can
have on peace and stability.
We must also redouble our efforts to strengthen the peaceful use of social media,
and all new and emerging technologies in our societies. This is especially crucial
where peacekeepers operate. The working environment for peacekeepers remains
volatile, particularly in situations where atrocities continue to escalate. As a troop and police-contributing country, South Africa understands that peacekeepers are
deployed in deteriorating and complex political and security environments, face
asymmetrical threats and have increasingly become the target for attacks. To this end,
South Africa will host the sixth United Nations Partnership for Technology in
Peacekeeping symposium in 2022. The symposium presents a unique opportunity to
unpack the nexus between the digital commons and the maintenance of peace and
stability, as we have seen that media and technology in all its forms can be used as a
tool to promote peace, but also to undermine it as well.
It is a common reality that the United Nations must improve its capabil ities in
areas pertaining to mediation, prevention, and resolution of conflict in order to
support political processes. In this regard, we must emphasize efforts geared towards
preventive diplomacy and acknowledge the key role that special political missio ns
play in preventing relapses into violent conflicts. At the level of the United Nations,
coordination between bodies such as the Peacebuilding Commission and the Security
Council as well as the Economic and Social Council remains critical for peace,
security, and development issues.
Let me conclude Mr President, by highlighting that we must continue to ensure
that our efforts and responses are in alignment with national priorities, local needs
and are effective, proactive, and inclusive of all.

21-14977

73/76

S/2021/868

Annex XXXVII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
Switzerland would like to thank Kenya for holding the present debate and the
speakers for their contributions.
As several of them have already mentioned, peacebuilding and sustaining peace
are not only related to the situations of countries in conflict, which the Security
Council is responsible for addressing, but are a permanent task for all States.
As indicated by the Geneva philosopher Jeanne Hersch, peace designed for the
service of humankind cannot be defined purely by the absence of armed conflict.
Human rights must be respected, for lasting peace must be based on the free and
conscious choice of women and men to live together, recognizing and r especting the
rights and freedoms of all.
For example, in Switzerland, since 1848, we have had the opportunity to
develop long-standing experience in the origins of and conditions conducive to peace.
Such peace was based on principles of government and a legal system that takes into
account the cultural, linguistic, religious and economic diversity of its citizens. Our
system of government thus offers significant freedom, but such freedom is always
accompanied by the obligation to respect the rights of ot hers.
We have three main observations related to the topic of the present open debate.
First, peace must be inclusive in order to be sustainable, and the sustainability
of peace must be evaluated constantly.
Individuals’ respect for each other can never be taken for granted, and the
inclusiveness of social systems, even those that are reputedly stable, must be assessed
regularly. For example, on 1 October 2021, our Government approved the
implementation of two sister conventions of the Council of Euro pe: the Framework
Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages. In addition, on 26 September 2021, the Swiss
people voted overwhelmingly in favour of marriage for all, enabling men and wom en
who had long been excluded to fully enjoy the rights and obligations associated with
marriage.
Second, the Security Council has an important role to play in this area.
While States bear the primary responsibility for ensuring such inclusiveness, the
Security Council has, for the past several years, recognized the importance of
sustaining peace, most recently in its resolution 2558 (2020), which focuses on the
full range of peacebuilding activities, and its resolution 2594 (2021), which relates to
peacekeeping mission transitions. The Security Council therefore has the legitimacy,
means and mandate to advance the goal of building and sustaining peace.
We welcome your efforts and those of previous Presidents of the Security
Council to increase not only the number but also the diversity of speakers.
We also call on the Council to continue to design the mandates of its peace
missions in order to ensure broad consultation, involving all actors that contribute to
peacebuilding, including national authorities and civil society stakeholders, in
particular women and youth. We also call for strong coordination, coherence and
cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission.

74/76

21-14977

S/2021/868

Third, although the Security Council has a particular responsibility, all Member
States can contribute.
For example, Switzerland is committed to supporting peacebuilding processes
not only through the peacebuilding architecture but also through bilateral cooperation,
including in Haiti, where we plan to increase our support for the reduction of
community violence. As a member of the Freedom Online Coalition, Switzerland is
also committed to promoting Internet freedom and to combating the spread of
disinformation and hate speech online. Investment in such initiatives, which are
aimed at preventing rather than overcoming conflict, should be increased
significantly, and we call on all States to respond to the call of the Secretary -General
in “Our Common Agenda” to ensure sustainable funding for peacebuilding.
Although we have emphasized the responsibilities of our Organization, the
Security Council and Member States, we must also recall the duty incumbent upon
all of us as individuals. For people build peace through tolerance towards others. As
Jeanne Hersch has stated, “true tolerance has the same root as human rights; that root
is also the root of liberty and truth”.

21-14977

75/76

S/2021/868

Annex XXXVIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Thailand to the
United Nations
At the outset, Thailand wishes to express its appreciation to Kenya for
convening this open debate to exchange views and explore ways forward in
addressing contemporary challenges to sustaining peace. Indeed, this timely open
debate corresponds to the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Our Common
Agenda”, which reaffirms once again the shared vulnerability and interconnectedness
and the disenchantment with institutions and leadership revealed and amplified by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
Peace, diversity, and State-building are interlinked. Efficient, transparent, and
accountable institutions, capable of responding to the needs of all segments of society,
are part and parcel of sustaining peace. Such institutions will strengthen the social
contract and therefore trust in the government for long-term socioeconomic
resilience, while addressing the risks of identity or diversity being manipulated as a
source of conflict.
In this regard, Thailand wishes to share the following views in light of
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
First, diversity is strength. Gender perspectives and women’s participation in
decision-making contribute to comprehensive and sustainable conflict resolution.
Empowerment of women and youth drives socioeconomic advancement and enables
long-term development. How States take care of the most vulnerable and people of
different identities is a benchmark of social justice and equality. State -building and
national institutions must harness and embrace these strengths for the society to be
sustainably peaceful and truly leave no one behind.
Second, our endeavours across the entire peace continuum should place
emphasis on supporting inclusive national peacebuilding and long-term development
priorities. Social safety nets, economic empowerment and, most importantly in these
times of the pandemic, universal healthcare and equitable access to COVID -19
vaccines contribute not only to the global recovery but also strengthen the foundation
for harmonious and prosperous societies.
Third, we should focus more on transition processes when planning a political
strategy for conflict situations. Peacekeepers could, from the beginning, play an
essential part in transitioning to post-conflict settings, supporting institution building,
and delivering essential services. This includes providing COVID -19 vaccines across
“the fault lines” where vaccines and basic services may not be equally accessible to
the population within the areas controlled by armed groups.
Lastly, the role of the United Nations at the national level is crucial in conflict
prevention. The resident coordinator and the United Nations country team are among
key frontline actors who can put a finger on the pulse and detect possible emerging
conflicts early. For early warning and response to operate, the United Nations system
on the ground must be equipped and directed towards building trust with the host
governments. A strong and coherent country team, with a clear division of labour
between agencies, funds, and programmes, would also be able to act more efficiently
in supporting countries to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, thereby
leading communities to become more peaceful, resilient, and sustainable.
As a proud member of the Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, Thailand remains firmly committed to the promotion of international
peace and security and to pursuing peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
76/76

21-14977
