A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/194
18 February 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 96 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/53/611)]
53/194. United Nations University
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the United Nations University,
Welcoming the appointment of Hans van Ginkel as the fourth Rector of the United Nations
University, by the Secretary-General in September 1997,
Having considered the report of the Council of the United Nations University,1 the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations University,2 the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the United
Nations University as transmitted by the Secretary-General3 and the comments of the Secretary-General
on the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the United Nations University,4
Bearing in mind the need to ensure a coordinated system-wide approach to training and trainingrelated research issues as well as to establish a coherent strategy for building on common fields of interest

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/53/31).

2

A/53/408.

3

See A/53/392.

4

See A/53/392/Add.1.

99-76879

/...

A/RES/53/194
Page 2

and complementarities between the various training and research institutions within the United Nations
system,
Expressing its deep appreciation for the voluntary contributions made to date by Governments and
other public and private entities in support of the University,
Noting with appreciation the efforts made by the Rector of the United Nations University in
intensifying his interaction with United Nations Headquarters in the context of the development and
implementation of a University-wide strategic plan which would help the University to determine an
overall strategic direction for the future, and, in this context, encouraging him further to enhance
interdisciplinary research, as recommended in the comments of the Secretary-General on the report of the
Joint Inspection Unit,4
Noting also with appreciation the efforts made by the Rector in initiating a self-assessment of the
University,
1. Welcomes the completion of the review of the United Nations University carried out by the Joint
Inspection Unit and the internal assessment conducted by an ad hoc committee of the Council of the
University and the comments of the Secretary-General on the report of the Joint Inspection Unit;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the steps taken by the Council and the Rector of the United
Nations University to promote the work and the visibility of the University, particularly among Member
States, the United Nations and its agencies, through such measures as organizing a series of public forums
for the purpose of disseminating the results of its research, and requests them to intensify such efforts
further;
3. Welcomes the progress made by the University in contributing to the work of the United Nations,
and requests the Council and the Rector to continue intensifying their efforts to improve the University's
interaction and communication with other relevant bodies of the United Nations system and to continue
their efforts to avoid unnecessary duplication of work within the system;
4. Requests the Council and the Rector to enhance further coordination and complementarity
between the University's research and training centres and its programmes, keeping in mind the relevant
recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit in its report entitled “Training institutions in the United
Nations system: programmes and activities”;5
5. Recognizes the importance of creating linkages, collaboration and cooperation with other research
institutions and universities in developing countries to facilitate the exchange of experience and best
practices so as to mainstream the perspective of developing countries in the activities of the University;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in this connection, to continue his consideration of innovative
measures to improve interaction and communication between the University and other relevant bodies of
the United Nations system and to ensure that the work of the University is taken into account in all
relevant activities of the system, taking into account General Assembly resolution 51/187 of 16 December

5

A/52/559, annex.
/...

A/RES/53/194
Page 3

1996, so that the United Nations system may draw more extensively upon the work of the University, and
to submit a report thereon to the Assembly at its fifty-fifth session;
7. Welcomes the intention of the University to strengthen its policy-analysis and capacity-building
activities in conjunction with the continuation of fundamental research and reflection in the strategic plan
now being developed by the University for 1999–2002;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to encourage the further participation of the University in the
work of the United Nations, and also requests him, taking into account resolution 51/187, to report to the
General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session on such further participation of the University in the activities
of the Administrative Committee on Coordination and its subsidiary machinery, as well as through other
existing structures and modalities for communication, interaction and synergy;
9. Urges the University, in its allocation of fellowships, to increase the number of researchers from
developing countries, thereby enabling them to benefit from the knowledge, expertise and skills of the
University and enhance capacity-building efforts in developing countries, particularly in educational and
research institutions;
10. Requests the Council and the Rector, taking into account resolution 51/187, to continue to make
further efforts to ensure the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of the activities of the University, as well
as its financial transparency and accountability, to intensify efforts to augment its Endowment Fund and
to find innovative ways to mobilize operating contributions and other programme and project support;
11. Invites the international community to make voluntary contributions to the University, including
its research and training centres and programmes, and in particular to its Endowment Fund.
91st plenary meeting
15 December 1998
