S/PRST/2013/3

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 February 2013
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6922nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 February 2013, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes President Abed Rabbo Mansour Hadi’s
announcement of the launch of the National Dialogue Conference on 18 March
and commends those that have engaged constructively in the preparatory
stages of the process. The Security Council also welcomes the issuance of a
decree regarding the formation of the Executive Bureau for the Mutual
Accountability Framework.
“The Security Council reiterates the need for the transitional period to be
a Yemeni-led process, underpinned by a commitment to democracy, good
governance, rule of law, national reconciliation and respect for the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of all people in Yemen.
“The Security Council emphasizes the need for the National Dialogue
Conference to be conducted in an inclusive manner involving the full
participation of all segments of Yemeni society, including representatives from
the South and other regions, and the full and effective participation of youth
and women, as stipulated in the final report of the Preparatory Committee. The
Security Council calls upon all parties to honour the timetable and benchmarks
set out in the transition agreement and for all sides to act in good faith, in a
peaceful, transparent, constructive, and reconciliatory manner. The Security
Council maintains its expectation that the National Dialogue Conference will
lead to a constitutional referendum and elections by February 2014.
“The Security Council urges all the parties in Yemen to adhere to
resolving their differences through dialogue and consultation, reject acts of
violence to achieve political goals, refrain from provocations, and fully abide
by resolutions 2014 (2011) and 2051 (2012). The Security Council expresses
concern over reports of interference in the transition by individuals in Yemen
representing the former regime, the former opposition, and others who do not
adhere to the guiding principles of the Implementation Mechanism Agreement
for the transition process, including former President Ali Abdullah Saleh and
former Vice-President Ali Salim Al-Beidh. The Security Council reiterates its
readiness to consider further measures, including under Article 41 of the UN

13-23569 (E) 150213

*1323569*

S/PRST/2013/3

Charter, if actions aimed at undermining the Government of National Unity
and the political transition continue.
“The Security Council expresses concern over reports of money and
weapons being brought into Yemen from outside for the purpose of
undermining the transition.
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the unity, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Yemen.
“The Security Council urges the Yemeni Government to pass legislation
on transitional justice to support reconciliation without further delay. The
Council further urges the need to respect rule of law and protect human rights,
in accordance with Yemen’s international legal obligations, particularly those
of women and people belonging to vulnerable groups, such as children. The
Security Council welcomes in this regard the commitment by the Government
to end the recruitment and use of children by the Yemeni security forces
through the adoption and implementation of an Action Plan in line with
resolution 1612 (2005).
“The Security Council remains closely engaged on the situation in Yemen
and will continue to closely follow the next steps towards a peaceful political
transition. In this regard it welcomes the continued and coordinated efforts of
the Gulf Cooperation Council, ‘Group of Ten Ambassadors’, the SecretaryGeneral’s Good Offices, including through the Special Adviser Jamal
Benomar, the wider diplomatic community, and the next Friends of Yemen
meeting that will take place on 7 March in London. The Security Council
underscores the need for continued international support for Yemen’s political
transition, including through the fulfilment of commitments made by donors to
support Yemen.”

2

13-23569
