VI.

Resolutions adc:,pte<l on the reports of the Third Committcc

regional machinery for the promotion and protection of
human rights, 63
Aware of the importance of encouraging regional cooperation for the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 7
(XXIV) of 1 March 1968, 64 in which the Commission
requested the Secretary-General to consider the possibility of arranging suitable regional seminars under
the programme of advisory services in the field of human
rights in those regions where no regional commission
on human rights exists at present for the purpose of
discussing the usefulne1,,s and advisability of the establishment of regional commissions on human rights,
Recognizing the important contribution of the regional commissions of the United Nations in the economic and social fields,
l. Appeals to States in arcas where regional arrangements in the field of human rights do not yet
exist to consider agreements with a view to the establishment within their respective regions of suitable
regional machinery for the promotion and protection
of human rights;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, under the programme of advisory services in the field of human rights,
to give priority to the organization, in regions where
no regional commission on human rights exists, of
seminars for the purpose of discussing the usefulness
and advisability of the establishment of regional commissions for the promotion and protection of human
rights;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit a progress report on the implementation of the
present resolution to the General Assembly at its thirtythird session for further consideration.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/128.

Missing persons in Cyprus

The General Assembly,
Concerned at the lack of progress towards the tracing
and accounting for missing persons in Cyprus,
Expressing the hope that the informal discussions
now taking place to establish a joint committee to trace
missing persons are successful,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to provide bis
good offices, through bis Special Representative in
Cyprus, to support the establishment of an investigatory
body with the participation of the International Committee of the Red Cross which would be in a position
to function impartially, effectively and speedily so as to
resolve the problem without undue delay;
2. Invites the parties concerned to continue cooperating in the establishment of the investigatory body
and work out the modalities with a view to activating
it expeditiously.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/129.

World Conference to Comhat Racism
ancl Racial Discrimination 6 ~

The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, in particular resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 and
31;78 of 13 December 1976, in which it affirmcd its
total abhorrencc of racism, racial discrimination and
apartheid and n.:solved to achieve their total elimination,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 2057 (LXII) of 12 May 1977, including the
annex thereto, in relation to the preparation of the
World Confcrence to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination.
Taking note of the communication dated 4 February
1977 from the Governmcnt of Ghana, 66
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 2057 (LXII), including the annex thereto;
2. Regrets the circumstances which led to the withdrawal by the Government of Ghana of its offer to act
as host to the World Conference to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination and expresses its appreciation
to that Government for its co-operation;
3. Decides to convene the Conference at Geneva
from 14 to 25 August 1978;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to invite as participants in the Conference:
(a)
Ali States;
( b) The United Nations Council for Namibia, in
accordancc with General Assembly resolution 31/149
of 20 December 1976;67
5. Requests the Secretary-General to invite to the
Conference as observers:
(a) Representatives of national liberation movements recognized in its rcgion by the Organization of
African Unity, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 3280 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974;
( b)
Representatives of organizations that have received a standing invitation from the General Assembly
to participate in the sessions and the work of all international conferences convened under its auspices, in
accordance with Assembly resolutions 3237 (XXIX)
of 22 November 1974 and 31/152 of 20 December 1976;
(e) Thc specialized agencies concerned as well as
intercsted organs and bodies of the United Nations;
( d) Interested intergovernmental organizations;
(e) The Special Committee against Apartheid;
(f) The Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implemcntation of the Declaration on
thc Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Pcoples;
(g) The Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination;

(h)

The Commission on Human Rights;

( i)

Othcr interested committees of the United

Nations;
63 A/10235, paras. 93-97 and 173-178, A/32/178, paras.
107-111.
64 See Official Records of the Ec~nomic and Social Council,
Forty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/4475), chap. XVIII.

149

65 Sec

also sect. X.B.5, decision 32/ 433.

66 E/5911.
67 Sec also

resolution 32/9 E.

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

150

(j) Non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council, as indicated in the anncx to the prcscnt resolution;
6. Authorizes thc allocation from the regular budget of thc United Nations of the costs involved in holding the Conferencc;
7. Decides to include Arabic as a language of the
Conference;
8. Requests thc Secretary-Gcncral, as part of the
preparatory process, to take adequatc steps to ensure
that maximum publicity shall be given to the Conference and, to that cnd, to allocatc the necessary resources from thc regular budget;
9. Calls upon ali States to contributc to the success
of the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, in particular by their active participation
in the Conference;
1O. Urges ali Statcs to co-opcrate with the Secrctary-General of the Confercnce in the prcparatory work;
11. Requests thc Secrctary-General to report to
the General Asscmbly at its thirty-third session on
the work of the Conference;
12. Decides to consider at its thirty-third session,
as a matter of high priority, the ítem entitled "World
Confcrence to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination".
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
ANNEX
Non-govcrnmcntal organizations invited to participate in
the World Conference to (:ombat Racism and Racial
Discriminalion

The following non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council shall be invited
by the Secretary-General to attend the World Conference to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination: ali non-governmental organizations in category I consultative status and nongovernmental or,ganizations in category II consultative status
and on the Roster which have, by 30 September 1977, submitted information on activities undertaken or contemplated
in connexion with the Decade for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination, in accordance with paragraph 18
(/) (iv) of the Programme for the Decade. 6 8 Their participation shall be effected through their presence at the Conference
as observers and through the submission of written statements
to the secretaria! of the Conference.

32/130.

Alternative approaches and ways and
means within the United Nations system
for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedo1ns

The General A.1,1cmbly,
Convinced that thc obligation of all States to observe
the purposes and principies of thc Charter of thc United
Nations is fundamental for the promotion and respect
of human rights and fundamental freedoms and for the
realization of the full dignity and worth of the human
person,
Conscious that it is thc duty of the United Nations
and of all Mcmber States to achieve international co-

operation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and
in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights
and for fundamental frecdoms for ali, without distinction as to racc, sex, languagc or rcligion,
Convinced that such co-operation should be based
on a profound understanding of thc variety of problems
existing in differcnt societies and on the full respect
for their economic, social and cultural realitics,
Bearing in mind the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 611
A cknowledging the progress achieved by the international community in the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms, particularly
with respect to the standard-setting work within thc
United Nations system,
Noting with satisfaction the entry into force of thc
International Covcnants on Human Rights 70 and of a
large number of other important international instruments in the field of human rights,
Considering that the acceptance by Member States
of the obligations contained in those instruments is an
important element for the universal realization and
respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recognizing that, in accordance with thc Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the ideal of free human
beings enjoying freedom from fear and want can only
be achieved if conditions are created whereby everyone
may enjoy bis cconomic, social and cultural rights, as
well as his civil and political rights,
Profoundly convinced that all human rights and fundamental freedoms are interrelated and indivisible,
Recognizing that apartheid, all forms of racial discrimination, colonialism, foreign domination and occupation, aggression and threats against national sovercignty, national unity and territorial integrity, as wcll as
the refusal to recognize the fundamental rights of all
peoples to self-determination and of evcry nation to
cxercise ful! sovereignty over its natural wealth and
resources, constitute situations which in themselves are
and generate mass and flagrant violations of ali human
rights and fundamental freedoms of peoples as well as
of individuals,
Deeply concerned at the continuing cxistence of an
unjust international economic order which constitutes
a major obstacle to the realization of thc economic,
social and cultural rights in developing countries,
Considering that the approach to the future work
within the United Nations system in the field of human
rights should take into due account the experiences
and thc general situation of, as well as the efforts madc
by, the developing countries to implement human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Considering that the thirtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights should be marked
by an over-all analysis of existing problems in thc field
of human rights and by increased efforts in finding
appropriatc solutions for the effective promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
taking into account the experiences and contributions of
both dcvelopcd and developing countries,
Having considered the rcports of the Secretary-General on this item, 71
on Resolution 217 A ( IlI).
2200 A (XXI). annex.
7 1 A/10235, A/32/178, A/32/179.

70 Resolution

os Resolution 3057 (XXVIII), annex.
