UNITED NA TIONS

OFFICIAL

RECO

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

2 FEBRUARY

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . , , , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 25 January 1980 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Malawi to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13764) . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2196)

SlPV.2196

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemerzts of the Official Records of the Security Council, The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions ard
Decisiow
of the Secrtt?ty Co[tmiI.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2196th MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday, 2 February 1980, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

(German

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian):
Members of the Security Council have before them
document S/13777/Rev.l,
which contains the revised
text of the draft resolution sponsored by Bangladesh,
Jamaica, Mexico, the Niger, the Philippines,
Tunisia
and Zambia. It is my understanding that the Council
is ready to vote on the revised draft resolution. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution
in document S/13777/Rev.l to the vote.

Mr. Peter FLORIN
Democratic Republic).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh,
China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2196)

A vote was taken

of the agenda

The draft
none. l

Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 25 January 1980 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Malawi to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13764)
The meeting

was called

to order

and

of hands.

WNS rrdopted

One member (the United Kingdom
Northern
Ireland) did notpcrrticipate

by 14 votes

to

qf Great Britniu
in the voting.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russ&m):
A number of delegations have expressed the wish to
.
speak after the vote; I shall now call on them.

nt 5.25 p.m.

4. Sir Anthony PARSONS
(United Kingdom):
My
delegation did not participate in the vote on the draft
resolution which has just been adopted.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda

resolution

by CI show

MJNS adopted.

5. In discharging its responsibilities
for administering
Southern Rhodesia, the British Government will continue to apply the terms of the Lancaster House Agreement2 as concluded between all the main parties in
Rhodesia who were signatories to that Agreement.
That is to say, the text of the Agreement will guide
our every action. It will be the sole text, and we shall
acknowledge the relevance of no other text. I have
participated
actively in this debate; I have listened
carefully to the views expressed by the Ministers and
Ambassadors of the African nations; I have faithfully
transmitted
those views both to London
and to
Salisbury. I have myself spoken at length in order to
inform the Security Council about the current situation
in Rhodesia, to try to clear up the many misunderstandings reflected in this debate and to refute allegations against the British Government and the Governor of Rhodesia. I have done that in the interests of
maintaining the close co-operation with African countries which is so important
in the present circumstances and in the hope of clearing the air. But it was
clearly inappropriate
for my delegation to go further
by associating itself directly with any document
purporting to give guidance on our responsibility
for
the administration
of Rhodesia other than the Lancaster House Agreement. We cannot, that is to say,

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 25 January 1980 from the ChargC
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Malawi
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/13764)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian):
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 2192nd
to 2195th meetings, I invite the representatives
of
Algeria, Botswana, Cuba, Egypt, Ghana, Kenya,
Liberia, Malawi, Mozambique,
Nigeria, Somalia, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Uganda, Viet Nam,
Yugoslavia and Zaire to participate in the debate
without the right to vote.
At the invitcrtion
of the President,
Mr. Bedjcmti
(Ajgerirr),
Mr.
7’10~ (Botswnna),
Mr.
Roa Korrri
(Cohn), Mr. Ahdel Megrrid (Egypt), Mr. Sekyi (Ghana),
MI*. Merino (Kenycr),
Mr. Dennis (Liberin),
Mr. MuWiJllh
(Mo/flwi),
Mr.
Monteiro
(Momnhique),
Mr. Usm1n
(Nigeria),
Mr. Shnrif (Somnlia),
Mr. WoPerlyi (U~CIJ~~CI),
Mr. Dorojo
(United
Republic
of
Twzonia),
Mrs. Nguyen
Ngoc Dung (Viet
Nom),
Mr. KOm~til711
(Yrrgoslrrsia)
NIX/
Mr. K~171Nlldo
WN
Kamnnda
(Zaire)
took the places reserved for them
c/t the side of the Council chnmber.

1

associate ourselves with attempts to reinterpret in any
way the Agreement we reached with all the main
parties in Rhodesia.

that Agreement, all of them encouraged by the clear
and firm support of the front-line States and Nigeria.
The French delegation wishes to pay formal recognition before one and all to the decisive contribution
that they have made to this major event.

6. Therefore the Council would not expect me to go
into detail about our views on the resolution. It is
enough to say that, in the view of my Government,
it is unbalanced and selective. The United Nations
has long insisted that it is the responsibility
of the
United Kingdom to administer Rhodesia. We are doing
our duty, and I urge the Council to let us get on with
it unhampered until independence is achieved in Zimbabwe.

12. Of course, my delegation does not claim that
everything now happening in Rhodesia is in keeping
with the letter of the Lancaster House Agreement.
For the time being France does not have any observe1
on the spot. However, it is probable that infractions
have been committed by various parties with regard
to the Agreement signed. The latter includes appropriate machinery for implementation
and investigation. It constitutes a framework of action which it is
vital to refer to and comply with scrupulously. The
negotiators who worked it out were not unaware of
the difficulties which would have to be faced. Indeed,
how could one imagine that men who for years now
have felt hostility and fear towards each other coutd
overcome from one day to the next their mutual
distrust?

7. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (i,zte&efaiiorr
fro/n
E;i-c&):
Mr. President, I hope you do not mind my
leaving it to you to bring to a conclusion the question
before the Council. You have just taken up your
duties, but I am sure that your experience in the
United Nations will enable you to conduct our proceedings in February successfully. That is my sincere
wish in extending to you my warmest congratulations.
I should also like to thank my colleagues wholeheartedly for the kind words they have addressed
to me.

13. However, in view of the progress that has been
made in such a short lime, these incidents should
surely be viewed in their proper perspective. Have
they really prevented the broad implementation
of the
Agreement signed in London from continuing? Have
we not during these past few days seen further significant progress such as the withdrawal of foreign
elements, the speeding up of the return of refugees
and the restoration of regular communications
with
neighbouring countries?

8. We have witnessed an impressive change in
Rhodesia. Progress towards peace and independence,
which began at Lusaka last August at the Meeting of
Commonwealth
Heads of Government,
is continuing.
In this connection, let us not forget to recall the merit
acquired in the eyes of history by the States which
participated
in that Meeting.
9. Events are unfolding at a rate often difficult to
follow. The initiative
of the African Group in the
Council no doubt responds to a desire to pause and
take stock of the situation. For 15 years the United
Nations, and particularly the delegations of the African
States, have devoted too much effort to the Rhodesian
question not to feel that they have the right to present
their assessment of the situation right up to the last
moment.

14. What we should perhaps be surprised at, on the
other hand, is that there has not been still further
hostility. In the tension in which the inhabitants of
Rhodesia-Zimbabwe
are living on the eve of a major
event that will for them reverse the course of history,
it might have been feared that at any moment clashes
of fatal proportions would have occurred. That has
not been the case. Let us recognize that, for, in so
doing, we are paying a tribute to the noblest elements
in man, his capacity to rise to the challenges of
history. None of the incidents that have occurred
has degenerated into or rekindled hostilities.

10. For my part, when I look at the 40 days that have
just elapsed I can say-at
the risk of occasioning
surprise-that
my delegation
harbours feelings of
hope. Surely it is truly remarkable that, in a country
where war seemed to have come to stay, the sound
of gun-fire should suddenly have been silenced over
the major part of the Territory. Surely it is encouraging
that men whom it was difficult to imagine one day
living together have been able to agree to bow to the
people’s verdict and to enter an electoral competition
which is sometimes dramatic in keeping with the best
traditions of democracy. Surely it is noteworthy that
the United Kingdom should have restored legality in
Rhodesia and reassumed, for the time necessary, the
essential trappings of sovereignty.

15. Undoubtedly
the Council had to take cognizance
of the complaints of the various parties, if only to
identify and overcome the obstacles still remaining
on the path that is still to be pursued. Those obstacles
have been identified by many of those who spoke in
the debate. I shall not go back over them. I shall
merely observe that thereby the Council was fulfilling
its task.
16. But the role of the Council is also to make a
positive contribution
to the solution of the problem
before it. Its role is to come to the assistance of and
encourage those who are working for the restoration
of peace in Rhodesia. Every day men who are on the
spot must face up to new and unforeseen difficulties

11. These events derive from the Lancaster House
Agreement,2 the fruit of efforts by all the parties concerned, the United Kingdom and all the signatories of
2

in a climate of nervousness which is quite easy to
explain. At this stage, it would not be merely futile,
but actually dangerous, for various parties to blame
each other. It is much easier to criticize than to act.

adopted. In certain respects we would have preferred
different formulations. Nevertheless, we cast a positive
vote since the text embodies renewed support for the
Lancaster House Agreement2 and its full and faithful
implementation.

17. It is the task of the Council not to take the easy
way out. It should face up to the facts and try to be
far-sighted and to prepare the ground for the future.
That is our duty. Much of what has been said since
the beginning of this debate derived from this same
idea, and for that I pay a tribute to the previous
speakers. But let us see the situation as it actually is.

24. The position of the Norwegian Government
on
the problems of southern Africa has been stated in the
Security Council on a number of occasions. We support fully the right of the peoples of that troubled
area to independence based on genuine majority rule.
Over the years we have given full and inqualified
support to all attempts aimed at negotiated solutions
to the complex problems facing southern Africa.

18, It is legitimate at this solemn moment for the
most urgent appeals to be addressed to the parties, but
we should also express the hope that the conclusion
of this debate will give a constructive impetus in the
final phase which separates Zimbabwe from freedom
and independence.
We should rise to the situation.
After so many years and after so much suffering,
the fact is that four short but decisive weeks remain
before,the final outcome of the struggle is known.

25. The new initiative taken at the Commonwealth
Meeting at Lusaka in August of last year to break the
deadlock on the question of Southern Rhodesia was,
therefore, a most timely one and had our strong
support a
26. After more than four months of intensive and
extremely difficult negotiations under the auspices of
the British Government, agreement was finally reached
at Lancaster House. We welcomed that Agreement as
an historic breakthrough which provided the people
of Zimbabwe with a framework within which their
aspirations for self-determination
and genuine majority
rule at last could be fulfilled. Furthermore,
it represented a last chance for attaining these goals through a
peaceful process, We felt, therefore, that the British
Government,
as well as all the parties concerned,
deserved praise for their willingness to negotiate and
to find the necessary compromises.

19. The Government
of the United Kingdom
has
shouldered its responsibilities.
Let us recognize this
fact. Simple equity demands it. The United Kingdom,
the cradle of parliamentary democracy, is now leading
Rhodesia to independence with democracy. Let us not
seem to be overlooking this fact. That would not be
worthy of us.
20. The people of Zimbabwe, for its part, so near to
its goal, feels a natural impatience. It cannot suddenly
overnight forget its ordeal and th,e suffering which have
accompanied its long march. Let us respect those
feelings; they merit our consideration.

27. Hence, it was highly appropriate that the Security
Council on 21 December 1979 should have endorsed
the Lancaster House Agreement in its resolution 460
(1979), on the very day that important
Agreement
was signed in London by the parties themselves.

21. But let us hope that everyone will overcome his
resentments, his disappointments
and his fears, and
will think only of the near future and the distant
future. The day of the elections is near, very near.
We are at the threshold of independence and beyond
that threshold is the long road of the building of a
new State for which the mobilization
of all forces,
of all energies and of all talents is so vital. Let us hope
that the next few weeks will be weeks of solidarity and
fraternity,

28. However, we never thought that all problems
had been overcome through the attainmerit
of that
carefully balanced compromise.
Above all, we sympathized with the administering
Power that has the
heavy responsibility
and difficult task of leading a
war-ridden country to peace and independence through
free and fair elections.

22. The resolution which has just been adopted, of
course, does not meet the concerns of the United
Kingdom, as we have just been told. We understand,
in the circumstances,
why the delegation of the
United Kingdom decided not to participate in the vote.
But that resolution does reflect- an effort which
should be properly appreciated. That is why, in spite
Of reservations with regard to certain language used
which does not seem to us to be entirely in keeping
with the situation, the French delegation voted in
favour of that text.

29. Taking into consideration
the many stumblingblocks along the road in this complicated
transitional
period, we find that all parties deserve credit for
having, in general, shown a spirit of co-operat.ion
that is necessary to give the democratic process a
chance to work. We agree, therefore, that there has
been considerable
progress in implementing
the
Lancaster
House Agreement.
We are especially
encouraged to see that all the leaders of the major
political parties are at present actively engaged in an
election campaign in Zimbabwe. We hope that, within
another few weeks, this process will produce a new
Government,
freely and fairly elected by the people

23. Mr. ALCARD (Norway): The Norwegian delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution just
3

macy, compromise and dedication to peace, negotiated
a framework for an internationally
accepted transition
to independence in Rhodesia. Credit for this achievement goes to all the participants-to
the United
Kingdom,
under whose aegis the negotiations took
place; to the Patriotic Front, which combined statesmanship and compromise;
to the front-line States,
without whose support there would have been no
agreement, and to the former Muzorewa Administration and the white citizens of Rhodesia for accepting
the uncertainties
inherent in the settlement and for
their recognition that change in Rhodesia was inevitable and that they should participate peacefully in
the process of change. The parties decided to compromise in the interest of a settlement. It was a decision to lay aside the gun and to trust in the ballot box,

of Zimbabwe.
Furthermore,
we welcome the statement by the representative
of the United Kingdom
[2195th meeting] that the South African troops at Beit
Bridge have been withdrawn.
30. The present situation calls for full and faithful
implementation
of the Lancaster House Agreement
by all parties concerned. All parties must be encouraged to make full use of the machinery provided for
in the Agreement to settle outstanding problems and
to avoid new ones. At this delicate stage, we feel that
the utmost restraint and caution are called for. This
applies also to the Security Council.
31. We have full trust in the administering
Power
and feel that it will spare no effort in crowning the
success of the Lancaster House Agreement with an
equally successful implementation
of it. In that difficult task it enjoys our full support.

37. None of us expected that the process of implementation would be without difficulty. It could not be
otherwise. Hostilities
were in progress. Years of
distrust had to be overcome. Moreover, the provisions of the Lancaster House Agreement are not
self-enforcing.
In most cases it is not a question of,
violation of the agreements. Differences were sure to
arise, and they are the result of differing interpretations and judgements. The parties view the decisions
from different perspectives and with different interests.

32, Mr. President, before concluding, I should like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month. I can assure you of my
delegation’s full co-operation in the discharge of your
important
duties. I should also like to express my
delegation’s admiration of the way in which Mr. Leprette conducted the business of the Security Council
in the month of January, during which the Council
had to deal with major international crises. It was most
valuable for the Council to have the benefit of
Mr. Leprette’s diplomatic skills and experience during
those difficult times.

38. What has occurred in the short time since the
Lancaster House Agreement was concluded? A ceasefire is in force. The principal leaders of the Patriotic
Front have returned to their country. They returned to
an enormous welcome and are now engaged in active
campaigning. Zimbabwean national exiles are returning
in large numbers. The security situation is improving.
Even the discordant note which was the principal
reason for the Council’s current consideration of this
question-the
presence of a South African force at
Bei t Bridge-has
been removed.

33. Mr. McHENRY
(United States of America):
Mr. President, may I add my good wishes to you upon
your assumption
of your duties and express my
expectation
and hope and confidence that you will
discharge your responsibilities
in the same outstanding
manner as did your predecessor, the representative
of France.

39. In my judgement, all parties should seek to build
on these achievements and indeed try to maintain and
enlarge the confidence and trust necessary to carry the
transition to a successful conclusion.

34. We have been meeting to discuss difficulties
which have arisen in the implementation
of the
Lancaster House Agreement2 on Southern Rhodesia.
We have done so and should do so with perspective.
The Agreement represents a great achievement,
an
extraordinarily
significant and hopeful step in the long
search for peace in Southern
Rhodesia
and in
southern Africa.

40. It is clear that the violations of the cease-fire
are not monopolized by any one party. Some of the
allegations of violations and breaches of the ceasefire have undoubtedly been due to misunderstandings.
Some seem to be deliberate. We know that the task of
Lord Soames is difficult. At times it must be thankless, as his efforts to demonstrate sensitivity to the
concerns of one party inevitably result in suspicions
among others. We believe that Lord Soames is trying
to ensure that the process of transition will be fair to
all participants.
All the parties should agree fully to
carry out the terms of the Lancaster House Agreement. Force should be used as a last resort only after
other methods to enforce compliance have failed, and
even then only in such a way as to reduce suspicions
of bias. We believe it is essential that all parties cooperate in taking steps beforehand to ensure that force

35. A year ago, despite years of diplomatic activity
and consultation,
efforts to find a settlement had
reached a stalemate. The parties could not be brought
together at a single conference to discuss ways in
which the question of the independence of Rhodesia
might be achieved. Efforts by the Smith regime further
to consolidate
an internal settlement
were going
ahead at full speed. Concurrently,
the war and the
killing were escalating.
36.

Today a different picture is before us. The parties
House, in an historic display of diplo-

at Lancaster

4

is not required

to achieve Compliance. We hope that
made thus far will continue to be
expanded, that violence will continue to decline and
that it will in fact be brought to an end,

45. Secondly, Sir Anthony reproached us on the
grounds that we did not want, as he said, “a peaceful
Political Settlement”. I should like to quote to him a
statement that was made by us in the course of the
debate at the last session of the General Assembly.

the achievements

41. Those OF us who are not parties to this difficult
Agreement should in my judgement exhibit forbearance
in our criticism.
In particular,
we doubt that the
British need lectures on the conduct of free and fair
elections from some who obviously have no experience with such elections.

“The Soviet Union has always been in favour of
a Political settlement of the problems of southern
Africa, including Southern Rhodesia. However, we
declare with the utmost vigour that the possibilities
of a Political settlement should be fully and honestly
utilized. Such a settlement can be effective only if
it is designed to attain genuine independence for
the People of Zimbabwe and takes fully into account
its vital interests,”

42. The United
States supported the resolution
before us today, In doing SO, we wish to make it clear
that we do not accept the charges of violations of
the Lancaster House Agreement. We do not view the
present resolution as in any way affecting or interpreting the provisions of the Agreement. We do not
presume to put ourselves in the difficult position of
making those daily judgements
which can be made
only by those with iqesponsibility, We view the resolution as calling upon the British and the parties to do
those
things which the British Government is already
trying to do and which it could accomplish with
greater certainty if only the parties would increase
their co-operation.

Then the Soviet representative quoted from the statement of the Foreign Minister and member of the
Politburo of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, Andrei Gromyko. This is
the quotation:

43. The objective of the Council is not merely the
passage of a resolution, nor is it the holding of an
election. Rather, it is the conduct of free and fair
elections which lead to that level of political consensus
which provides the basis for democratic government.
That is our goal for Southern Rhodesia.

46. Now I should like to explain the vote of the
Soviet delegation in favour of the resolution just
adopted, a vote we cast in an attempt to contribute to
the fulfilment of the hopes of African countries for a
just settlement of the problems of Zimbabwe.

“All kinds of combinations,... which are aimed
al preserving the domination of racists and colonialists with the help of hastily formed puppet
rCgimes should be resolutely rejected”.

47. The discussion in the Security Council about the
situation in Southern Rhodesia makes abundantly
clear the just nature and relevance of the current
consideration of this question, which was put forward
on the initiative of the African Group. At the same time
it has become clear to everyone that the reluctance of
certain countries to bring this problem to the Security
Council for discussion was dictated simply by a desire
to cover up and muffle the explosive nature of the
situation in Southern Rhodesia, and thus to leave a
free hand to those who would like to subvert the
holding in that country of genuinely free and just
elections that could allow that people to embark on a
course of free and independent development.

44. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (intesprettrtion .fiom Russictt~): Mr. President, before I explain the vote of our delegation, in
favour of the draft resolution, I should like to make
two points that I failed to make yesterday, because
I did not have the relevant documents at hand. First,
my neighbour, Sir Anthony, reproached me yesterday
[ihid.) and said that nowhere and never had the documents of the United Nations described the Patriotic
Front as the sole legitimate
representative of the
people of Zimbabwe. Either Sir Anthony’s memory
has betrayed him or his staff is not doing its work too
well. Permit me to read from a document of the
United Nations that must be well known to Sir Anthony
and his staff. I shall read from a preambular paragraph of draft resolution
A/34/L.65/Rev.lJ
which
says:

48. The discussion in the Security Council made it
abundantly clear that the representative of the administering Power was unable to refute the allegations or
to justify the specific violations cited in the letter of
the African countries. His arguments convinced no
one because the statements of repreSentatiVeS of
African countries irrefutably confirmed the justice of
their claims.

“Bearing
in ljzind that the negotiations
at
Lancaster House in London were the direct result
of the armed struggle by the people of Zimbabwe
led by the Patriotic Front, their sole legitimate rePresentative”-1
repeat, “their sole legitimate rePresentative”.

49. In spite of assertions by the British representative
to the contrary, South African troops Still remain in
Southern Rhodesia, and not only in the area of Beit
Bridge, as was said here; they are still t0 be found at
strategically important points throughout the country.

This is not something that I have fabricated or thought
up. This is a draft resolution,
a document of the
General Assembly which Sir Anthony should know.
5

,

macy, compromise and dedication to peace, negotiated
a framework for an internationally
accepted transition
to independence in Rhodesia. Credit for this achievement goes to all the participants-to
the United
Kingdom,
under whose aegis the negotiations took
place; to the Patriotic Front, which combined statesmanship and compromise;
to the front-line States,
without whose support there would have been no
agreement, and to the former Muzorewa Administration and the white citizens of Rhodesia for accepting
the uncertainties inherent in the settlement and for
their recognition that change in Rhodesia was inevitable and that they should participate peacefully in
the process of change. The parties decided to compromise in the interest of a settlement. It was a decision to lay aside the gun and to trust in the bailot box.

of Zimbabwe.
Furthermore,
we welcome the statement by the representative of the United Kingdom
[2195rh meeting] that the South African troops at Beit
Bridge have been withdrawn.
30. The present situation calls for full and faithful
implementation
of the Lancaster House Agreement
by all parties concerned. All parties must be encouraged to make full use of the machinery provided for
in the Agreement to settle outstanding problems and
to avoid new ones. At this delicate stage, we feel that
the utmost restraint and caution are called for. This
applies also to the Security Council.
31. We have full trust in the administering
Power
and feel that it will spare no effort in crowning the
success of the Lancaster House Agreement with an
equaIly successfur implementation
of it. In that difficult task it enjoys our full support.

37. None of us expected that the process of impiementation would be without difficulty. It could not be
otherwise.
Hostilities
were in progress. Years of
distrust had to be overcome. Moreover, the provisions of the Lancaster House Agreement are not
self-enforcing.
In most cases it is not a question of,
violation of the agreements. Differences were sure to
arise, and they are the result of differing interpretations and judgements. The parties view the decisions
from different perspectives and with different interests.

32. Mr. President, before concluding, I should like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month. I can assure you of my
delegation’s full co-operation in the discharge of your
important
duties. I should also like to express my
delegation’s
admiration of the way in which Mr. Leprette conducted the business of the Security Council
in the month of January, during which the Council
had to deal with major international crises. It was most
valuabte for the Council to have the benefit of
Mr. Leprette’s diplomatic skills and experience during
those difficult times.

38. What has occurred in the short time since the
Lancaster House Agreement was concluded? A ceasefire is in force. The principal leaders of the Patriotic
Front have returned to their country. They returned to
an enormous welcome and are now engaged in active
campaigning. Zimbabwean national exiles are returning
in large numbers. The security situation is improving.
Even the discordant note which was the principal
reason for the Council’s current consideration of this
question-the
presence of a South African force at
Beit Bridge-has
been removed.

33. Mr. McHENRY
(United States of America):
Mr. President, may I add my good wishes to you upon
your assumption
of your duties and express my
expectation
and hope and confidence that you will
discharge your responsibilities
in the same outstanding
manner as did your predecessor, the representative
of France.

39. In my judgement, all parties should seek to build
on these achievements and indeed try to maintain and
enlarge the confidence and trust necessary to carry the
transition to a successful conclusion.

34. We have been meeting to discuss difficulties
which have arisen in the implementation
of the
Lancaster House Agreement* on Southern Rhodesia.
We have done so and should do so with perspective.
The Agreement represents a great achievement,
an
extraordinarily
significant and hopeful step in the long
search for peace in Southern Rhodesia and in
southern Africa.

40. It is clear that the violations of the cease-fire
are not monopolized by any one party. Some of the
allegations of violations and breaches of the ceasefire have undoubtedly been due to misunderstandings.
Some seem to be deliberate. We know that the task of
Lord Soames is difficult. At times it must be thankless, as his efforts to demonstrate sensitivity to the
concerns of one party inevitably result in suspicions
among others. We believe that Lord Soames is trying
to ensure that the process of transition will be fair to
all participants.
All the parties should agree fully to
carry out the terms of the Lancaster House Agreement. Force should be used as a last resort only after
other methods to enforce compliance have failed, and
even then only in such a way as to reduce suspicions
of bias. We believe it is essential that all parties Cooperate in taking steps beforehand to ensure that force

35. A year ago, despite years of diplpmatic activity
and consultation,
efforts to find a settlement had
reached a stalemate. The parties could not be brought
together at a single conference to discuss ways in
which the question of the independence of Rhodesia
might be achieved. Efforts by the Smith regime further
to consolidate
an internal
settlement
were going
ahead at full speed. Concurrently,
the war and the
killing were escalating.
36. Today a different picture is before us. The parties
at Lancaster House, in an historic display of diplo4

is not required to achieve compliance. We hope that
the achievements made thus far will continue to be
expanded, that violence will continue to decline and
that it will in fact be brought to an end.

45. Secondly, Sir Anthony reproached us on the
grounds that we did not want, as he said, “a peaceful
political settlement”.
I should like to quote to him a
statement that was made by us in the course of the
debate at the last session of the General Assembly.

41. Those of us who are not parties to this difficult
Agreement should in my judgement exhibit forbearance
in our criticism.
In particular,
we doubt that the
British need lectures on the conduct of free and fair
elections from some who obviously have no experience with such elections.

“The Soviet Union has always been in favour of
a political settlement of the problems of southern
Africa, including Southern Rhodesia. However, we
declare with the utmost vigour that the possibilities
of a political settlement should be fully and honestly
utilized. Such a settlement can be effective only if
it is designed to attain genuine independence for
the people of Zimbabwe and takes fully into account
its vital interests.”

42. The United
States supported the resolution
before us today. In doing so, we wish to make it clear
that we do not accept the charges of violations of
the Lancaster House Agreement. We do not view the
present resolution as in any way affecting or interpreting the provisions of the Agreement. We do not
presume to put ourselves in the difficult position of
making those daily judgements which can be made
only by those with i-esponsibility. We view the resolution as calling upon the British and the parties to do
those thjngs which the British Government is already
trying to do and which it could accomplish
with
greater certainty if only the parties would increase
their co-operation.

Then the Soviet representative quoted from the statement of the Foreign Minister and member of the
Politburo of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, Andrei Gromyko. This is
the quotation:
“All kinds of combinations,..,
which are aimed
at preserving the domination
of racists and colonialists with the help of hastily formed puppet
rCgimes should be resolutely rejected”.
46. Now I should like to explain the vote of the
Soviet delegation in favour of the resolution just
adopted, a vote we cast in an attempt to contribute to
the fulfilment of the hopes of African countries for a
just settlement of the problems of Zimbabwe.

43. The objective of the Council is not merely the
passage of a resolution, nor is it the holding of an
election. Rather, it is the conduct of free and fair
elections which lead to that level of political consensus
which provides the basis for democratic government.
That is our goal for Southern Rhodesia.

47. The discussion in the Security Council about the
situation in Southern Rhodesia makes abundantly
clear the just nature and relevance of the current
consideration of this question, which was put forward
on the initiative of the African Group. At the same time
it has become clear to everyone that the reluctance of
certain countries to bring this problem to the Security
Council for discussion was dictated simply by a desire
to cover up and muffle the explosive nature of the
situation in Southern Rhodesia, and thus to leave a
free hand to those who would like to subvert the
holding in that country of genuinely free and just
elections that could allow that people to embark on a
course of free and independent development.

44. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretcrtion from Russinn): Mr. President, before I explain the vote of our delegation, in
favour of the draft resolution, I should like to make
two points that I failed to make yesterday, because
1 did not have the relevant documents at hand. First,
my neighbour, Sir Anthony, reproached me yesterday
[ibicl.] and said that nowhere and never had the documents of the United Nations described the Patriotic
Front as the sole legitimate
representative
of the
people of Zimbabwe, Either Sir Anthony’s memory
has betrayed him or his staff is not doing its work too
well. Permit me to read from a document of the
United Nations that must be well known to Sir Anthony
and his staff. I shall read from a preambular paragraph of draft resolution A/34/L.65/Rev. I3 which
says:

48. The discussion in the Security Council made it
abundantly clear that the representative of the administering Power was unable to refute the allegations or
to justify the specific violations cited in the letter of
the African countries. His arguments convinced no
one because the statements of representatives
of
African countries irrefutably confirmed the justice of
their claims.

“Becihg
in JTliJld
that the negotiations
at
Lancaster House in London were the direct result
of the armed struggle by the people of Zimbabwe
led by the Patriotic Front, their sole legitimate representative”-I
repeat, “their sole legitimate representative”.

49. In spite of assertions by the British representative
to the contrary, South African troops still remain in
Southern Rhodesia, and not only in the area of Beit
Bridge, as was said here; they are still to be found at
strategically important points throughout the country.

This is not something that I have fabricated or thought
up. This is a draft resolution, a document of the
General Assembly which Sir Anthony should know.
5

According to the statements of the representative of
the Patriotic
Front and representatives
of African
countries, no less than 6,000 South African soldiers
are stationed there. Even if some of them are wearing
Rhodesian uniforms or are mercenaries, that does not
change the racist nature of their presence, which is
designed to interfere with the preparations for free
and fair elections. Their presence is being used to
ensure protection for the interests of Bishop Muzorewa
and the white settlers and also to surround the forces
of the Patriotic Front.

validity
of the Patriotic
Front’s
expressed in the United Nations.

assessment,

as

53. The forces of the Patriotic Front have been placed
in a very difficult situation, in practical terms, in the
carrying out of their electoral campaign. Indeed, they
cannot circulate their literature.
They have been
deprived even of telephone services. They cannot get
in touch with those people with whom they want to
get in touch, so as to transmit something or to express
their wishes and views. Their supporters are being
overwhelmed
by hostile propaganda, which comes
from South Africa too, among other places.

50. With regard to the views of Muzorewa, whom
some people wanted to invite to the Security Council,
I already stated what they were when I spoke in
the Fourth Committee.
However, it would not be
without interest here to bring before the members of
the Security Council his true attitude concerning the
people of Zimbabwe and their independence. Talking
with aforeignjournalist,
Muzorewa made the following
statement:

54. The colonial authorities
which have now reassumed power in Rhodesia are doing everything they
can to hinder the free expression of the will of the
supporters of the Patriotic Front forces. It has been
said that the detainees have been freed, But representatives of all the African countries and the Patriotic
Front say that hundreds of political detainees are still
languishing in gaol. As a rule, they usually put into
gaol the most active representatives of the Patriotic
Front. There is harassment of officials and supporters
of the Patriotic Front.

“Africans
cannot govern their own countries
without the help of the whites. What good is independence in all these kingdoms and republics if,
after the Europeans leave, all the perfumed soap
disappears from the shops and the water in the hotels
stops running? I am a pragmatist”-he
said--“and
so I prefer a warm shower in a hotel owned by
whites to a dry bathtub in a hotel nationalized by
blacks .”

55. Now they also talk about the return of refugees.
It is true that refugees are returning: 4,000 have
returned to the country. But outside Rhodesia there
are 250,000 refugees and prisoners, The Governor has
established a transitional period of two months before
the elections. A month has now gone by; indeed there
is less than a month left-less than four weeks for the
Patriotic Front to carry out its electoral work under
normal conditions and lift the spirits of the people. IS
that an accident? Certainly not. Mr. McHenry musl
agree that it is not an accident.

Now what else need we say about Muzorewa? He
has black skin, but his actions are those of any other
racist in Rhodesia.
51. In the course of Security Council meetings, it
was shown factually that, in violation of the Lancaster
House Agreement,z
the British
Governor,
Lord
Soames,
redeployed
Rhodesian
forces, including
mercenaries and the so-called auxiliaries, in regions
liberated earlier by forces of the Patriotic Front and
used them to exercise control over those forces and
to harass and do physical violence to soldiers of the
Patriotic Front. The “auxiliary
forces”, enjoying a
free hand, have been disarming separate guerrilla
groups returning
to Rhodesia and terrorizing
the
population,
trying to force it to support the SmithMuzorewa clique.

56. The British Governor has unjustifiably extended
for a further six months the state of emergency and
martial law in the country, so as to be able to arrest
and detain without trial a large number of supporters
of the patriotic forces. In the final analysis, the aim of
all this is to prevent the victory of the patriotic forces
in the forthcoming elections. The question has already
been asked why the state of emergency has been
extended. If two months were allotted for the transitional period, the question arises: of what use is the
state of emergency for another four months‘? In actual
fact, is it possible to have free and fair elections in
a state of emergency?

52. In carrying out the will of certain circles in the
United Kingdom,
Lord Soames is deliberately placing
the Patriotic
Front in a disadvantageous
position.
The return of the leaders of the Patriotic Front has
been deliberately delayed so that Muzorewa, a puppet
serving the racists, may gain the advantage of being
the first to launch his electoral campaign in favourable
circumstances.
It has been said here that the leaders
of the Patriotic Front have returned. Of course they
have returned, but when, and how much were they
impeded in their return? The fact that so many
people turned out to greet them demonstrates the

57. Now I shall speak about the two months. The
electoral campaign in the United States begins almost
a year before the elections, and in Rhodesia they have
two months. In the United States the majority of the
people is literate, but there the majority is illiterate.
In the United States, after all, candidates for the
presidency, for the Senate and the Congress do travel
around and they can explain their programmes to the
people. But how can this take place in Rhodesia,
among an illiterate population and without the mass
6

media? How can the patriotic forces explain their
programmes to the people when a state of emergency
exists which permits people to be put in prison or
killed on suspicion of anything?
58. The present situation in Southern Rhodesia and
the obstacles created by the Administration
of Lord
Soames to hinder the people of Zimbabwe from
achieving independence,
represent a continuation
of
the colonial policy of the United Kingdom which
it pursued in Africa in one form or another over many
decades. When the process of the decline of the British
colonial empire on the African continent reached the
southern part of that continent, decolonization,
as it
were, stumbled, as one African representative said
at a meeting of the General Assembly. Why was
that? The fact is that southern Africa is a very juicy
piece of the continent in a strategic and an economic
sense. We cannot brush aside this question or conceal
it; let us speak the truth here. That is the reason for
the difficulties with decolonization in southern Africa.
59. One former official of the United Nations-I
shall
not name him, or my neighbour here will want to
answer this-said
that Rhodesia was a little garden of
the House of Lords. I do not know whether he was
right or not, but there is some element of truth in it.
60. When the British colonial possessions began to
disappear one after another, then an attempt was
made to bring to power in Rhodesia the racist regime
of the minority.
For 15 years the United Kingdom,
disregarding the decisions of the United Nations about
sanctions, in fact attempted to consolidate that regime,
and it was only the heroic, valorous struggle of the
Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe, with the support of the
non-aligned African countries, of all African countries
and the socialist countries, that prevented the maintenance in power of the Smith-Muzorewa
clique, as
was correctly stressed here by the representative of
the Patriotic Front. Even in the course of the London
talks certain circles in Britain were still trying to
preserve and consolidate the neo-colonialist
racist
regime in Southern Rhodesia. I would say that they
are still trying to do so now, in the course of the
implementation
of the Lancaster House Agreement.
That Agreement can be appraised and interpreted in
different ways. It can be interpreted as Mr. McHenry
interpreted it, but it can also be viewed from a
different standpoint. In particular, we have the right
and good grounds for assessing it quite differently.
We consider it inadequate. We know in what circumstances it was concluded in London. We know how
often representatives
of the Patriotic Front were
given ultimatums,
how often it was proposed that they
leave in the course of the consideration of the draft
constitution.
11 happened when the conditions for the
transitional period were being considered. The same
thing happened even when the question of the ceasefire arose. Those are the facts. There is no way
they can be shrugged off. The British and American
Press are very low-key in their reports on the situation

in Rhodesia. Incidentally,
this is the third day of our
debate in the Security Council and what have we
found in the American press or mass media about
these meetings? So much is said in the United States
about human rights, but the fate of a whole people
hangs in the balance here, whether it is to be free or
whether it is to be enslaved by the racists. And what
do we find reported about that in the press, in the mass
media? Nothing. It is not even mentioned.
By the
way, I should like to say that the “takes” given out
to journalists by the United Nations Department
of
Public Information
do not give a good account of the
actual statements made by representatives
in the
Security Council.
61. The Soviet Union criticized and continues to
criticize the Lancaster House Agreement, not because
it expresses the goal of creating a free and independent
Zimbabwe on the basis of genuine majority rule, but
because it does not contain the necessary guarantees
for attaining that noble goal. The attempts of my neighbour, Sir Anthony Parsons, to represent matters. as
if the Soviet Union had no interest in a final, peaceful
settlement of the Rhodesian problem are therefore in
vain. Our country has consistently
favoured and
continues to favour a peaceful settlement in Southern
Rhodesia; not just any peaceful settlement however,
but one that would guarantee the people of Zimbabwe
genuine freedom and independence. At the same time,
we are against a settlement that would lead to the
establishment in Zimbabwe of a neo-colonialist puppet
regime. We have apprehensions about that and we
have good grounds for having them. In that regard,
yesterday and the day before we spoke in very clear
terms on this question based on convincing evidence.
62. The British representative did not like the “awful
Soviet jargon”-that
is what was said yesterdaywhen we talked of neo-colonialist
puppet regimes of
Smith-Muzorewa
and those like them. Of course, my
neighbour, the British representative,
would perhaps
prefer to call the Smith-Muzorewa
regime democratic
and free, since it would appear that the actions of
that regime are in keeping with his concept of democracy and freedom, If preparations for free elections
mean what is now being done in Rhodesia, then permit
me to say: spare us and everyone else such democratic
elections.
63. Yesterday
[ihid.]
the British
representative
expressed dissatisfaction at the fact that we had called
the elections held in Southern Rhodesia in April 1979
a farce and warned against a repetition of that farce.
As he sees it, those so-called elections were clearly
an example of the “democratic
process” which he
wanted to propose to us as an example.
64. However, the Soviet Union is not the author of
these assessments and descriptions
of what is
happening in Southern Rhodesia and in a number of
other places-Namibia,
for example. It was not the
Soviet Union that invented
the assessments and

descriptions.
I do not wish to be a Columbus and to.
claim that we discovered this language. This is the
language of the overwhelming
majority of the States
members of the non-aligned movement and the Organization of African Unity, and many other States. These
are the words of the Monrovia Declaration of Commitment of the Heads of State and Government of the
Organization
of African Unity on Guidelines and
Measures for National and Collective Self-Reliance in
Social and Economic Development
for the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order, adopted
at the sixteenth ordinary session from 17 to 20 July
1979, with which everyone is fatniliar. These are the
words of General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions.
These are the words of the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries held at Havana from 3 to 9 September 1979. We were just repeating them here in
the Council to remind representatives of their actual
relevance and significance.
We speak the same
language as all freedom-loving
peoples, the language
of the national liberation and anti-colonialist
movements. It is of course no surprise that this language
makes my neighbour,
the United Kingdom
representative, wince.

strictness and exactitude the Agreement
signed” [2192nd nweting, pnra. 1061.

68. In his statement, the representative of the United
Kingdom attempted to assure everyone here that the
turn of events in Southern Rhodesia was in accordance
with the Lancaster House Agreement. I understand
his position. He is obliged to make that attempt;
these are the instructions of his Government. The
delegation of the United Kingdom tried to prove that
there was no need at all for the Security Council to
discuss this question. But in statements made here by
representatives of African countries, and in particular
in the statements of the delegation of the United
Republic of Tanzania [2192nd and 2195th meetings],
it was clearly stressed that after the signing of the
Agreement, none other than the United Kingdom had
been the first to violate that Agreement flagrantly.
That was said, as I have just pointed out, by the delegation of the United Republic of Tanzania, a country
that did a great deal to promote the preparation and
adoption of the Agreement. It would appear that there
are serious grounds for the delegation of that country
to make such a statement.
69.

65. We have good grounds for believing that the
issue here is not so much a matter of language as a
matter of the substance of the problem. The United
Kingdom
representative
abstained in the vote on
Security Council resolution 448 (1979). Clearly, he
abstained not only because the April elections in
Southern Rhodesia were called “sham elections”,
but also because the resolution condemned all the
attempts and manoeuvres aimed at preventing the
accession of the people of Zimbabwe to independence
and genuine majority rule, because the resolution
called on all States not to recognize the results of
those elections. What other explanation could there
be for the abstention in the vote on that resolution?
If our aim was a free and independent Rhodesia, then
it was our duty to vote for a resolution which, if
properly implemented,
could achieve that aim.
66. Many African delegations have pointed to the
existence of a genuine threat in maintaining the puppet
racist r6gime in Southern Rhodesia. In particular, the
delegation of Algeria stressed that
“The measures taken by the Government cannot
but elicit the most serious concern because everything is happening as though what was desired
was the preservation
of the racist and colonial
sfrrtlrs into in Rhodesia, while an attempt is made to
lend to its internal evolution a semblance of legality.” [2194ih n1rcting, pr~cr. 116.1
fi7. The delegation of Mozambique
clearly indicated
that there do not exist at the present time in Zimbabwe
conditions for the holding of elections in complete
freedom and without threats and that “the administering Power has not implemented
with the required

that has been

The delegation

of Zambia stated:

. . . if the British Governor, and therefore the
British Government, had observed and adhered to
the terms of the Lancaster House Agreement, the
prevailing
tension would have been averted”
[2193rd meeting, paru. 411.
“

70. In the Soviet delegation’s view, all these flagrant
violations by the administering Power which have been
revealed during this series of Council meetings basically were expressed in draft resolution S/13777/Rev.l
submitted
by the non-aligned countries, which the
Security Council has adopted today. Of course, the
resolution
would respond to the existing state of
affairs to a larger extent if it indicated more clearly
who is responsible for the extremely dangerous situation that has arisen in Southern Rhodesia, threatening
international
peace and security. We supported the
draft resolution, however, because we consider that
the implementation
of the demands expressed in it
could help to remedy the abnormal situation existing
in Southern Rhodesia. We should bear in mind in this
regard that those demands-such
as the return of all
refugees, not just 4,000; the release of all political
prisoners, not just some of them; the rescinding of
the state of emergency, which has been renewed by
Governor Soames; the expelling of all South African
forces, regular or mercenary, from Rhodesia-constitute the very minimum conditions to enable the
people of Zimbabwe to make its choice and, by
democratic and peaceful means, ensure the possibility
of creating its own independent State, a State which
would be recognized by the United Nations as a
full-fledged
member of the international
community
and whose
representative
could attend
these
proceedings.

71. The Soviet delegation whole-heartedly supports
and approves of paragraph 10 of the resolution, under
which the Security Council “decides to keep the
situation in Southern Rhodesia under review until the
Territory attains full independence
under genuine
majority rule”. We became even more aware of the
correctness of and need for such a provision when we
heard the statements made here by the British representative, who, both today and in his statements at
previous meetings, attempted to embellish and justify
the actions of the administering
Power in Southern
Rhodesia. Disregarding and ignoring in that way the
crilicism
levelled at the British administration
in
Southern Rhodesia
demonstrates
that the United
Kingdom intends to continue on the course of establishing a puppet neo-colonialist
regime in Southern
Rhodesia. That is a potential source of considerable
complications
and .dangers in the future. Therefore,
all those who are genuinely interested in ensuring
the free and independent development of the people of
Zimbabwe must exert the utmost vigilance and do
everything they possibly can to achieve the implementation of the demands contained in the resolution
just adopted.
72. Mr. FUTSCHER
PEREIRA
(Portugal):
Since
the Portuguese
delegation
made clear yesterday
C2195tlz ineetirzg] its position on the subject before the
Security Council, I can assure you, Mr. President,
and the members of the Council that my explanation
Of vote will be extremely brief.
73. We have just voted in favour of draft resolution
S/13777/Rev. 1, despite our doubts and concerns on
some of its passages. We have done so in a constructive
spirit, because in our opinion the resolution just
adopted reflects, basically, the apprehensions of the
worId community
about the present situation
in
Southern Rhodesia and about the future of the country.

Our primary concern is that nothing should be done
that could make more difficult the implementation
of
the Lancaster House Agreement,*
which of course
must be the only guiding instrument on the path to
free and fair elections leading to the independence
of Zimbabwe. We recognize the extreme difficulties
that the United Kingdom faces as the administering
Power, and we should like to restate that the Portuguese Government entirely trusts the British Government to continue to implement the Lancaster House
Agreement in an impartial way.
74. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): Over
a number of months, I have been making modest and
moderately
worded attempts in public debate to
convert my neighbour from the Soviet Union to my
point of view. I appear to have been lamentably unsuccessful, in so far as our viewpoints are still widely
separated. But I believe that I would be interpreting
a consensus of the Council if 1 said that the Council
would prefer me to continue those efforts in private.
75. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (iuterpretatiorz fio/ll Russian): I associate
myself with what was just said by my neighbour
Mr. Parsons. However, I should like to quote a French
proverb: @i vivm Yearn--Let’s wait and see.
The meetLlg rose lrf 6.35 pm.

NOTES

1 See resolution 463 (1980).
2 See Soufherrr
faw~ce,
Lw~crrs~e~

Rhodesia:
Home,

Report
Lor?do~~,

nf the

Constitutiond
Seprerllbe,-Decelnbe~

Cm1979,

Cmnd. 7802 (London, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1980).
3 Official

Records

sion, A~zwws,

of the Gene&

agenda item 90.

Assrmhly,

Thirty-fourih

Ses-

HOW

TO

OBTAIN UXITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIOSS

PUIILICATIONS

may k obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
IO: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Wnies sont en vente clans les librairies
et lea agences
ddpositaires
du mondc entier. Infonnez-voua
aupr+s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations
Unies. Section dcs ventes. New York ou Genbve.

Us&~iwR

OpIYMmUWH

06zc~ReercHblx

Haurrfi

YOi+c"O

KyllHTb

JHH&X
~amenf
Hannfi,

H aremcmax
HO 8cex pafroxnx
~~pn.
HnnonIcTe
cnpaaan
~~mxz-zohf Mara3mte
mw nrtmrr~e
no anpccy:
OpraHH38LtHR
Ce~sm
no npo~aw?
w3nawffi,
Haa?-Hopit
nnn XCerieaa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

B KHSVKRbIX
MWYS06 H3xaHHRX
13
ObZeJViHeRHbIX

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidar
estrin en venta en Iibnrfas
y caaas distribuidoras
en todas pa&es de1 rnundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjaae
a: Naciones
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

a0300

83-61462-December

19gS-2,425
