A/66/PV.122

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

122nd plenary meeting

Monday, 23 July 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 6 (continued)
Election of the Vice-Presidents of the
General Assembly
Election of the Vice-Presidents of the
General Assembly for the sixty-seventh session
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that, at its 114th plenary meeting, on 8 June, the
Assembly elected, in accordance with rule 30 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, 20 of the
21 Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly for the
sixty-seventh session. There remained the election of
one Vice-President from among the Group of African
States.

(Qatar)

sixty-seventh session. I congratulate Kenya on its
election.
Agenda item 63 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and
international support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
Draft resolution A/66/L.40/Rev.1
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
Draft resolution A/66/L.41/Rev.1

I have been informed by the Chair of the Group
of African States, in a letter dated 29 June, that Kenya
has been selected by the African States to fill one of
the seats allocated to Africa as a Vice-President of the
General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session.

The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that the General Assembly considered, in a joint
debate, agenda item 63 and its sub-items (a) and (b),
along with agenda item 13, at its 32nd and 33rd plenary
meetings, on 11 October 2011.

In accordance with paragraph 16 of General
Assembly decision 34/401, the election of the
Vice-Presidents of the Assembly by secret ballot will
be dispensed with when the number of candidates
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled. We
shall proceed accordingly.

I now give the floor to the representative of Algeria,
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, to introduce
draft resolution A/66/L.40/Rev. 1.

Since there is only one candidate for the one seat
to be filled from among the African States, I declare
Kenya elected Vice-President of the Assembly at its

Mr. Djacta (Algeria): I have the honour to
introduce, on behalf of the Group of 77 (G-77) and
China, a draft resolution entitled “New Partnership
for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation
and international support”, contained in document
A/66/L.40/Rev.1, under sub-item (a) of agenda item 63.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-43283 (E)

*1243283*

A/66/PV.122

The Group of 77 and China would like to express
its appreciation to all delegations for their constructive
deliberations on and contributions to the draft resolution.
Our particular appreciation is extended to the facilitator,
Mr. Modest Mero of Tanzania, for his remarkable work
and to the coordinator, Mr. Hussein Elshaar of Egypt,
for his tremendous effort and commitment on behalf of
the G-77 and China.
We would like to highlight that the draft resolution
reaffirms the support of the entire United Nations
membership for the implementation of the African
Union’s New Partnership for Africa’s Development
and recognizes the progress in its implementation. The
draft resolution also stresses the need to implement
all commitments of the international community
to Africa’s development and to continue to support
the special needs of Africa in order to mitigate the
impacts of the world economic and financial crisis
on the continent. It emphasizes the need to enhance
the voice and participation of developing countries,
including African countries, in international economic
decision-making and norm-setting and to avoid further
marginalization of the continent in that regard.
The Group of 77 and China hopes that the draft
resolution will be adopted by acclamation during this
meeting.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before giving the
floor to the speaker in explanation of vote before the
voting, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for giving the United States the
floor to underscore our support for Africa’s common
vision to achieve the goals and objectives of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD). My
delegation fully supports African-led efforts to enhance
economic growth and to enjoy the benefits of integration
into the global economy. The United States takes note
of the progress under way in areas critical to economic
growth and sustainable development. We encourage
the ongoing activities to assist the implementation of
NEPAD by African States.
The United States delegation is pleased to join
the consensus on the draft resolution before us today,
entitled “New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international support”,
contained in document A/66/L.40/Rev.1. We especially

2

appreciate the excellent facilitation efforts of our
Tanzanian delegation colleague, Mr. Modest Mero. In
future General Assembly consideration of NEPAD, we
wish to stress the importance of keeping the focus on
Africa and its development, while being mindful of
its macroeconomic underpinnings. The discussion of
broader international macroeconomic policy issues are
extensively and more appropriately treated under the
relevant agenda item in the Second Committee.
The United States delegation attaches great
importance to the annual consideration of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, and congratulates
all parties on today’s imminent adoption of the draft
resolution.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard the
only speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/66/L.40/Rev. 1, entitled “New Partnership
for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation
and international support”. I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/66/L.40/Rev.1, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Australia,
Austria, Croatia, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, France,
Israel, Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Montenegro,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden and Ukraine.
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/66/L.40/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/66/L.40/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 66/286).
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 63?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that the General Assembly considered, in a joint
debate, agenda item 63 and its sub-items (a) and (b),
along with agenda item 13, at its 32nd and 33rd plenary
meetings, on 11 October 2011.

12-43283

A/66/PV.122

I now give the floor to the representative of Algeria
to introduce draft resolution A/66/L.41/Rev.1 on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China.
Mr. Djacta (Algeria): I have the honour to introduce,
under sub-item (b) of agenda item 63 and on behalf of
the Group of 77 (G-77) and China, a draft resolution
entitled “Implementation of the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa”, as contained in
document A/66/L.41/Rev.1.
The Group would like to express its appreciation
to all delegations for their constructive deliberations
and contributions to the draft resolution. We would also
like to thank all the Member States that have joined the
list of sponsors. Our special thanks go to the facilitator,
Mr. Hussein Elshaar of Egypt, and the coordinator,
Mr. John Mugerwa of Uganda, for their outstanding
work.
We welcome the progress made by African Member
States, the African Union and subregional organizations
in conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and development. We also welcome their continuing
efforts to settle conflicts and promote human rights,
democracy, the rule of law and constitutional order in
Africa.
While the responsibility for peace and security
in Africa, including the capacity to address the
root causes of conflict and to resolve conflicts in a
peaceful manner, lies primarily with African countries
themselves, we also recognize the need for the support
of the international community and the United Nations,
in accordance with its responsibilities under the Charter.
We are convinced that conflict prevention and
the consolidation of peace would benefit from the
coordinated, sustained and integrated efforts of
the United Nations system, its Member States and
regional and subregional organizations, as well as
of international and regional financial institutions.
In particular, the achievement of durable peace and
sustainable development in countries in conflict and
post-conflict situations requires national Governments
and international partners to continue to develop
coordinated approaches tailored to the peacebuilding
needs and challenges faced by those countries.
We would like to stress that international and
regional efforts to prevent conflict and consolidate

peace in Africa should be channelled towards the
sustainable development of Africa and the human and
institutional capacity-building of African countries and
organizations, particularly in priority areas identified
at the continental level.
The Group hopes that this draft resolution will be
adopted by acclamation at this meeting.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
will now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/66/L.41/Rev.1, entitled “Implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
draft resolution A/66/L.41/Rev.1: Australia, Austria,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus,
Denmark, Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain
and Sweden.
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/66/L.41/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/66/L.41/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 66/287).
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 63 and
agenda 63 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(g) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the President of the General Assembly
(A/66/864)

12-432833

A/66/PV.122

The President (spoke in Arabic): As indicated in
document A/66/864, the General Assembly is required,
during the current session, to appoint members of the
Joint Inspection Unit to fill the vacancies that will
arise from the expiration of the terms of office, on
31 December 2012, of Mr. Mohamed Mounir-Zahran,
Mr. Nikolay V. Chulkov, Mr. Enrique Román-Morey,
Mr. Even Francisco Fontaine Ortiz, Mr. Zhang Yishan,
and Ms. Deborah Wynes.

Inspection Unit for a five-year term of office beginning
on 1 January 2013 and expiring on 31 December 2017.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Ms. Sukai Prom-Jackson (Gambia), Mr. Jean
Wesley Cazeau (Haiti), Mr. A. Gopinathan (India),
Mr. Gennady Tarasov (Russian Federation) and
Mr. George Bartsiotas (United States of America) as
members of the Joint Inspection Unit for a five-year
term of office beginning on 1 January 2013 and expiring
on 31 December 2017?

Members will recall that, at its 47th plenary
meeting, on 1 November 2011, the Assembly decided to
fill one vacancy in the Joint Inspection Unit for a term
of office beginning on 1 January 2012 and expiring on
31 December 2016, which resulted from the resignation
of Mr. Enrique Román-Morey (Peru) with effect from
31 October 2011. That vacancy was subsequently filled
at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2011, by
Mr. Jorge Flores Callejas (Honduras).

The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda item 115?

In accordance with the procedures described
in article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit and pursuant to resolution 61/238, of
22 December 2006, having consulted Member States
and having drawn up a list of countries from among
the regional groups concerned, I requested the Gambia,
Haiti, India, the Russian Federation and the United
States of America to propose candidates to serve for a
period of five years beginning on 1 January 2013.

International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994

As also indicated in document A/66/864, in
accordance with paragraph 7 of resolution 59/267, of
23 December 2004, candidates should have experience
in at least one of the following fields: oversight, audit,
inspection, investigation, evaluation, finance, project
evaluation, programme evaluation, human resources
management, management, public administration,
monitoring and/or programme performance, in addition
to knowledge of the United Nations system and its
role in international relations. As further indicated in
document A/66/864, as a result of the consultations held
in accordance with article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute
of the Joint Inspection Unit, including consultations
with the President of the Economic and Social Council
and with the Secretary-General, in his capacity
as Chairman of the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination, I submit to the
Assembly the candidatures of Ms. Sukai Prom-Jackson
(Gambia), Mr. Jean Wesley Cazeau (Haiti), Mr. A.
Gopinathan (India), Mr. Gennady Tarasov (Russian
Federation) and Mr. George Bartsiotas (United States
of America) for appointment as members of the Joint

4

It was so decided.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 127 (continued)

Letter from the Secretary-General (A/66/819)
Letter from the President of the
Security Council (A/66/870)
Draft decision (A/66/L.54)
The President (spoke in Arabic): We shall now
proceed to consider draft decision A/66/L.54.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): This oral statement is made
in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
In connection with draft decision A/бб/L.54, entitled
“International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring

12-43283

A/66/PV.122

States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994”, I
wish to put on record the following statement of financial
implications on behalf of the Secretary-General.

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt the draft decision?

By the draft decision, the General Assembly would,
first, decide that, notwithstanding the expiry of their
term of office on 30 June 2012, Judge William H.
Sekule (United Republic of Tanzania), Judge Solomy
Balungi Bossa (Uganda) and Judge Mparany Mamy
Richard Rajohnson (Madagascar) may continue, on an
exceptional basis, to serve at the International Tribunal
until 31 December 2012 or until the completion of
the Ngirabatware case which they began before the
expiry of their term of office, while taking note of the
intention of the International Tribunal to complete the
Ngirabatware case by December 2012; secondly, take
note of the intention of the International Tribunal to
complete all remaining judicial work by 31 December
2014 and decide, bearing in mind the expiry of his term
of office on 30 June 2012, to extend the term of office
of Judge Vagn Joensen (Denmark), on an exceptional
basis, until 31 December 2014 so that he may continue
to perform the functions required of him as trial judge
and President of the International Tribunal, to complete
the work of the Tribunal and express its intention to
review this decision in June 2013.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 127.

The extension of the term of office of Judge
William H. Sekule, Judge Solomy Balungi Bossa and
Judge Mparany Mamy Richard Rajohnson through
31 December 2012 would require a total payment in
honoraria amounting to $126,000 for an aggregate
period of six additional months.
The extension of the term of office of Judge Vagn
Joensen through 31 December 2014 would require a
payment in honoraria for the biennium 2012-2013 of
$273,000 for 13 additional months from 1 December
2012 to 31 December 2013. The extension of the term
of Judge Joensen would also entail the retention of
three staff members — a driver, a security officer and
a secretary — and miscellaneous expenses for security,
transportation and office space amounting to $190,000.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft decision A/66/L.54, additional requirements
in the amount of $589,000 for honoraria, staff and
miscellaneous expenditures would arise under the
budget for the Tribunal for the biennium 2012-2013.
The Tribunal would make every effort to meet these
additional requirements from within the overall
resources amounting to $171,613,100 approved for the
Tribunal for the biennium 2012-2013.

The draft decision was adopted.

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Note by the Secretary-General (A/66/234)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly will now take up a request submitted by
the Secretary-General in document A/66/234, relating
to the election of a member of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law.
In his note, the Secretary-General informs the
General Assembly that he has received notification,
by a letter dated 6 June 2012 from the Permanent
Representative of Poland, that according to the
agreement among members of the Eastern European
States to rotate their membership in the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law among
themselves, Poland is relinquishing its seat in favour
of Croatia. The General Assembly will therefore be
required, at its current session, to elect a member to
fill the remainder of the term of office of Poland, which
expires on the last day prior to the beginning of the
forty-ninth session of the Commission, in 2016.
The agenda of the sixty-sixth session of the General
Assembly does not contain a sub-item on the election
of members of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law. The Secretary-General has
therefore deemed it necessary to request, pursuant to rule
15 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly,
the inclusion in the agenda of the current session of an
additional sub-item entitled “Election of members of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law”, under agenda item 114, entitled “Elections to fill
vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections”.
Given the nature of the item, unless there is an
objection, may I take it that the General Assembly
agrees to waive the relevant provision of rule 40 of the
rules of procedure, which would require a meeting of
the General Committee on the question of the inclusion
of this additional sub-item on the agenda?

12-432835

A/66/PV.122

It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take
it that the General Assembly, on the proposal of
the Secretary-General, wishes to include in the
agenda of the current session, an additional sub-item
entitled “Election of members of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law”, as a sub-item
of agenda item 114 under heading I (Organizational,
administrative and other matters)?
It was so decided.

6

The
President
(spoke in Arabic):
The
Secretary-General has requested that the sub-item be
considered in plenary meeting. May I take it that it
is the wish of the Assembly to consider this sub-item
directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform members that this additional sub-item becomes
sub-item (e) of agenda item 114 of the current session.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

12-43283
