United Nations

S/PV.6043

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

6043rd meeting
Monday, 15 December 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vilović . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Croatia)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Urbina
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Kumalo
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-64915 (E)

*0864915*

S/PV.6043

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by Ambassador Giulio Terzi di Sant’Agata, Permanent
Representative of Italy and Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) concerning the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea; Ambassador Dumisani Shadrack
Kumalo, Permanent Representative of South Africa and
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia and the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa;
Ambassador R. M. Marty M. Natelegawa, Permanent
Representative of Indonesia and Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 918 (1994) concerning Rwanda, the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Working Group of the Whole on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations; Ambassador
Jan Grauls, Permanent Representative of Belgium and
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572
(2004) concerning Côte d’Ivoire and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006); and Ambassador Ricardo Alberto Arias,
Permanent Representative of Panama and Chairman of
the Security Council Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Giulio Terzi
di Sant’Agata, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005) concerning the Sudan and the Security Council

2

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) concerning the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy): I would like to
take this opportunity to share with the Council some
observations concerning the two Sanctions Committees
that Italy has had the honour to chair over the past two
years, namely, the Sudan Sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) and the
Security Council Sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). I will start with the
Sudan Sanctions Committee, and then I will talk about
the Sanctions Committee on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
The work undertaken by the 1591 Sanctions
Committee, on the Sudan, has been quite challenging.
While all the members of the Committee share a
common objective — to bring peace and stability to
Darfur — their understanding of the role of sanctions
in ending the conflict, and of the conflict itself, is
different. That is evident in the fact that, after almost
four years in existence, the Committee has yet to
designate any individual as subject to the travel ban
and the assets freeze. The Council designated four
individuals who are currently subject to the targeted
sanctions. In addition, experience with sanctions has
shown that it is difficult to monitor — and therefore to
enforce — an arms embargo covering only part of the
territory of a country, as in the case of Darfur.
Notwithstanding those constraints, the Committee has
been able to discharge its mandate, which is to monitor,
and not enforce, the measures imposed under
resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1591 (2005).
The Committee has regularly reported to the
Council on the lack of compliance with the existing
measures by all parties to the conflict. It has provided a
forum to discuss the implementation of those measures
and has assessed the reports of the Panel of Experts, as
mandated by resolution 1591 (2005). The direction that
both my predecessor, Ambassador Spatafora, and I
have given to the work of the Committee in order to
achieve those limited, yet important, results has been
based on a constant drive for consensus as the best way
to keep the Committee united on key tasks.
Our work, however, has not been as effective as
we would have liked. In particular, many Panel
recommendations have not been given the desired
follow-up because of the lack of consensus. I wish the

08-64915

S/PV.6043

new Chairman a more productive biennium in that
regard. On that point, I have noted with interest
remarks made by some delegations during my last
briefing to the Council encouraging a review of the
decision-making procedures of the subsidiary bodies of
the Security Council in order to better align their work
with the direction given to them by the principal organ.
I wish to thank the members of the Committee for
their active contributions. I also wish to thank present
and past members of the Panel of Experts for having
been the Committee’s eyes and ears on the ground,
often under very difficult conditions. My thanks also
go to the Secretariat staff for their sound advice and
accurate drafting. My recommendations for the future
are as follows.
My first recommendation is to also reach out to
other sources of information on Darfur, in particular
within
international
and
non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). In that connection, I wish to add
that, last Friday, for the first time since its
establishment, the Committee heard a briefing by an
NGO about information it had gathered concerning
ongoing violations of resolutions 1556 (2004) and
1591 (2005). I hope that such a practice can continue.
My second recommendation is to promote
dialogue with the countries in the region and to explore
further the opportunities provided by the mandate of
the Committee in that regard.
My third recommendation is to ensure liaison
with the mediation of the political process and with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). In that connection, I wish to note
that, while the Council gave UNAMID a mandate to
monitor the arms embargo, the mission does not yet
have the resources to effectively carry out that task.
The rationale behind my three suggestions is that
the Committee does not operate in a vacuum and
cannot remain self-referential. On the contrary, it needs
to be in tune with the other components of the Security
Council’s strategy for Darfur, whose common aim is to
bring peace and stability to all Darfurians. As I
mentioned before, despite the differing views on the
role of sanctions, all members of the Committee
strongly share that objective. Building on that common
ground will be the key to the success of the Committee.
I should now like to refer to the 1718 Committee.
As I near the end of my chairmanship of that

08-64915

Committee, I am pleased to brief the members of the
Security Council on that important body.
In discharging its mandate, the Committee was
guided by paragraph 12 of resolution 1718 (2006).
Since 1 January 2007, the Committee, while ready to
meet as frequently as necessary to carry out its duties
effectively, held 14 sessions of informal consultations
at the expert level and one formal meeting.
Owing to keen interest from Member States
outside the Council, but also on the part of many
represented on the Council, the Committee addressed
the issue of implementing subparagraph 8(a)(iii) of
resolution 1718 (2006), concerning the ban on the
export of luxury goods to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. In that connection, on 21 February
2007, the Committee issued a letter to Member States
clarifying that any definition of luxury goods as may
be necessary for Member States to implement that
provision of the resolution would be the national
responsibility of individual Member States. The
Committee also reaffirmed that the measures contained
in subparagraph 8(a)(iii) of resolution 1718 (2006) are
consistent with the objectives of the resolution and are
not intended to restrict the supply of ordinary goods to
the wider population of the country, or to have a
negative humanitarian impact on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. The Committee further
referred Member States to national reports submitted
pursuant to paragraph 11 of the resolution as cases of
national definitions and implementation with respect to
luxury goods.
On 15 March 2007, the Committee issued two
letters in reply to communications received from the
International Air Transport Association and the
Permanent Mission of Uganda to the United Nations,
which had sought guidance on specific cases of
cooperation with the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea after the adoption of
resolution 1718 (2006).
On 20 June 2007, at a formal meeting, the
Committee adopted the guidelines for the conduct of
its work. That document — which was transmitted to
all States for their information and use as necessary
and which was posted on the Committee’s web page —
serves as a tool to guide the work of the Committee
and to facilitate the implementation of the measures
imposed by resolution 1718 (2006).

3

S/PV.6043

In accordance with its mandate, the Committee
continued the process of determining additional items,
materials, equipment, goods and technology to be
specified for the purpose of subparagraph 8(a)(ii) of
the resolution, and of adjusting the lists contained in
documents S/2006/814, S/2006/815 and S/2006/853
through the consideration of amendments proposed by
the members of the Committee.
Paragraph 11 of resolution 1718 (2006) calls
upon all States Members of the United Nations to
report to the Security Council within 30 days of the
adoption of the resolution on the steps they have taken
to implement effectively the provisions of paragraph 8
of the resolution. As of 15 December 2008, the
Committee had received reports from 73 countries and
one organization — the European Union — concerning
the implementation of the resolution. In that regard,
Member States’ reports are issued as official
documents of the Committee and are also accessible
electronically on the Committee’s website, unless a
State requests that its reply be kept confidential.
In subparagraph 12(e) of resolution 1718 (2006),
the Security Council mandated the Committee to
designate individuals and entities subject to the
measures imposed by subparagraphs 8(d) and (e) of
resolution 1718 (2006) — for instance, targeted
financial sanctions and the travel ban, respectively.
Since its inception, the Committee has received no
request for designation on the basis of the criteria
contained in the two subparagraphs to which I have
referred.
Since July 2007, no information relevant to the
implementation of its mandate has been brought to the
attention of the Committee.
While affirming that the primary responsibility for
implementing the provisions of the resolution rests with
States, the Committee stands ready to facilitate the
implementation of those measures once it is requested
to do so. The Committee continues to cooperate with
Member States and relevant organizations upon
receiving specific requests in that regard.
The President: I thank Ambassador Terzi di
Sant’Agata for his briefings.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Kumalo,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992),
concerning Somalia, and of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa.

4

Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): For the past two
years, I have had the honour to serve as the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia and the
Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa.
Regarding the 751 Committee on Somalia, the
information we have considered has indeed been
consistently sobering as well as troubling. The reports
of the Monitoring Group have documented the
worsening security situation in Somalia. They have
been unsparing in describing the widespread violations
of the arms embargo by land, air and sea, which has
continued unabated for the past 16 years.
The Monitoring Group has consistently reported
on the general state of lawlessness and the lack of
accountability that prevails in Somalia. Recently, the link
between piracy, kidnapping and ransom payments in
financing embargo violations committed by armed groups
has received increased attention. In recent months, the
number of piracy incidents has increased dramatically,
capturing global attention. The Monitoring Group has
described piracy as a multi-million dollar industry
involving up to 2,000 people, using over 60 small boats
and several mother ships. The pirates are said to have
earned enormous amounts of money, estimated to be
more than $100 million in recent years.
This has made Somali piracy very compelling
indeed. Yet Somali piracy is only one of the symptoms
of the root causes of the Somali conflict. The
Monitoring Group has noted that pirates invoke
legitimate Somali grievances regarding illegal fishing
in Somali waters by foreign ships, together with the
illegal dumping of toxic waste off the Somali coast.
These grievances have earned the pirates general
support for their activities among Somali society.
In its latest report, the Monitoring Group has
recommended the creation of a maritime administration
caretaker authority for Somalia that could mitigate the
scourge of piracy, as well as begin to address the
problems of toxic waste dumping and illegal fishing on
the Somali coast. But, even if this recommendation
could be accepted, that would still be addressing only
one part of the Somali problem, albeit a visible one.
This also explains why the arms embargo imposed by
the Council in 1992 has had such a minimal effect.
What Somalia urgently needs is for its tragic situation
to be addressed in a comprehensive and holistic

08-64915

S/PV.6043

manner. In other words, the solution for Somalia lies in
addressing piracy and the arms embargo together with
a political solution that will lead to the establishment
of reliable Government authority in Somalia.
Otherwise, systematic violations will continue to occur
in an environment that has been one of impunity, where
there are few or no consequences for any violations.
A promising start has already been made with the
Djibouti Agreement, which brought the Transitional
Federal Government together with some of the Islamic
groups interested in rebuilding Somalia. Besides the
fact that the Djibouti Agreement is desperately in need
of international political support, there is a lack of the
security stabilization inside Somalia that would allow
for the political process to grow some roots. The
African Union has contributed the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to help stabilize the
situation and support the Transitional Federal
Government. And AMISOM, which is in dire need of
strengthening, can never be enough on its own.
The Security Council and the international
community must address Somalia in a holistic manner,
because we cannot watch Somalia become an even
worst disaster than it is right now. Thousands of people
are dying of hunger and disease in Somalia — that is if
the murderous militias that run freely throughout
Somalia do not kill them first.
So, the Council can pass the toughest resolutions
on piracy; the Council can strengthen the arms
embargo and can even aim the most stringent measures
at individuals and entities that may be seen as
obstructing the process in Somalia; but such
fragmented efforts are unlikely to succeed without a
comprehensive solution. Meanwhile, Somalia will
continue to sink further and further into despair. Surely
the people of Somalia deserve a better life than the one
they have right now.
I would like to offer my warmest wishes to my
successor as Chair of this Committee — I am not sure
whether to say condolences. I would also like to
express appreciation to the Monitoring Group for its
commendable work. We could not have done our work
without the tireless Secretariat, which has provided
support and advice to me and my delegation, as well as
to the Committee, over the past two years.
South Africa assumed the Chair of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa because we felt that this would strengthen the

08-64915

African agenda on peace, security and development.
Our overall contribution to this Council was in line
with the aims of the Working Group. During our
presidency of the Council, we highlighted the need to
strengthen the working relationship between the
African Union and the United Nations, in particular the
Security Council. We hosted thematic debates that
brought several heads of State and Government from
Africa to the Security Council. Right now, we look
forward to a report of the African Union-United
Nations panel headed by former Prime Minister
Romano Prodi of Italy, which will make concrete
proposals on how the United Nations can support the
work of the African Union with predictable and
sustainable resources.
Regarding the programme of the Working Group,
we held four meetings, including a session at which the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, briefed the Working Group on the reform of
the Department of Political Affairs. The briefing
provided the Working Group with an opportunity to
understand how the Department of Political Affairs
sees its role in conflict prevention and resolution
efforts.
Another important meeting took place on
1 December 2008 and addressed the concept of
responsibility to protect. There were two main
purposes for holding the meeting. The first was that the
Secretary-General is expected to present his report on
the responsibility to protect to the General Assembly
early next year, which will then hold a debate on that
report. Our deliberations in the Working Group on the
concept of responsibility to protect could contribute to
that debate, whose objective is, among others, to arrive
at a common understanding on issues that are set forth
in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome Document (A/60/L.1).
Second, it was our understanding that the concept
of responsibility to protect falls within the mandate of
the Working Group. Therefore, it was critical that the
meeting be understood within the context of the
mandate of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, which set forth
“To propose recommendations to the Security
Council to enhance cooperation in conflict
prevention and resolution, between the United
Nations and regional (OAU) and subregional
organizations” (S/2002/207, section III (iv)).

5

S/PV.6043

Finally, I would like to express my deep
appreciation for the cooperation of the members of the
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa in our endeavour to contribute to the
successful implementation of the Working Group’s
mandate. I also wish to thank the Secretariat for its
support throughout the activities of the Working Group.
The President: I thank Ambassador Kumalo his
briefings.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Marty
Natalegawa, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 918
(1994) concerning Rwanda, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): With your
permission, Sir, I would like to share with members of
the Council some reflections in my personal capacity
on the work of the three subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council to which you just referred: the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 918
(1994) concerning Rwanda, and the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations.
I would like at the outset to refer to the sanctions
Committee on the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In general terms, the measures established and
progressively adapted by the Security Council in
resolutions 1493 (2003), 1596 (2005), 1698 (2006),
1771 (2007) and 1807 (2008) aim at preventing all
rebel groups operating in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo from being supplied with arms
and/or participating in military activities. Adopted on
31 March 2008, resolution 1807 (2008) marked an
important watershed in the duration of the sanctions
regime. While supplier States continue to be required
by the resolution to notify the sanctions Committee of
arms shipments to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to include in such
notifications all relevant information — including,
where appropriate, the end user, the proposed date of
delivery and the itinerary of shipments — the Security
Council effectively lifted the arms embargo on the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

6

Resolution 1807 (2008) was also adopted by the
Council with a view to simplifying the sanctions
regime and improving the implementation of the arms
embargo, for instance by terminating the requirement
on the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to designate receiving sites for the authorized
shipments of arms and related materiel. One could
make the case, in fact, that the introduction of more
clarity and the simplification of the sanctions regime
played a positive role in the renewed cooperation
which the Democratic Republic of the Congo
authorities extended to the Group of Experts, as noted
in the Group’s final report submitted this month.
During the course of 2008, the Committee
proactively conducted its work and convened a number
of sessions of informal consultations, the majority of
which were held to discuss the reports of the Group of
Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including possible actions to be taken by the
Committee arising from the Group’s recommendations.
In connection with the list of individuals and
entities subject to the measures imposed under
paragraphs 13 and 15 of resolution 1596 (2005), the
Committee acted on new information conveyed by the
Group of Experts and Member States by updating the
list and with a view to providing Member States with
the most accurate information possible to facilitate
implementation of the measures imposed on listed
individuals and entities. Implementation is hindered,
however, when listed individuals have no tangible
assets or do not travel across international borders, thus
limiting the impact of the assets freeze and travel ban.
The Committee also considered four requests in
2008 for de-listing. In terms of proposals for listing,
the Committee currently has under consideration a
request submitted by the Permanent Representative of
Rwanda in May 2008, whose delegation transmitted a
list of individuals to the Committee, requesting their
inclusion in the list.
Further to its efforts to engage with Member
States, the Committee continued its practice of
acknowledging notifications received by supplier
States during the course of 2008. However, challenges
remain, as only seven notifications have been received
by the Committee since the adoption of resolution 1807
(2008) on 31 March 2008.
The Committee also interacted with a number of
Member States in connection with a request for

08-64915

S/PV.6043

exemption to the assets freeze, and transmitted a
number of letters to Member States drawing their
attention to the recommendations contained in various
reports of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Committee also addressed
letters to a number of international organizations,
drawing their attention to possible areas of assistance
to reinforce the capacity of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to fully implement
the arms embargo.
The Group of Experts has played an instrumental
role in monitoring the sanctions regime and in
facilitating action by the Committee towards the
improvement of the implementation of the sanctions
regime. As part of these efforts, the Group collaborated
extensively with the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with
a view to analysing information gathered by the
Mission on the ground that is relevant to the mandate
of the Group and the Committee.
As highlighted in the latest report of the Group of
Experts, many challenges remain towards achieving
full implementation of the sanctions regime. It is
unfortunate that, several years after the adoption of the
Committee’s travel ban and assets freeze against
individuals and entities violating the arms embargo, the
level of awareness and implementation of such
measures remain very limited. To that end, the full
collaboration and engagement of States in the region
are essential.
Looking back over the course of 2008, I have
relied on the support and the flexibility of members in
moving the Committee’s work forward. As Chairman, I
have endeavoured to engage actively with my
colleagues to bridge differences and build the
consensus that is very crucial to the work of the
Committee.
Looking forward, it is my personal view that the
final report of the Group of Experts submitted this
month has broken new ground in terms of the
Committee’s and the Council’s understanding of the
support networks for the two major rebel groups in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and the
Congrès national pour la défense du peuple,
particularly these groups’ financial networks. It is my
hope that, in 2009, the Committee and the Council will
actively use the sanctions regime as a positive

08-64915

instrument that can be integrated into a wider political
strategy to end a conflict which has so deeply harmed
the civilian population in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and to reinforce the Government’s efforts to
exercise authority in the eastern part of the country.
This may also include the Committee’s engaging
further with States in the region and other States with a
view to ensuring increased compliance with the
sanctions regime.
Let me now turn to the sanctions Committee on
Rwanda. As Council members are aware, the Security
Council decided in resolution 1823 (2008), adopted in
July, to dissolve the Committee. The Security Council
also decided in that resolution to terminate the
remaining measures relating to Rwanda.
It will be recalled that the Committee was
established in 1994 to oversee the arms embargo and to
undertake other tasks mandated by the Security
Council. In subsequent years, the complete arms
embargo and other measures were gradually terminated
by the Security Council. In 2007, for example, the
Security Council, in its resolution 1749 (2007),
terminated the notification requirement for the delivery
of arms to the Government of Rwanda.
Prior to its termination, the Committee met on
11 April 2008, at which time members noted that it had
been largely inactive over the past 10 years and that the
signing of the Nairobi joint communiqué of November
2007 could be seen as a sign of the continued
improvement of the political climate in the subregion.
It was also noted that the termination of an inactive
subsidiary body could be seen as a good business
practice that could help rationalize the functions of the
Security Council. Some members expressed the view
that the termination of the sanctions regime should be
considered a technical rather than a political matter.
Committee members agreed that I should recommend
the dissolution of the Committee, which I subsequently
did on 22 May. The Security Council agreed with that
view.
Let me now make a few observations regarding
the work on the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations. The Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations met on 27 March 2007. The meeting took
up two subjects: surge in peacekeeping operations and
security sector reform. The members of the Working
Group expressed their views on the various related
issues and provided suggestions on enhancing the

7

S/PV.6043

effectiveness of the United Nations peacekeeping
system.
On 26 March 2008, the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations again convened to exchange
views on issues related to United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE). The members of the
Security Council, a number of the troop-contributing
countries to UNMEE, and representatives of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support participated in the
meeting.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Costa Rica and Viet
Nam, who serve as Vice-Chairs of the Sanctions
Committee on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as well as the Permanent Representative of Italy, who
serves as Vice-Chair of the Sanctions Committee on
Rwanda, for their respective support and assistance.
I also thank all delegations for their constructive
cooperation with the Chair.
I also wish to convey my appreciation to the
Security Council Subsidiary Organs Branch, led by
Mr. Aleksandar Martinovic. In particular, I would like
to thank Mr. David Biggs, Ms. Francesca JannottiPecci and Mr. James Sutterlin for their untiring support
to the work of the Chair.
The President: I thank Ambassador Natalegawa
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Jan Grauls,
Chair of the Security Council committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities; the Security Council committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004),
concerning Côte d’Ivoire; and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).
Mr. Grauls (Belgium): Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the opportunity to speak today in my
capacity as Chair of three Sanctions Committees: the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities; the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004),
concerning Côte d’Ivoire; and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006),
concerning Iran.

8

Since the departure of my predecessor,
Ambassador Johan Verbeke, in June of this year to take
on new responsibilities within the United Nations
system, I have had the honour to preside over these
three Committees. This has proven to be both a
privilege and a challenge.
The comments I am about to make are my
personal observations based on my experience and that
of my predecessor. They are not attributable to any
other delegation, nor should they be seen as a record of
the work of these subsidiary organs. For a factual
account of the work delivered in the past two years, I
would like to refer to the annual reports of the three
Committees, which may be found on their respective
websites at the end of each year. At the end of my
briefing, I will also say a few words about the state of
play within the Informal Working Group on
international tribunals.
I would like to start my briefing with the
Al-Qaida/Taliban Committee.
When my predecessor took on the chairmanship
in January 2007, he did so in the wake of the adoption
of two important Security Council resolutions at the
end of 2006: resolution 1730 (2006) establishing the
focal point process for de-listing requests, and
resolution 1735 (2006), strengthening the sanctions
regime and enhancing the Committee’s procedures in
order to ensure more clarity and transparency.
Subsequently, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1822 (2008) in June, which in my view
represents a milestone in the life of the Committee.
Resolution 1822 (2008) introduced a number of
important innovations with regard to the procedures for
listing and de-listing, the notification of sanctioned
individuals and entities, the posting of narrative
summaries of reasons for the listing of all entries on
the Committee’s website and the review mechanisms,
thus adding to the transparency and fair and clear
procedures character of the sanctions regime.
The Committee members committed themselves
to transposing resolution 1822 (2008) in a new
framework for the practical implementation of these
new mechanisms before the end of this year. In order to
find solutions fitting for all members, multiple rounds
of negotiations ensued that were sometimes arduous
and complex. This new framework has now been
approved and will form a solid basis for my successor

08-64915

S/PV.6043

to continue the implementation work on resolution
1822 (2008).

Committee during the two years of the Belgian
chairmanship.

May I pay tribute here to the very professional
support I got from the experts of the member States
and from the Monitoring Team. I also appreciated the
flexibility shown by delegations during the final stages
of the negotiations. All these efforts have truly paid
off, since the Security Council included many of the
aforementioned innovations when it adopted the recent
resolution imposing targeted sanctions in the context of
Somalia.

First, those activities took place in the broader
context of the momentum resulting from the
Ouagadougou Agreement of 4 March 2007. While
resolution 1721 (2006) had proved difficult to
implement, the Ouagadougou Agreement marked the
assumption of ownership of the peace process by the
Ivorians and regional actors, which entailed a relative
withdrawal by the Security Council. The Ouagadougou
Agreement contained sanctions provisions, to which
the Ivorian political actors have referred regularly in
their statements, including before the General
Assembly. On the other hand, neither the Security
Council nor the Sanctions Committee has ever
considered any request based on those provisions of
the Agreement.

One cannot ignore the international context in
which these developments have taken place. The
reality is that Security Council sanctions regimes find
themselves increasingly under pressure and have
recently been questioned, especially in light of the
need for fair and clear procedures for listing, de-listing
and the granting of humanitarian exemptions.
I do believe that the Al-Qaida/Taliban Committee
has made significant progress in this regard. However,
it is also my belief that all of us must remain
committed to continuing to ensure that due, and
probably even more, attention is given to these
concerns.
I do not think there is any doubt in anyone’s mind
that terrorism remains one of the most serious threats
to international peace and security. The sanctions
regime against Al-Qaida, the Taliban and their
associates is still one of the most important tools of the
international community in the fight against terrorism.
In that light, it is important that Member States
use this tool to the fullest extent possible by proposing
the names of key actors for listing and complying fully
with the sanctions measures. In that spirit, my
predecessor and I gave four briefings to the larger
membership in order to engage it in the activities of the
Committee.
That said, I know that the challenges ahead will
be great. More needs to be done to ensure that the right
individuals and entities are targeted. Due respect for
fair and clear procedures can only increase the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime.
I now turn to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004)
concerning Côte d’Ivoire. Primarily, I shall address
three characteristics of the activities carried out by the

08-64915

Another characteristic of the Committee is that
various reports of the Group of Experts have identified
serious failures in the implementation of Security
Council measures both by Côte d’Ivoire itself and by
other countries, particularly those in the region. In
particular, the experts noted a certain degree of
ignorance, indifference and, in certain cases, contempt
in Côte d’Ivoire regarding the sanctions measures
adopted by the Council. The Republican Guard’s
persistent refusal to authorize embargo inspections by
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the
subsequent halt in those inspections are elements of
great concern. One may suppose that, in the current
context in Côte d’Ivoire, better acceptance of the
sanctions by the Ivorian authorities and others, as well
as improvements in implementation, will remain
challenges for the international community.
Finally, I was struck by the lack of follow-up to
the allegations of human rights violations noted in
particular by the United Nations. Despite some
observed progress, allegations of human rights
violations remain numerous and grave, in particular
cases involving sexual violence against women and
children. Most reported cases are not being prosecuted
by the Ivorian legal authorities. That situation is
intolerable and should be followed very closely.
The activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006),
concerning Iran, were carried out against the backdrop
of the verification efforts of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and political negotiations

9

S/PV.6043

related to the nuclear issue. The Committee’s activities
were carried out in strict compliance with the mandate
received from the Security Council. Moreover, during
the first two years of the Committee’s existence, the
sanctions regime saw three successive waves of new
measures imposed under resolutions 1737 (2006) of
December 2006, 1747 (2007) of March 2007 and 1803
(2008) of March 2008.
The Iran sanctions have undoubtedly affected the
nuclear programme and the major actors and
intermediaries involved in it. However, it must be
noted that, despite the pressure exerted by the
sanctions and the repeated offers of cooperation from
the international community, the Iranian authorities
persist in refusing dialogue and in cultivating
ambiguity. More than five years after the disclosure of
Iran’s clandestine programme, the IAEA remains
incapable of confirming its peaceful nature. The last
report of the IAEA shows once again that, at most, the
sanctions have delayed the programme, not stopped it,
nor — which is crucial — have they been able to
reassure the international community of its peaceful
nature.
The dual-track approach adopted by the Security
Council — pressure and dialogue — was further
confirmed by resolution 1835 (2008) of last September.
I believe that that resolution is both an invitation to
strengthen efforts to launch the dialogue and a request
for increased attention to the strict implementation of
the sanctions by all.
The Committee on Transactions could, therefore,
take a closer look at the national reports and examine
more thoroughly the breaches in the implementation of
the resolutions. In order to do that, in my view it would
be particularly useful for the Committee, following the
example of other sanctions committees, to be assisted
by a panel of experts and to undertake visits in certain
countries. In my view, such instruments are quite
simply the logical complements to a sanctions
committee.
Finally, I would like to mention the activities of
the Informal Working Group on Tribunals, which
Belgium has chaired during 2008. The discussions
within the Group mainly concentrated on the
establishment of a residual mechanism to carry out
certain essential functions of the International Criminal
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda
after their closure.

10

My delegation delivered a statement regarding
the work of that body during the Security Council
debate last Friday. So, I do not wish to come back to
that in detail here. Moreover, there are further details
on that process in a letter that I will forward to the
President shortly and that will be circulated as an
official document.
To conclude, I would like to thank all those who
have been involved in the work of those subsidiary
organs over the past two years. I would most especially
like to thank the delegates, the Monitoring Team and
the Group of Experts on Côte d’Ivoire, as well as the
Secretariat for their valuable work and cooperation.
During my chairmanship of those three sanctions
committees, I have been able to observe how different
and, in a sense, how unique they are. Each committee
works within its own political context, being a countryspecific committee or tackling a global terrorist
phenomenon. Each has its specific mandate and its own
tools to implement it, for instance, with or without a
group of independent experts. The interplay of those
distinct characteristics always seems to produce a
unique result.
The world is not the same as when we started, nor
is the Security Council. But certain threats to peace and
security remain and they must be addressed effectively
and fairly. Sanctions are a valuable tool in that respect,
and I am convinced that they can be further developed
to become an even better tool.
The President: I thank Ambassador Grauls for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ricardo
Arias, Chairman of the Security Council Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
Mr. Arias: Thank you, Sir, for giving me the
opportunity to speak today in my capacity as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. In my statement, I should
like to give the Council an overview of the work
undertaken by that subsidiary body under my
chairmanship and to make a few personal remarks.
In 2008, the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions built
on the work completed under previous Chairmen and
continued to examine ways to best implement the notes
by the President of the Security Council in documents

08-64915

S/PV.6043

S/2006/507 and S/2007/749. Among the priorities set
by the Working Group in 2008 were issues related to
the summary statements on matters of which the
Security Council is seized, meeting formats, the
participation of non-Council members in the work of
the Security Council and the role of the Security
Council President and the Chairs of subsidiary bodies.
Owing to time constraints, we were unable to examine
the last issue.
Early in the year, the Working Group worked
towards improving the summary statements by making
them more user-friendly. The Working Group
subsumed similar and related items into a single
agenda item. The Working Group is still considering a
proposal to make the summary statement more
accurate, reflecting the items of which the Council is
actually seized and giving the Council greater
involvement in its preparation. We expect agreement to
be reached on that matter in the coming days. The
Working Group also considered a proposal by the Chair
on meeting formats and the participation of nonCouncil members, but was unable to reach a decision
on that matter.
Further, the Working Group received a letter
dated 5 September from the Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, requesting us
to examine their current procedures and to recommend
measures to improve them, based on the practices of
other Council subsidiary bodies. In deliberating that
issue, we consulted the Secretariat and were briefed by
the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
Following those consultations, we drafted a response
that is currently under no-objection procedure and
should be delivered to the Chair in the following days.
That communication includes a response from the
Secretariat on the questions posed to them and
highlights relevant passages of note of the President of

08-64915

the Security Council in document S/2006/507 that
could assist them in enhancing the efficiency and
effectiveness of the methods of the Working Group.
As a follow-up to the open debate on the
implementation on the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2006/507), the delegation of
Belgium submitted a proposal to update that note.
However, some delegations suggested that we defer the
consideration of that issue until 2009.
Finally, I would like to point out that, regardless
of specific results, the fruitful exchanges held this year
within the Working Group were crucial to clarifying
and improving the implementation of current working
methods, as well as to exploring new ways to make the
Council more efficient in its deliberations.
Before closing, on a more personal note, I would
like to extend my particular gratitude to all members of
the Working Group for their time and effort. Their
contributions to improving the working methods will
definitely be translated into concrete results in the
subsequent work of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
The President: I thank Ambassador Arias for his
briefing.
There are no other speakers inscribed on my list.
On behalf of the Security Council, I would like to take
this opportunity to express appreciation to the five
outgoing Chairmen, Ambassador Terzi, Ambassador
Kumalo, Ambassador Natalegawa, Ambassador Grauls
and Ambassador Arias, for the manner in which they
have discharged their important responsibilities on
behalf of the Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

11
