United Nations

A/RES/60/193

General Assembly

Distr.: General
20 February 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 52 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2005
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/60/488/Add.1)]

60/193. Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/199 of 20 December 2000, 56/226 of 24 December
2001, 57/253 of 20 December 2002 and 57/270 A and B of 20 December 2002 and
23 June 2003, respectively, and its resolutions 58/218 of 23 December 2003 and
59/227 of 22 December 2004,
Recalling also the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 1 Agenda 21, 2
the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 3 the Johannesburg
Declaration on Sustainable Development 4 and the Plan of Implementation of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 5
as well as the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing
for Development, 6
Reaffirming the commitment to implement Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,
including the time-bound goals and targets, and the other internationally agreed
development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, 7 and reaffirmed in the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 8
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,
_______________
1
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol.I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution
1, annex.
5
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
6
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
7
See resolution 55/2.
8
See resolution 60/1.

05-49918

A/RES/60/193

Reaffirming the decisions taken at the eleventh session of the Commission on
Sustainable Development,
Reaffirming also the continuing need to ensure a balance among economic
development, social development and environmental protection as interdependent
and mutually reinforcing pillars of sustainable development,
Reiterating that the Commission is the high-level body responsible for
sustainable development within the United Nations system and serves as a forum for
consideration of issues related to integration of the three dimensions of sustainable
development,
Reaffirming that eradicating poverty, changing unsustainable patterns of
production and consumption and protecting and managing the natural resource base
of economic and social development are overarching objectives of and essential
requirements for sustainable development,
Recognizing that good governance within each country and at the international
level is essential for sustainable development,
Recognizing also that eradicating poverty is the greatest global challenge
facing the world today and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, particularly for developing countries, and that although each country
has the primary responsibility for its own sustainable development and poverty
eradication and the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be
overemphasized, concerted and concrete measures are required at all levels to
enable developing countries to achieve their sustainable development goals as
related to the internationally agreed poverty-related targets and goals, including
those contained in Agenda 21, the relevant outcomes of other United Nations
conferences and the Millennium Declaration,
Recalling the decision taken bythe Commission at its thirteenth session 9 to
devote one day of its review sessions to the review of the implementation of the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, 10 focusing on that
year’s thematic cluster, as well as on any new developments regarding the
sustainable development efforts of small island developing States using existing
modalities,
Recalling also the decision of the Commission to request its secretariat to
update the policy options and practical measures contained in the Chairman’s
summary of the interactive discussions held at the Intergovernmental Preparatory
Meeting, on a regular basis, so as to make it a living document, and to develop webbased tools to disseminate information on implementation and best practices,9
Looking forward to the upcoming cycles of the work programme of the
Commission as adopted at its eleventh session and their contributions to the further
implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of
Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development,

_______________
9

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 9 (E/2005/29), chap. I,
sect. C, resolution 13/1.
10
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

2

A/RES/60/193

1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the activities
undertaken in the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development; 11
2.
Notes that the Commission on Sustainable Development at its thirteenth
session adopted policy decisions on options and practical measures aimed at
accelerating progress in implementation in the areas of water, sanitation and human
settlements;9
3.
Reiterates that sustainable development is a key element of the
overarching framework for United Nations activities, in particular for achieving the
internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the United
Nations Millennium Declaration7 and in the Plan of Implementation of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”);5
4.
Calls upon Governments, all relevant international and regional
organizations, the Economic and Social Council, the United Nations funds and
programmes, the regional commissions and the specialized agencies, the
international financial institutions, the Global Environment Facility and other
intergovernmental organizations, in accordance with their respective mandates, as
well as major groups, to take action to ensure the effective implementation of and
follow-up to the commitments, programmes and time-bound targets adopted at the
World Summit on Sustainable Development, and encourages them to report on
concrete progress in that regard;
Calls for the effective implementation of the commitments, programmes
5.
and time-bound targets adopted at the World Summit on Sustainable Development
and for the fulfilment of the provisions relating to the means of implementation, as
contained in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
Encourages Governments to participate at the appropriate level with
6.
representatives, including ministers, from the relevant departments and
organizations working in the areas of energy for sustainable development, industrial
development, air pollution/atmosphere and climate change, as well as finance, in the
fourteenth session of the Commission;
Recalls the decision of the Commission at its eleventh session to invite
7.
the regional commissions, in collaboration with the secretariat of the Commission,
to consider organizing regional implementation meetings in order to contribute to
the work of the Commission, 12 and, in this regard, welcomes the activities
undertaken by the regional commissions and the secretariat of the Commission to
organize the regional implementation meetings in preparation for the fourteenth
session of the Commission, and looks forward to their contributions, based on the
discussions in the intergovernmental regional implementation meetings, to the
preparation of the fourteenth session;

_______________
11

A/60/261 and Corr.1.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap. I,
sect. A, draft resolution I entitled “Future programme, organization and methods of work of the
Commission on Sustainable Development”, para. 3 (a); see also Economic and Social Council resolution
2003/61 of 25 July 2003.
12

3

A/RES/60/193

8.
Also recalls the decision of the Commission at its eleventh session 13 that
activities during Commission meetings should provide for the balanced involvement
of participants from all regions, as well as for gender balance;
Invites donor countries to consider supporting the participation of experts
9.
from the developing countries in the areas of energy for sustainable development,
industrial development, air pollution/atmosphere and climate change in the
fourteenth session of the Commission;
10. Reaffirms the objective of strengthening the implementation of
Agenda 21,2 including through the mobilization of financial and technological
resources, as well as capacity-building programmes, particularly for developing
countries;
11. Also reaffirms the objective of enhancing the participation and effective
involvement of civil society and other relevant stakeholders in the implementation
of Agenda 21, as well as to promote transparency and broad public participation;
12. Further reaffirms the need to promote corporate responsibility and
accountability as envisaged by the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
13. Reaffirms the need to promote the development of microenterprises and
small- and medium-sized enterprises, including by means of training, education and
skill enhancement, with a special focus on agro-industry as a provider of livelihoods
for rural communities;
14. Requests the secretariat of the Commission to make arrangements to
facilitate the balanced representation of major groups from developed and
developing countries in the sessions of the Commission;
15. Also requests the secretariat of the Commission to coordinate the
participation of the relevant major groups in the discussions at the fourteenth
session of the Commission;
16. Requests the Secretary-General, in reporting to the Commission at its
fourteenth session on the state of the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme
for the Further Implementation of Agenda 213 and the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation, on the basis of appropriate inputs from all levels, to submit
thematic reports on the thematic cluster of issues for the fourteenth session of the
Commission, in accordance with the decisions taken by the Commission at its
eleventh session;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the
Commission, at its review session,on progress and obstacles in respect of
sustainable development in small island developing States, including
recommendations on how to enhance the implementation of the Mauritius Strategy
for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States,10 focusing on that year’s thematic
cluster;
18. Encourages Governments and organizations at all levels, as well as
major groups, including the scientific community and educators, to undertake
results-oriented initiatives and activities to support the work of the Commission and
to promote and facilitate the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the

_______________
13

4

Ibid., para. 2 (j).

A/RES/60/193

Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,
including through voluntary multi-stakeholder partnership initiatives;
19. Notes the convening of the Second International Expert Meeting on the
Ten-year Framework of Programmes for Sustainable Consumption and Production
in San José, Costa Rica, from 5 to 8 September 2005;
20. Also notes the work in inter-agency cooperation and coordination
undertaken in the follow-up to the World Summit on Sustainable Development, and
requests the Secretary-General to report, at its sixty-first session, on action taken by
the United Nations system in the thematic areas being addressed by the Commission
in its current two-year cycle, with a view to facilitating an in-depth consideration of
system-wide inter-agency cooperation and coordination in the relevant thematic
areas, in accordance with the mandates agreed upon in the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation;
21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the
item entitled “Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development”, and requests the Secretary-General, at that session, to
submit a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
68th plenary meeting
22 December 2005

5
