UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/2000/2
26 January 2000
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 4092nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 January 2000 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its appreciation to the Heads of State
of Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mozambique, Rwanda,
Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe, and to the Foreign Ministers of Namibia, South
Africa, Burundi, Canada and the United States of America, the Vice-Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, the Minister Delegate
for Cooperation and Francophonie of France, the Minister of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, and the Minister of
Armed Forces of Mali, who participated in its meeting on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on 24 January 2000. The Council also expresses its
appreciation to the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), the representative of the Chairman of the OAU, and the OAU-nominated
Facilitator of the Congolese National Dialogue. Their presence and their
statements attest to their renewed commitment to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement (S/1999/815) and to the search for a durable peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. Their presence in New
York also reinforces the progress made at the Maputo Summit of 16 January
2000 and the Harare meeting of the Political Committee of 18 January 2000.
The Council expects that this progress will continue at the next Political
Committee Meeting and Summit of the Signatories to the Agreement.
"The Security Council urges all the parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement to build on the momentum of these meetings in order to create and
sustain the climate necessary for the full implementation of the Agreement.
It underlines the importance of a revised implementation calendar for the
full and effective implementation of the tasks in the Agreement.
"The Security Council reaffirms the territorial integrity and national
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including over its
natural resources, in accordance with the principles of the Charters of the
United Nations and the OAU. In this regard, it reiterates its call for the
immediate cessation of hostilities and the orderly withdrawal of all
foreign forces from the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
00-26081 (E)

260100

/...

S/PRST/2000/2
English
Page 2

in accordance with the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. The Council reaffirms
its support for the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and also reaffirms its
resolutions 1234 (1999) of 9 April 1999, 1258 (1999) of 6 August 1999, 1273
(1999) of 5 November 1999 and 1279 (1999) of 30 November 1999.
"The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
17 January 2000 (S/2000/30). The Council expresses its determination to
support the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. Accordingly,
it has now begun consideration of a resolution authorizing the expansion of
the present mandate of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) along the lines recommended by the
Secretary-General in that report. It expresses its intention to act
promptly on this basis. It also expresses its intention to consider at the
appropriate time preparations for an additional phase of United Nations
deployment and further action. It welcomes the statements by the Heads of
State and delegation in support of the proposals of the Secretary-General.
The Council welcomes the arrival of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, expresses its
support for his efforts, and urges all parties to provide him with the
assistance and cooperation he will require to carry out his functions.
"The Security Council supports the establishment of a coordinated
MONUC/Joint Military Commission (JMC) structure with co-located
headquarters and joint support arrangements. The Council believes this is
a vital step in enhancing the ability of the United Nations to support the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. In this regard, the Council urges Member
States and donor organizations to continue to provide assistance to the
JMC.
"The Security Council underlines the absolute necessity of security
and access for United Nations personnel deployed in support of the Lusaka
process, and stresses that such a climate of cooperation is an essential
prerequisite for the successful implementation of the mandate of MONUC in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Council calls on all signatories
to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement to provide assurances of safety, security
and freedom of movement of United Nations and associated personnel, and in
this regard attaches importance to the statement by the President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on the security of MONUC and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
"The Security Council stresses the importance of the National Dialogue
as called for in the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, and affirms that it must
be an open, inclusive and democratic process conducted independently by the
Congolese people under the established Facilitation. It further affirms
that the National Dialogue is the best means for all Congolese parties to
address the political future of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
"The Security Council strongly supports the designation of the former
President of Botswana, Sir Ketumile Masire, as the Facilitator of the
National Dialogue as provided for by the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, and
calls on Member States to provide full financial and other support to his
efforts and the process as a whole. The Council welcomes the declared
/...

S/PRST/2000/2
English
Page 3

readiness of the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to begin
the National Dialogue, and to guarantee the security of all participants.
"The Security Council stresses the need for the continued operation of
United Nations and other agencies’ humanitarian relief operations and human
rights promotion and monitoring under acceptable conditions of security,
freedom of movement, and access to affected areas. The Council expresses
its serious concern over the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as well as the shortfall in responses to the United
Nations consolidated humanitarian appeal. It therefore urges Member States
and donor organizations to make available the necessary funds to carry out
urgent humanitarian operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
"The Security Council expresses its concern that the presence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo of non-signatory armed groups that have
yet to be demobilized constitutes a threat to the Lusaka process. The
Council recognizes that disarmament, demobilization, resettlement and
reintegration (DDRR) are among the fundamental objectives of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. The Council underlines that a credible plan for DDRR
must be based on an agreed and comprehensive set of principles.
"The Security Council expresses deep concern over the illicit flow of
arms into the region, and calls upon all concerned to halt such flows.
"The Security Council values the continuing leadership of the peace
process by the President of Zambia and the vital contribution of the
Southern African Development Community through its Chairman, the President
of Mozambique. It also expresses its appreciation to the current Chairman
of the OAU, the President of Algeria, and to the Secretary-General of the
OAU for the Organization’s vital role in the Lusaka process. It urges them
to continue their essential efforts in close cooperation with the Security
Council and the Secretary-General."

-----
