A /73/PV.66

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

66th plenary meeting

Tuesday 15 January 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Korneliou
(Cyprus), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/73/L.73)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jamaica to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.73.
Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): I have the honour
to introduce, under agenda item 14, the draft
resolution contained in document A/73/L.73, entitled
“Commemoration of the one-hundredth anniversary
of the establishment of the International Labour
Organization”, on behalf of the Permanent Mission
of Belgium and my own Government, through the
Permanent Mission of Jamaica.
Emerging from the ashes of the First World War,
the International Labour Organization (ILO) was
founded on the belief that social justice is essential to
universal and lasting peace. Indeed, its work affects us
all — the hours we work, our entitlements to holiday and
maternity pay, the fight against discrimination in the
workplace — the ILO’s international labour standards
and activities address all such issues affecting the

conditions of labour that give meaning to our lives and
imbue our work with dignity.
Through the Treaty of Versailles, which ended
the Great War, it was recognized that an international
organization was needed to deal with labour issues and
to promote and preserve world peace. The novel idea
to ensure a place for representatives of Governments,
workers and employers to come together to forge
solutions to labour issues has become a lasting and
central pillar of the ILO, known as tripartism. Surviving
two world wars and numerous other crises, the ILO, as
a key member of our United Nations family, stands at
the cusp of its hundredth anniversary. That milestone
reaffirms the strength and resilience of multilateralism.
Moreover, it provides inspiration to the entire United
Nations system as we address modern challenges,
including the future of work and actions required to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. In that
spirit, I wish to draw the Assembly’s attention to the
draft resolution before it.
The draft resolution recalls the ILO’s establishment
in 1919, and subsequently its membership as the first
specialized agency of the United Nations in 1946.
The draft resolution congratulates the ILO on its
centenary and notes with satisfaction its contribution to
promoting social justice. It further decides to devote a
one-day meeting, to be held within existing resources,
to commemorate the ILO’s centenary under the overall
theme “The future of work”.
The draft resolution sets out the modalities of
the meeting, including the convening of a high-level

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-01062 (E)

*1901062*

A/73/PV.66

plenary meeting of the General Assembly on 10 April
2019, and designates that the Director-General of
the International Labour Organization and the
representatives of the ILO social partners, comprising
the General Secretary of the International Trade Union
Confederation and the President of the International
Organization of Employers, address the commemorative
plenary meeting.
Bearing in mind that the overall theme of the
meeting will be to focus on the future of work, the draft
resolution also establishes that a youth representative
address the commemorative plenary meeting. In addition
to the half-day commemorative plenary meeting, two
interactive panel discussions will be convened that
same afternoon from 3 to 4.25 p.m. and from 4.30 to
5.55 p.m., also to be held within existing resources.
The draft resolution further instructs the President
of the General Assembly, with support from the
International Labour Organization, to finalize
the organizational arrangements in a transparent
manner, including the identification of sub-themes
and panellists, with due regard to gender balance
and equitable geographical representation. The draft
resolution requests the President of the General
Assembly to prepare and bring to the attention of
Member States a summary of the panel discussions
and to transmit the summary to the High-level Political
Forum on Sustainable Development to be held in
2019 under the auspices of the Economic and Social
Council. I reiterate that the meeting will not bear any
programme budget implications, as it will take place
within existing resources.
Finally, I wish to draw the Assembly’s attention
to paragraph 6 of the draft resolution in order to make
a minor revision. It should read “President” of the
International Organization of Employers rather than
“Secretary-General”.
On behalf of Ambassador Pecsteen de Buytswerve
and on my own behalf, we encourage the unanimous
adoption of the draft resolution before the Assembly
today and would welcome high-level attendance by
delegations at the meeting in April.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.73, as orally
revised, entitled “Commemoration of the one-hundredth
anniversary of the establishment of the International
Labour Organization”.
2/3

15/01/2019

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that Antigua and Barbuda is also a co-sponsor
of draft resolution A/73/L.73, as orally revised.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.73,
as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/73/L.73, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 73/282).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 14.
Agenda item 130 (continued)
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals
Letter from the President of the Security Council
(A/73/578)
Memorandum by the Secretary-General
(A/73/577)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/566)
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at the 65th meeting, on 21 December, Mr. Yusuf Aksar
of Turkey was elected as a judge of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for a term
ending on 30 June 2020.
As members are aware, there is still one vacant seat
to be filled for the roster of the Residual Mechanism. In
that connection, I wish to refer to the communication
received by the United Nations Legal Counsel from
the Permanent Mission of the United States of
America, which the President of the General Assembly
transmitted on 8 January, informing of the withdrawal
of the nomination of its candidate from the election,
namely, Mr. Michael A. Newton. Consequently,
the remaining candidates for the one vacancy are
Mr. Mustapha El Baaj of Morocco and Mr. Guénaël
Mettraux of Switzerland.
The Assembly will now proceed to vote in respect
of the remaining vacancy.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
19-01062

15/01/2019

procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order
on the actual conduct of the voting. In addition, ballot
papers will be given only to the representative seated
directly behind the country’s nameplate.
We shall now proceed with the seventh round of
balloting and begin the voting process. Ballot papers
are now being distributed. I would like to remind
representatives that they are requested to use only the
ballot papers that are being distributed. Only those
candidates whose names appear on the ballot papers
are eligible. Representatives may indicate the one and
only candidate for whom they wish to vote by placing
a cross in the box at the left of the name on the ballot
papers. Ballot papers on which more than one name
is checked will be considered invalid. Votes may be
cast only for those whose names appear on the ballot
papers. If a ballot contains votes other than votes for
the candidates listed on the ballot paper, those votes
will not be counted.
At the invitation of the Acting President,
Mr. Loko (Benin), Ms. Macdonal Álvarez
(Plurinational State of Bolivia), Mr. Titze (Malta),
Mrs. Wang (Singapore), Mr. Nagy (Slovakia) and
Mr. Devahastin Na Ayuthai (Thailand) acted
as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 10.35 a.m. and
resumed at 11 a.m.

A/73/PV.66

The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required absolute majority:
Number of individual votes obtained:
Mustapha El Baaj (Morocco)
Guénaël Mettraux (Switzerland)

188
1
187
2
185
98
99
86

Having obtained an absolute majority and the
highest number of votes, Yusuf Aksar (Turkey) and
Mr. Mustapha El Baaj (Morocco) were elected
judges of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals for a term ending on
30 June 2020.
The Acting President: I take this opportunity
to extend to the judges the congratulations of the
Assembly on their election and to thank the tellers for
their assistance.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 130?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

19-010623/3
