S/PV.8965

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8965th meeting

Tuesday, 15 February 2022, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Evstigneeva. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2022/101)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-25826 (E)
*2225826*

S/PV.8965

The situation in Somalia

January National Consultative Council. The Federal
Electoral Implementation Team has signalled its intent
to fill at least two thirds of the House of the People seats
in the coming weeks. Thus far, 130 of 275 seats have
been elected, with an additional 60 seats announced for
competition shortly. I call on the electoral management
bodies, as well as Somalia’s political leaders, to
accelerate and quickly conclude the elections for the
House of the People.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia (S/2022/101)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. James Swan,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia; Mr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Head of the African
Union Mission in Somalia; and His Excellency Mr. Olof
Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/101, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Swan.
Mr. Swan: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Council on the situation
in Somalia. I am pleased to do so again, together with
the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia, Ambassador
Francisco Madeira. This underscores the important
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations in Somalia. I once again commend the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and Somali
forces for their contributions to improving security and
stability in Somalia.
National elections in Somalia are now more than one
year behind the constitutionally prescribed schedule.
Since I last briefed the Council three months ago (see
S/PV.8907), however, the Upper House elections have
concluded and the pace of the House of the People
elections has progressed considerably, following the
2/19

15/02/2022

Some 28 women — or approximately 22 per
cent — have so far been elected to the House of the
People. That falls well short of the 30 per cent women
quota Somalia’s political leaders have committed to
achieving for the two Houses of Parliament. I urge
all Somali actors to redouble their efforts to meet
that target. Thanks to the generous contributions of
Member States, the United Nations continues to provide
technical, material and advisory support to the election
management bodies, the Office of the Prime Minister,
the National Consultative Council and the women’s
Goodwill Ambassadors. As we continue to receive
reports of alleged irregularities in the electoral process,
I urge key actors to course correct to improve the
process, whenever necessary. That is vital to ensuring
that the elections receive broad acceptance among the
Somali public.
In addition to the support we provide to electoral
institutions, the United Nations continues to coordinate
with international partners to ensure joint messaging.
Together with our partners, we have consistently called
for a timely and credible electoral process that will
enable the next Government to focus on advancing
Somalia’s broader national priorities, including
security challenges, as well as the State-building and
development agenda.
While political tensions among some Somali
leaders continue to flare up sporadically, they have
so far been contained, and so have not derailed the
electoral process. However, the risk remains that a
miscalculation could cause those tensions to spill over
into conflict. The United Nations has consistently
sought to help Somalis reduce that risk by directly
engaging all parties and calling on them to address
their political differences through dialogue. Together
with our partners, we continue to advocate for restraint,
compromise and pragmatic consensus-based solutions
so that Somali leaders remain focused on completing
the elections.
22-25826

15/02/2022

The situation in Somalia

Al-Shabaab continues to pose the major security
threat in Somalia. Political divisions and prolonged
delays in the elections have allowed insurgent forces to
make some recent gains. The group’s modus operandi
remain unchanged, with Banaadir region and SouthWest state the centre of its attacks. In recent months,
operations have also intensified in Hirshabelle and
Galmudug states, as Al-Shabaab has sought to exploit
local political and security tensions. We continue
to see extensive use of improvised explosive devices
(IEDs), including a series of person-borne IEDs and
vehicle-borne IEDs, in Mogadishu in recent weeks.
With the future configuration of AMISOM currently
under review, the United Nations is actively engaged in
discussions among the Federal Government of Somalia,
the African Union and key donors. Progress was made
during the technical discussions held in Mogadishu from
27 January to 9 February, including through developing
the joint African Union-Federal Government of Somalia
concept of operations for a reconfigured Mission; the
joint African Union-United Nations proposal on a
reconfigured Mission; and the United Nations logistical
options in support of a reconfigured Mission and the
Somalia Security Forces going forward, as requested
under resolution 2568 (2021).
Progress in the implementation of the Somali
transition plan is key for both the reconfiguration of
AMISOM and to determine the pace of the transfer of
responsibilities from AMISOM to the Somali security
forces. We encourage the Federal Government of
Somalia to convene the next Somali transition plan
steering committee meeting soon to advance that
priority, in collaboration with security partners.
The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains
extremely dire, with 7.7 million Somalis requiring
humanitarian assistance in 2022. Somalia is the
most severely drought-affected country in the Horn
of Africa, with 4.3 million people impacted and
more than 270,000 people newly displaced due to
drought. With the next rains in April likely to be the
fourth below-average cycle, Somalia faces a potential
humanitarian catastrophe.
While the Somalia humanitarian operation has
the know-how to deliver life-saving aid to people in
need, it requires adequate resources. Unfortunately, the
humanitarian response plan for 2022 is currently only
2 per cent funded. While I wish to express my profound
appreciation to the donor community for its continued

S/PV. 8965

commitment to Somalia, I once again call on donors to
increase their support for urgent assistance to the most
vulnerable Somali people.
While critical, any humanitarian response is, of
course, not a long-term solution. The United Nations
family is therefore taking action to strengthen the
humanitarian, development and peacebuilding nexus.
To that end, Somali-based agencies, funds and
programmes continue to pursue a joint approach to
address challenges such as water management, finding
durable solutions, and fraud and corruption.
Implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, as well as the inclusion of young
people, remains central to our work. With support
from the Peacebuilding Fund, the United Nations and
the Government of Somalia jointly launched a new
women, peace and protection programme in November.
That project is aimed at promoting the meaningful
participation of women in peacebuilding processes,
particularly within decision-making and leadership
roles. That is an investment enabling us to implement
the women and peace and security agenda at the federal
and subnational levels, as well as to improve critical
areas such as the protection of women and girls from
sexual violence in conflict.
On the youth front, the United Nations continues
to support the Somali Government in integrating
youth dimensions in multiple areas, from electoral
participation to local reconciliation and more.
While political, security and humanitarian
conditions in Somalia are still fragile, I remain
guardedly hopeful that the country will make further
progress in those areas in the coming months and
beyond. That requires Somali leaders to put their
differences aside for the good of the Somali people and
to conclude credible elections as soon as possible. That
overdue step will then allow leaders to refocus their
efforts on the full range of urgent national priorities.
To that end, the international community continues
to accompany the Somali people on that journey by
providing the necessary support.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Swan
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to address the Security Council on the
situation in Somalia. I am pleased to be here alongside

22-258263/19

S/PV.8965

The situation in Somalia

my good friend Ambassador James Swan, Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia.
We are now 10 days away from the 25 February
deadline for the completion of the Lower House
elections. That all-important date was set by the Somali
leaders at the National Consultative Council meeting
held in January. Although that deadline may not be met,
it represents the sense of urgency and seriousness with
which the Somali leaders have committed themselves
to overcoming the odds and concluding the electoral
process as early as possible.
We encourage them to remain steadfast, since
despite the slow pace at which the process is moving, 130
members of the Lower House of the Federal Parliament
have so far been elected. We also note that 28 women
have been elected to date, representing 22 per cent of the
30 per cent quota reserved for women. As the process
continues, enhanced efforts need to be deployed to
scale that percentage up to reach the target set.
The African Union, through the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), continues to actively
engage, support and provide technical expertise to
Somalia’s ad hoc election management bodies, the
Federal Election Implementation Team and other
key election stakeholders, including the federal
member states.
In support of a swift conclusion of the ongoing
electoral process, I have continued to undertake a series
of diplomatic engagements, including meetings with
civil society representatives, state officials, opposition
leaders, and federal and regional leaders. My aim has
been to listen and learn from all stakeholders who are
making visible contributions to the advancement of the
electoral process and to encourage them to continue
doing so and to move ahead with the elections.
Somalia needs continued support from international
partners to overcome the current and emerging election
challenges. In that context, I am very encouraged that
the structural and operational difficulties faced by
states and the Electoral Dispute Resolution Committee
have been addressed. I also welcome the important role
played by the National Consultative Council meeting,
held from 3 to 9 January, in forging consensus on
resolving outstanding election issues.
Besides technical support, AMISOM has remained
focused on delivering election security. Our delivery
since November has been a three-pronged one.
4/19

15/02/2022

First, we have redoubled our training efforts in the
joint operation centres, with an emphasis on building
the capacity of Somali Police Force commanders.
Linked to that effort has also been AMISOM’s
support on intelligence, data management and
reporting — a critical element of the functioning of the
joint operation centres.
Secondly, recognizing the lead role of the Somali
Police Force in delivering election security, African
Union police now collaborate with senior Somali Police
Force leadership. Their task is to offer strategic support
on election security issues.
Thirdly, we have enhanced our operational support
and police force, with a specific focus on jointly
providing security to the Lower House election venues.
Key venues have included Banaadir, Kismaayo, Baidoa,
Dhuusamarreeb, Baraawe and Jawhar. We are presently
deployed in Garbahaarrey, ready to secure the electoral
process there.
Regrettably, the security situation in the country
continues to be a source of great concern, as Al-Shabaab
remains relentless in its destabilizing activities. Since
my most recent briefing (see S/PV.8907), we have
observed an upsurge in terrorism-related violence. The
violence has mainly been perpetrated by Al-Shabaab
through the use of improvised explosive devices
(IEDs), person-borne improvised explosive devices,
mortar attacks, ambushes and targeted assassinations
of senior Government officials, Somali security forces
and civilians.
We have also been monitoring with concern
what could be a resurgent Islamic State, as credible
reports indicate that the group carried out two IED
attacks and detonated a vehicle-borne improvised
explosive device in November 2021 and January 2022,
respectively. Besides, AMISOM is assessing multiple
reports suggesting that the Islamic State has returned
to extortion in Mogadishu.
As we continue to monitor the activities of
Al-Shabaab and the possible expansion of the Islamic
State, a clear picture is emerging. Al-Shabaab appears
emboldened by its determination to disrupt the ongoing
electoral process. The attack of 10 February at the El
Gabta junction in Mogadishu in which a convoy of
“Somaliland” election representatives was targeted is
a clear demonstration of that trend. With regard to a
possible resurgence of the Islamic State, these must be
judged within the context of Da’esh’s emerging regional
22-25826

15/02/2022

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8965

presence in East Africa, one that is characterized by a
proliferation of funds, intensified recruitment and the
transfer of terrorist tactics.

can be brought to the attention of the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council.

During the reporting period, AMISOM has
continued to focus on joint operations in support of
the Somali security forces. In December 2021, together
with the Somali security forces, key operations were
carried out in Lower Juba and Gedo, while in early
January 2022 has been devoted to consolidating the
gains of Operation Badbaado I. Similarly, in late
January, AMISOM, Somalia and the Somali National
Army, including the Danab forces, carried out a series
of operations that saw five senior Al-Shabaab figures
put out of action, with several other Al-Shabaab fighters
captured. The African Union (AU), through the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, has announced
its civilian-led stabilization activities. With the support
of the European Union and the current Government,
the Mission, in collaboration with both the Federal
Government and federal member states, has carried
out a total of 34 quick-impact and peace-strengthening
projects. Those projects, which include the provision
of health services, educational support, water and
sanitation, have all been completed and handed over to
various communities throughout Somalia.

Those documents were developed with the full
participation of the AU and the Federal Government of
Somalia and the involvement of entities recommended
by the Council. They are a true reflection of the
spirit and letter of the Somali transition plan, as they
faithfully outline and follow the dictates regarding the
operational activities, institutional capacity-building
and stabilization in the way envisaged by the plan and
in a manner that we all understand and identify with.
The documents clearly retain the idea that the mission
is a transitional mechanism aimed at enabling and
supporting the Somali Government and its security
forces to effectively take full responsibility for the
security of Somalia in a pre-established time frame,
preserve the gains accumulated with the support of
AMISOM over the years and allow for the departure of
AU forces and other mission components.

The last quarter of 2021 saw an intensification of
contacts with a view to overcoming the challenges that
stood in the way of efforts towards an agreement on
a framework for the establishment of a reconfigured
African Union mission in Somalia that would replace
AMISOM and eventually hand over full security
responsibilities to the Somali security forces. Those
challenges were successfully overcome after bilateral
discussions between the AU and the Federal Government
of Somalia led to the adoption of a nine-point approach
to future engagements in that regard.
The ensuing bilateral technical discussions, which
at the latest stage included officials of the United
Nations and the European Union, culminated in the
production of three important draft documents aimed at
providing responses to the request made by this body,
as enshrined in operative paragraphs 8 and 9 of its
resolution 2568 (2021). The draft concept of operations,
the draft joint proposals and the draft optional logistical
support contain details on the strategic objectives,
mandate, composition, size, structure, equipment,
duration and command and control of the mission.
They are documents still in the making that will have
to go through different levels of clearance before they

To achieve those lofty objectives, both the new AU
mission and the Federal Government of Somalia need to
be supported. The military component of the AU mission
and the Somali security forces must enhance their
counter-IED ability, their ability to collect and process
information and their capacity to apply the elements of
speed and surprise when acting on real-time, actionable
intelligence. The right type and an adequate number of
enablers and multipliers would be required to give the
mission’s armed component the flexibility, agility and
mobility that the transition plan is demanding and that
the mission itself needs to succeed in its targeted and
other planned joint or coordinated operations.
The achievements made around the Somali
force-generation effort should be enhanced and
consolidated over the next few months that the transfer
of security responsibility to the Somali security forces
is achieved within the projected time frame of the
new mission.
Transition is a complex process. The Friends
of Somalia involved in helping the country assume
full responsibility for its security, recover peace and
achieve reconciliation and development must continue
to pull together complementarily and united in their
common paths. There should be a clear division
of labour, transparency and accountability in the
implementation of tasks and commitments, improved

22-258265/19

S/PV.8965

The situation in Somalia

coordination and enhanced information-sharing and
mutual accountability.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: Let me extend our best wishes for the
Russian Federation presiding over the Security Council
this month.
I thank you, Madam President, for inviting the
European Union (EU) to brief the Security Council on
Somalia. This is a very timely discussion in view of
the increasing challenges in Somalia and the Horn of
Africa region. Somalia is a key country in the broader
context of stability and security in the Horn of Africa.
Despite progress notably on economic reforms, the
overall situation in Somalia continues to be extremely
fragile and volatile, hampered by political instability,
persistent
security
challenges,
socioeconomic
vulnerability, climate-induced shocks and a lack of
sustained Government presence and basic services
delivery. Against a rising trend towards violence and
extremism and the evolving threat of Al-Shabaab,
the country continues to suffer from terrorism and
transnational crime.
These factors, combined with the coronavirus
disease pandemic and an unprecedented, devastating
drought, are the main drivers of acute humanitarian
needs, with 2.9 million people internally displaced and
over 4.6 million people facing acute food insecurity
and hunger from February to May. Half of Somalia’s
population is assessed to be in immediate need of
humanitarian aid and protection, as we have heard.
It is therefore imperative to adopt a comprehensive,
nexus-based approach to create synergies between
humanitarian engagements, development efforts and
peacebuilding and reconciliation.
Somalia itself is presently at a crossroads, due to
significant shifts in regional dynamics and the factors
I have just described. The immediate priorities are
the conclusion of parliamentary elections, a peaceful
transition of power and the formation of a functioning
Government able to deliver to its population and engage,
inter alia, with the international community.
In Somalia, it is critical to put politics at the centre.
For months now, Somalia’s partners and neighbours
have continued to urge Somali leaders to work in a
spirit of compromise to overcome the last political
6/19

15/02/2022

hurdles to finalizing an inclusive electoral process as
soon as possible and respecting the agreements they
reached both on 17 September 2020 and 27 May 2021.
We note the level of progress — fewer than 50 per cent
of the 275 seats needed to finish the elections for the
House of the People within the prescribed deadline of
25 February. The people of Somalia deserve the full
dedication of their leaders to their safety, well-being
and progress.
Together with international partners, the EU has
given support to Somalia to conclude the overdue
elections and conduct an orderly and peaceful transition
of power. This will be key not only for stability, but
also for reinvigorating the overall reform dynamics,
including State-building efforts and previously agreed
milestones that have not been met, such as the review
of the provisional constitution, agreeing on the federal
model for Somalia.
In spite of the highly volatile situation experienced
in the past year, EU cooperation programmes have
continued to support State-building, security and
socioeconomic development. Since 2014, our support
has amounted to almost €1 billion in development and
humanitarian assistance.
With regard to the electoral process, last year
an immediate package benefiting civil society
of €3.5 million was released to kick-start the
implementation of the electoral agreement; actions
include civic and voter education, the establishment of
early conflict warning and response, conflict mediation,
as well as information-sharing on the electoral process.
These actions also support women’s participation
across the country.
Moving on to the security situation in Somalia
and the evolving threat of Al-Shabaab, looking more
specifically at the tools both needed and available to
provide a full spectrum solution to degrade Al-Shabaab
both on land and at sea, let me emphasize the EU’s strong
commitment to Somalia’s State-building efforts. Apart
from the contribution to development and humanitarian
assistance, as referred to earlier, our investment in the
security sector is the most substantial, with more than
€2.3 billion to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) since 2007. We have also deployed an
executive Common Security and Defence Policy
(CSDP) maritime operation — European Union Naval
Force Operation Atalanta — and two missions, the
European Union Training Mission in Somalia (EUTM
22-25826

15/02/2022

The situation in Somalia

Somalia) and the European Union Capacity Building
Mission in Somalia (EUCAP Somalia);
Operation Atalanta has successfully contributed
to the suppression of piracy off the coast of Somalia.
With the objective of consolidating and enhancing
the provision of maritime security, the mandate of
Operation Atalanta was recently extended to other
secondary executive tasks to counter the trafficking
of weapons in support of the United Nations arms
embargo, and to counter the trafficking of narcotic
drugs, as well as monitoring illicit activities at sea.
These new tasks will contribute to the ongoing fight
against Al-Shabaab and its funding streams. Our CSDP
missions in Somalia continue to support the build-up of
the Somali security forces and institutions for a gradual
takeover of security responsibilities, both on land and
off-shore, in line with the Somali transition plan.
Since its inception, EUTM Somalia has trained
over 7,000 Somali National Army (SNA) soldiers and
has been supporting the development of the Somaliowned training system that provides the SNA with the
policies, procedures and expertise to manage its own
force generation. The mission also provides strategic
advice and targeted training on enabling functions,
such as counter-improvised explosive device training,
which remains instrumental in decreasing the Somali
National Army’s dependency on AMISOM.
EUCAP Somalia has been supporting the
development of the Somali Police Force, in particular
the Federal Darwish, and its interoperability with the
Somali National Army. Over 800 Federal Darwish
officers have been now deployed to security transition
operations. EUCAP Somalia has also supported the
reopening of the INTERPOL National Central Bureau
in Mogadishu, which has now reached its initial
operational capability.
Turning to the immediate question of Somalia and
the security transition from AMISOM, let me first
underline that any progress made over the years in
Somalia has been possible thanks to AMISOM, and I
pay tribute here again to the sacrifices made by Africa’s
sons and daughters, who have paid the ultimate price in
their contribution to security in Somalia.
In line with the required Security Council mandate
requesting a reconfigured African Union (AU) mission,
there is general agreement that continued support from
an international mission on land is necessary, that more
accountability from all stakeholders is needed, and that

S/PV. 8965

the AU is best placed to continue to provide this. Let us
be clear — the EU is willing to support the continued
security presence of a reconfigured AU mission in
Somalia, but there is no support for more of the same.
This is precisely because the context has evolved,
which requires a fresh, holistic approach to addressing
the challenge posed by the mutating threat, which sees
a number of actors working more closely to deliver such
a comprehensive and integrated solution.
Despite the delays of last year, it is nevertheless a
positive sign that the parties are re-engaged, that the
Quartet — the Federal Government of Somali, the AU,
United Nations and EU — has reconvened and the work
begun by the technical teams, first in Addis Ababa,
then in Cairo and now Mogadishu. The road map
provided by the African Union anticipated this entirely,
in accordance with the timelines set by the Security
Council. We welcome also the positive spirit fostered
between the teams to conclude this process.
In parallel to the reconfiguration and plans for the
eventual drawdown of the AU Transitional Mission to
Somalia, it is essential that the Federal Government
of Somalia plan how this drawdown process can be
matched by a corresponding generation of the forces
needed. We encourage full transparency on this
going forward. As partners, we look forward also to
discussing the resources needed to deliver the Somali
transition plan. Together, these plans must be realistic,
pragmatic and focused, as well as conditions-based,
in order to ensure a measured transition between the
phases foreseen.
As regards the EU, while we continue to call on
all partners for a more balanced donor structure, the
EU commitment to supporting peace, stability and
development in Somalia is long-term.
Turning now to the maritime domain, since its
inception in 2008, Operation Atalanta has successfully
reduced the threat of piracy off the coast of Somalia,
with 171 pirates having been transferred to competent
authorities. The report of the Secretary-General of
November 2021 (S/2021/920) concluded that piracy
had indeed been suppressed but not eradicated, as
root causes remain, and that only naval presences,
such as Operation Atalanta, could ensure the needed
deterrent effect;
Operation Atalanta also has a 100-per cent success
rate in the protection of World Food Programme vessels
delivering aid to persons in need; almost 1,600 vessels

22-258267/19

S/PV.8965

The situation in Somalia

have been protected, with over 2.5 million tons of food
and aid delivered to Somalia since 2008.
We are willing to work hand-in-hand with the
Somali authorities to support their efforts on maritime
security, of course in full respect of the sovereignty
of Somalia. We hope that the Council will be able to
agree on a revised resolution that better reflects Somali
priorities, while also renewing the legal provisions
necessary for the continuation of Operation Atalanta
for at least for the remainder of this year.
We therefore count on Somalia to express its
readiness regarding a renewal of the resolution for
at least another nine months. If the resolution is not
extended beyond 3 March, Operation Atalanta will not
have the authorization to fight piracy and to protect
the deliveries of the World Food Programme and other
vulnerable vessels in the Somali territorial waters.
For the EU’s part, once the resolution is renewed
and extended, we stand ready to start discussions
with the Somali Government to define the mutually
agreed parameters of cooperation on maritime security,
including on capacity-building.
The EU remains strongly committed to further
enhancing the regional maritime security architecture,
as well as to supporting Somalia’s strategic priorities,
notably the build-up of maritime capacity and capability
and the gradual takeover by Somalia of security
responsibilities, both offshore and on land.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Skoog for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): May
I start by thanking Mr. Swan, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia, and Ambassador Skoog for
their briefings.
I want to focus my remarks today on four
topics: elections, security transition, piracy and the
humanitarian situation in Somalia.
First, on elections, the United Kingdom welcomes
the recent increase in the pace of elections to the lower
house. Completing the electoral process will prevent
prolonged political uncertainty, avoid increased risks
to Somalia’s security and stability, weaken Al-Shabaab
8/19

15/02/2022

and help to pave the way for Somalia to access muchneeded international financing. We therefore urge all
Somali political leaders to put the national interest
first, prioritize the conclusion of a peaceful, credible
electoral process and ensure that security forces are
not used as political instruments. We hope to see the
conclusion of the lower house elections by 25 February
and the achievement, as a minimum, of the target of
30 per cent of parliamentary seats won by women.
Secondly, on the security transition, I want to
underline the importance of reaching swift agreement
on a reconfigured African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) that is realistic, effective and affordable
and which can support the implementation of the
Somalia transition plan. We welcome the positive
progress made in recent weeks by the United Nations,
the African Union, the Somali Government and other
stakeholders to that end. It is critical that the process
continue at pace.
We also encourage the Federal Government of
Somalia to provide clarity on how it will generate the
forces and capacity required to implement the Somalia
transition plan. That is the best way to protect the
AMISOM successes, won by AMISOM Somali forces
at such a great cost, and address the evolving threat of
Al-Shabaab.
Thirdly, on the subject of piracy, the United
Kingdom commends the successful efforts of Somalia
and international efforts to counter piracy off the
Somali coast. We have no objection in principle to the
Federal Government of Somalia’s desire to move to a
bilateral maritime cooperation framework. However,
we support an extension of resolution 2608 (2021) until
such a framework is in place to avoid any operational
gaps, which includes ensuring that the European
Union’s Operation Atalanta can continue to function.
Finally, on the humanitarian situation, I want
to say a few words about the backdrop of the severe
humanitarian need against which those other
challenges are unfolding. The United Kingdom
recently announced $18.3 million in additional support
to address the effects of the current drought on top
of the $47.5 million humanitarian assistance already
committed. However, more funds are needed. It is vital
that we, the international community, learn the lessons
from 2017. We need to act fast to improve access to
affected populations, as well as helping to build longerterm resilience to climate shocks.
22-25826

15/02/2022

The situation in Somalia

In conclusion, there is no overnight solution to these
complex peace, security and humanitarian challenges.
However, the rapid completion of credible elections,
as agreed by the National Consultative Council last
month, will be a critical step towards keeping the vital
economic, security and constitutional reforms on track.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I join other speakers in
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. James Swan, for his briefing. I also thank
the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
Ambassador Francisco Madeira, and Ambassador Olof
Skoog for their respective updates.
The implementation of the electoral process in
Somalia has been unable to meet the deadlines for more
than a year now. Regrettably, the reporting period also
witnessed political tensions, slowing down the election
process. While there may be genuine logistical and
administrative challenges, the biggest impediment
has been the acute political differences among the
stakeholders within Somalia. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the Somali leaders should rise
above their political differences and work together to
complete the electoral process credibly and swiftly on
the basis of the 17 September 2020 and 27 May 2021
electoral agreements.
We appreciate the proactive and pragmatic
approach of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his team in the ongoing effort
to complete the electoral process. In the coming weeks,
the Somali authorities need to complete the elections to
the House of the People, by 25 February, in line with
the communiqué of the National Consultative Council.
We recognize the efforts that have been made since last
month in that direction. Smooth coordination among
the constitutional authorities remains a key factor in
concluding the electoral process, culminating in the
presidential elections.
The failure to meet the upcoming deadlines will
only strengthen the hands of adversaries of democracy
in Somalia, such as the terror group Al-Shabaab.
As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/101), the activities of Al-Shabaab increased
by 17 per cent in 2021. The frequency of its associated
operations has also intensified. This year itself,
Al-Shabaab has carried out five attacks, including four

S/PV. 8965

in Mogadishu, killing scores of people and injuring
many others.
Ambassador Madeira spoke at length about
the grave nature of the Al-Shabaab threat. We
unequivocally condemn such terrorist attacks, and
we express condolences to the families of the victims.
Terrorism is a threat not only to Somalia, but also the
whole world. Preventing terror outfits from accessing
financial resources is crucial. Equally important is to
recognize and address the linkages between terrorism
and transnational organized crime.
In that context, we need to recognize that the
fight against terrorism in Somalia cannot be sustained
without AMISOM. The contribution of AMISOM to
security and stability is immense. I would like to recall
that India contributed $1 million to the AMISOM trust
fund last year.
The international community’s support to Somalia
and the efforts of the African Union will be important
in order to ensure that the gains made by AMISOM are
not reversed. We reiterate the importance of predictable
and sustainable funding for AMISOM.
A stable security transition in Somalia demands
firm leadership and the collaboration of the Somali
Government and the African Union. The reconfiguration
of the African Union Mission in Somalia is also required
to address the security challenges. We look forward to
the joint proposal on the Somali transition plan to be
submitted to the Council in the next few weeks.
The situation in Somalia continues to be a matter of
concern. The difficult humanitarian situation calls for
the enhanced support of the international community to
the 2022 humanitarian response plan.
In conclusion, the people of Somalia have the unique
honour of being Africa’s first democrats. The current
electoral process provides an opportunity to revive that
legacy. India will continue to support Somalia and its
people in their collective desire for a stable, secure and
peaceful future.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Ghana
and Kenya.
First of all, we would like to begin by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General James
Swan; Ambassador Francisco Caetano José Madeira,

22-258269/19

S/PV.8965

The situation in Somalia

Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia; and Ambassador Olof
Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, for their respective briefings.
We also welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia, Ambassador Abukar
Osman, in this meeting.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2022/101) and welcome the progress made by the
Federal Government and all stakeholders in Somalia on
the agreed priorities of the Somalia transition plan. We
note the successful conclusion of the elections that took
place for the 54-member Upper House of the Federal
Parliament in November 2021. We also note the lack of
achievement with regard to women’s representation, as
well as the elections for the members of the 275-member
lower house, which continues to have a considerable
number of outstanding seats.
We also welcome the decisions of the National
Consultative Council conference, held in Mogadishu in
early January, and encourage the steadfast commitment
of all stakeholders to ensuring that the lower-house
elections are held by 25 February, in accordance with
the agreed timelines.
The exceedingly long electoral process is
detrimental to efforts to consolidate peace and rebuild
the economy. We urge all political actors and leaders
in Somalia to show true leadership and patriotism by
putting the country’s interests first, to de-escalate
rising political tensions and to refrain from provocation
or use of force that could undermine peace and
stability in the country. The path of the constitutional
framework must be maintained, and the actions of
the Federal Government of Somalia must focus on its
timely implementation.
While commending the Somali National Army and
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for
the progress made in their fight against Al-Shabaab
and other armed groups and in providing much-needed
security for the elections and other stabilization efforts,
we are deeply concerned about Al-Shabaab’s continuing
ability to attack and pursue a negative political agenda
against the Federal Government of Somalia and its
interests, including the electoral process. We therefore
call on the Security Council, as well as all international
partners, to assist both the Somali Federal Government
forces and AMISOM to improve their operational
capabilities, which is essential to Somalia’s stabilization
10/19

15/02/2022

and peacebuilding efforts and critical to defeating
and dismantling Al-Shabaab, its affiliates and other
terrorist networks that continue to control large swaths
of territory in Somalia, with several funding streams.
Like other terrorist groups operating in the Sahel
and Western and Southern Africa, Al-Shabaab has a
transnational character. It is key that more efforts be
undertaken to limit its ability to strike regional and
international targets and to carry out operations outside
Somalia. The Council should show a willingness to
differentiate national stabilization tools from those
intended to limit the threat posed by international
terrorism. Al-Shabaab’s use of foreign fighters, its cells
in foreign countries, its affiliation with Al-Qaida and
its transnational aims should be distinguished from
its criminal and political dimensions in Somalia. The
Council’s ability to do so may give some members of
the group greater incentive to distance themselves from
its international aims and operations.
As we anticipate the adoption of a modified
mandate for the mission in Somalia at the end of March,
we encourage the ongoing discussions on the future
of AMISOM and look forward to the submission of
clear outcome documents to the Council by 7 March,
covering the areas of the concept of operations, the
strategic plan and the logistics support plan. We note the
ongoing discussions on the potential and global funding
for the transition mission in Somalia and encourage
predictable and sustainable funding, including from the
United Nations assessed contributions.
While commending the Council for its proactive
approach to addressing humanitarian issues in Somalia,
we wish to highlight the dire humanitarian situation in
the country as a result of drought-induced destitution and
natural disasters, especially in the southern, central and
north-eastern parts of Somalia. We call on national and
international humanitarian development organizations
to scale up their efforts in those areas. We reiterate our
call for increased humanitarian assistance to Somalia,
which is urgently needed to assist the increasing
number of civilians in need, address the rise in food
insecurity, alleviate drought-induced displacement
and save lives and livelihoods. We acknowledge
and commend the work of all peacekeepers, security
personnel and the personnel of the United Nations,
the African Union and regional community and civil
society organizations that are working in Somalia for
their sacrifice and commitment to ensuring that the
22-25826

15/02/2022

The situation in Somalia

country will be able to stand on its feet and take charge
of its own development aspirations.
In conclusion, the A3 members reaffirm our
respect for and commitment to the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Somalia,
and urge the Council and other relevant partners to
continue to take that into consideration, as we work
towards bringing lasting peace and stability to Somalia.
We encourage the Federal Government of Somalia to
enhance its leadership role with regard to the transition
plan to guide all relevant partnership support.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
the briefers today for their remarks. The United States
would also like to thank the civilian and uniformed
personnel of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia, the United Nations Support Office in Somalia
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
as they implement their important mandates in an
extremely dangerous and challenging environment.
The United States reiterates its deep concern about
political and security developments in Somalia. While
we acknowledge the significant progress made since
the National Consultative Council meeting from 3 to
9 January in selecting members of the House of the
People, at the current pace Somalia will miss yet another
deadline for completing parliamentary elections.
We have also seen additional deployments of Somali
national security forces to polling locations, which
have raised new concerns about efforts to use the threat
of force to influence voting. Security forces should
have no role in determining the outcome of elections.
The rapid conclusion of elections that are
credible, further laying the groundwork for responsive
governance, is a key element to achieve sustainable
peace in Somalia, along with enhanced security and
inclusive economic growth. We call on Somalia’s
national and federal member State leaders to follow
through with their own commitments to completing the
parliamentary elections in a credible and transparent
manner by 25 February.
Turning to AMISOM, we note that the three-month
technical rollover of the mandate expires on 31 March,
and we urge all parties to meet the deadlines set in
January for completing the work necessary for a new
mandate with a reconfigured force. With the very tight
timeline, the key stakeholders must have opportunities
for review and input as early as possible.

S/PV. 8965

The United States recognizes and honours the
sacrifices made by AMISOM troops, and it is vital to
adapt the Mission to the evolving Al-Shabaab threat
and to agree on a concrete plan for a phased transition
of security responsibilities to Somali security forces.
A reconfigured African Union-led mission focused on
increasing pressure on Al-Shabaab and transitioning
security responsibility to Somali security forces is
vital. We urge all stakeholders to reach consensus on
an approach that can effectively advance peace and
stability in Somalia and gain the requisite support of
the Security Council.
The United States recognizes the Council’s
authorizations with respect to counter-piracy measures
off the coast of Somalia that expire on 3 March. We
hope that a new resolution can be adopted in the spirit
of consensus.
Finally, the United States would like to express
its concern about the unfolding drought in the Horn
of Africa, which the World Food Programme, on
8 February, called the worst in that region since 1981.
We must act with urgency to save lives. We understand
that 4.6 million Somalis, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, will face crisis or
emergency levels of food insecurity — Integrated Phase
Classification levels 3 or 4 — in the coming months.
The International Organization for Migration
predicts that between 1 million and 1.4 million people
in Somalia may be displaced by drought in the coming
six months.
We commend the work of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Swan and his team and urge
the Somali Government and stakeholders to conclude
national elections as soon as possible. That would
enable a renewed focus on the work that needs to be
done to make a peaceful, prosperous and democratic
Somalia a reality.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke
in French): I thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, James Swan; the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia, Francisco Madeira; and the
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, Olof Skoog, for their briefings.
I welcome the Permanent Representative of
Somalia, Mr. Osman, to today’ s meeting.

22-2582611/19

S/PV.8965

The situation in Somalia

15/02/2022

I would like to focus on two points: elections and
security challenges. France is concerned about the delay
in the electoral process. We call upon the Somali federal
authorities and the member states of the Federation to
conclude the electoral process as soon as possible. In
that regard, France recalls the importance of the full
participation of women as voters and as candidates
and welcomes the efforts of the Somali authorities to
achieve the 30 per cent women’s quota.

I would like to underscore the importance of
that development. France calls upon all parties to
work to ensure that the transition from AMISOM to
ATMIS is not just a change of name but also allows
for efficiency gains. It is important that the mission
be able to take more robust and better coordinated
action against Al-Shabaab, while ensuring the transfer
of responsibilities to Somali forces, based on an
ambitious timetable.

Somalia is in urgent need of a fully legitimate
Government, which can respond to all challenges
faced by the country. Insecurity and climate change
continue to exacerbate the humanitarian situation and
food insecurity. Sexual and gender-based violence
and violations against children, in particular their
recruitment, must be combated and the perpetrators
prosecuted.
Human
rights
and
international
humanitarian law must be respected by all.

France hopes that a reconfiguration proposal will
be submitted to the Security Council before 7 March
so that a decision can be taken before the end of March.

Our second priority must be to redefine the
partnership between Somalia and the international
community in order to address the security threats.
Next month, the members of the Security Council are
expected to share their views on the maritime security
situation off the coast of Somalia, as well as on the future
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
We must use this time to evaluate the measures taken to
date and seek to improve dialogue with all stakeholders,
in particular the Somali authorities.
With regard to maritime security, France welcomes
the collective efforts that have made it possible to
reduce the threat of piracy off the coast of Somalia.
As just recalled by the Head of the Delegation of the
European Union, Operation Atalanta contributed that
success and we are prepared to develop that partnership
and adapt it to Somali priorities. Nevertheless, a revised
resolution must be adopted before 3 March. We are
working closely with Somalia to that end.
The European Union is also the largest financial
supporter of the fight against Al-Shabaab. France
firmly condemns the attacks committed by that
group against civilians and humanitarian and medical
workers and against Somali and AMISOM forces. The
threat posed by the group calls for in-depth changes to
the security architecture in Somalia. We welcome the
fact that Somalia and the African Union have reached
an agreement on the principle of an African Union
transitional mission in Somalia, to be called ATMIS,
which will succeed AMISOM.
12/19

Ms. Heimerback (Norway): May I also start by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Swan and the Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union (AU) Commission
for Somalia, Mr. Madeira, for their insightful briefings.
I also thank Ambassador Olof Skoog for sharing the
perspective of the European Union.
I will highlight five key issues. First, despite
the recent progress in the electoral process, we are
concerned about its slow pace and threats to its
credibility. We condemn Al-Shabaab’s attacks and
threats against election workers and candidates.
The economic reform programme, agreed with the
International Monetary Fund, will be severely off-track
unless a new Government is formed early this year.
If so, international development finance to Somalia,
including from the World Bank, could be reduced
significantly. That will have a detrimental effect
on efforts to build peace, stability and development
in Somalia.
Norway strongly supports the work of Somali
women political rights activists to advocate for the
30 per cent women’s quota. We are concerned about
the fact the Lower House elections fall short of 2016
results. We strongly urge those responsible at all levels
to redouble their efforts in the final stage of the electoral
process. Once elected, women parliamentarians need to
be empowered and supported.
Secondly, the protection of civilians situation is
deeply worrisome. Al-Shabaab remains the largest
perpetrator of civilian casualties. However, State forces
are responsible for several civilian casualties. We urge
the Somali authorities to investigate and prosecute
sexual violence and grave violations against children,
in line with previous commitments.
22-25826

15/02/2022

The situation in Somalia

Thirdly, as noted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/101), the current drought represents a grave
threat to large parts of the Somali population. Climate
shocks and conflict have displaced 2.9 million people,
who face significant protection risks. Addressing
drought and other climate-related security risks will
require durable and sustainable interventions across
the humanitarian-development-peacebuilding nexus,
combined with long-term stabilization and development.
Fourthly, the security situation remains of great
concern, including the maritime security situation off
the coast of Somalia and in the region. We note the
delays in implementing the Somalia transition plan.
Efforts towards security sector reform must intensify
after the elections.
Building and supporting accountable local
government and its ability to deliver basic services
to the population is key to achieving justice and
security in Somalia. It also prevents the emergence
of governance vacuums that could be filled by
Al-Shabaab. In close coordination with authorities
at federal and district levels, Norway has supported
practical stabilization efforts throughout Somalia for
almost a decade. We believe those efforts contribute to
security, reconciliation and economic development and
that stabilization efforts should be given higher priority
and should be well resourced, coordinated and aligned
with realities on the ground.
Fifthly, we welcome the progress towards a
reconfigured African Union Mission in Somalia
achieved in the recent discussions between the
AU Commission and the Federal Government of
Somalia. We look forward to the joint United NationsAU proposal.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Swan,
Special Representative Madeira and, of course, my
colleague Ambassador Skoog for their briefings.
As we have heard today, we are now witnessing one
of the region’s most severe droughts in recent history and
a deepening humanitarian crisis. The statistics outlined
by Mr. Swan earlier today are shocking. Millions are
hungry and many have had to flee their homes. That
compounds the many political and security challenges,
including climate-related security risks, that confront
Somalia. Those harsh realities must surely focus all
minds around the table today.

S/PV. 8965

As an international community, we have a clear
responsibility to step up and support the Somali people.
That includes providing the needed additional funding
and facilitating financial flows and doing that now.
We must build on the lessons learned when famine
was averted in 2017, while also recalling our collective
failure in 2011. Back then, famine took hold in very
similar circumstances to today’s.
Today’s crisis requires a major humanitarian and
political effort, to which Ireland will contribute. We
condemn all attacks on humanitarian workers and
goods, including diversion by profiteers. Safe and
unrestricted humanitarian access must be guaranteed
throughout the country so that life-saving support can
reach those most in in need.
The unfolding humanitarian catastrophe coincides
with a moment when we are finally seeing progress
towards completing elections. That is welcome.
Nevertheless, I once again call on the Somali authorities
to make the final push to get the process over the line
fairly and with transparency. The Government can then
return to the core business of delivering for the Somali
people. We hope that the elections will be concluded
swiftly and their results accepted without the threat or
use of violence.
Since Ireland joined the Council, we have
emphasized the need for women to play an equal part
in political life and in the public sphere in Somalia.
We believe that such participation will lead to a better,
fairer and safer country for all Somali people. I echo
Special Representative Swan’s call today for the Somali
Government to meet its 30 per cent women’s quota. That
would be an encouraging step on the road to gender
equality that could be built on in the next elections,
when we hope the polls will be run on the basis of one
person, one vote.
We condemn the rising number of attacks by
Al-Shabaab over the past year that have targeted
those involved in elections. Those attacks continue
to disproportionately affect civilians and, tragically,
children. We condemn the reported widespread sexual
and gender-based violence targeted against women and
girls. We need to see the Somali authorities protect
civilians, ensure accountability and provide services
for all victims and survivors of those heinous crimes.
I echo the Secretary-General in calling on the Somali
authorities to adopt a new national action plan to
prevent and respond to sexual violence in conflict. That

22-2582613/19

S/PV.8965

The situation in Somalia

15/02/2022

horrific situation for all women and girls in Somalia
must be ended.

(AMISOM) troops, as well as its attempts to disrupt
electoral activities.

Ireland looks forward to participating actively in
discussions on a future African Union (AU) mission
in Somalia. We welcome the recent agreement on a
framework proposal and look forward to seeing detailed
plans, which should pragmatically take into account the
realities today on the ground and in the wider context.
The Somali Government needs to put in place realistic
plans for the generation of forces to allow the eventual
drawdown of the AU Transitional Mission to Somalia.
Part of that context, of course, is maritime security.
We hope that consensus will swiftly be found on the
renewal of the resolution on maritime security off the
coast of Somalia (resolution 2608 (2021)).

As AMISOM’s mandate expires, it is crucial that the
Somali Government, the African Union and the United
Nations reach consensus on the strategic objectives,
size and composition of a new mission that can better
address the threat from Al-Shabaab while charting a
realistic path for the handover of responsibilities to
Somali security forces. It is important for the technical
work among the parties to be completed as soon as
possible and for the necessary documentation to be
ready to present a collective proposal to the Security
Council in a timely manner.

Finally, as Mr. Skoog said this morning, the
European Union has been and will continue to be a
strong supporter of Somalia and its people. We look
forward to working together on finding a way forward.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Representatives Swan and
Madeira, as well as the Head of the European Union
delegation, for their presentations. I also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Somalia.
I
will
focus
my
remarks
on
three
aspects — the political situation, the security situation
and the humanitarian situation.
First, Mexico takes note of the commitments
agreed concerning electoral matters during the
National Consultative Council meeting held in January.
The Somali authorities need to build on that progress,
maintain focus on the electoral process and proceed to
implement the agreed decisions.
A fair, timely, inclusive and transparent electoral
process is absolutely necessary to secure the support
and confidence of the Somali people. Similarly, the
full inclusion and representation of women in political
life is fundamental to achieving peace and sustainable
development in Somalia. That is why we reiterate our
call for the minimum quota of 30 per cent women’s
representation in the Lower House to be met.
The security situation in the country remains
uncertain and unstable, largely as a result of
Al-Shabaab’s activities. We strongly condemn the
group’s attacks on civilians, humanitarian personnel,
Somali forces and African Union Mission in Somalia
14/19

Finally, as we have heard, it is extremely troubling
that millions of people in Somalia are suffering as a
result of the escalation of their humanitarian needs. That
is very much a consequence of one of the worst droughts
in recent years. It is an unfortunate example of how
climate change can be a factor in exacerbating security
issues, while simultaneously exacerbating humanitarian
needs. The Council therefore can no longer avoid
integrating the risk that climate change poses to peace
and security into its responses and must incorporate it,
without hesitation, as a necessary component of United
Nations conflict-prevention strategies.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Swan; the
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia, Mr. Madeira; and the
Head of the European Union Delegation to the United
Nations, Mr. Skoog, for their comprehensive briefings.
I would like to emphasize the commitment of the
United Arab Emirates to working and cooperating with
the United Nations and the international community
to take joint measures to promote peace, prosperity
and stability in Somalia. We commend in that regard
the tireless efforts of the African Union Mission in
Somalia, the United Nations Support Office in Somalia
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
to provide the necessary support for Somalia.
Today’s meeting comes at a time when Somalia
is suffering from difficult humanitarian, security and
environmental conditions that require comprehensive
international efforts aimed at addressing all challenges.
Accordingly, the United Arab Emirates would like to
highlight the following four points.
22-25826

15/02/2022

The situation in Somalia

First, the focus should be on supporting the
political track as a basis for achieving sustainable
peace in Somalia. We encourage all parties to engage
in positive dialogue, giving priority to the holding of
inclusive elections that meet the hopes and aspirations
of the Somali people.
Here we refer to the positive developments achieved
in the political process by the holding of elections for
all Senate seats, as well as the National Consultative
Council reaching a consensus on electoral procedures
and its decision to expedite the holding of the People’s
Assembly elections by 25 February. We hope that the
ratio of women participating in political life and in
electoral processes in Somalia will be increased to
achieve the desired quota of 30 per cent, as stated in the
electoral agreement. We also stress the importance of
ensuring the safety and protection of women candidates
for political office.
Secondly, we refer to the call made by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2022/101) on the importance of
providing assistance to Somalia to address the security
threats that prevent the building of a sustainable peace,
particularly the Al-Shabaab terrorist movement, which
continues to launch attacks and seeks to weaken the
influence of the security forces by controlling large
parts of the territories of central and southern Somalia.
In the context of the recent progress made in the
talks among stakeholders on the reconfiguration of
AMISOM, we stress that this process must be carried
out accurately, especially with regard to ensuring
the transfer of security responsibilities to the Somali
security forces through calculated steps that prevent
the creation of a vacuum for the Al-Shabaab movement
to consolidate its control or expand its scope.
Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in Somalia
continues to deteriorate owing to the frequency of
acts of violence and natural disasters, which has led
to an increase in internal displacement and deprived
approximately 3 million Somalis of access to many
basic services. We stress here the importance of the
full, safe and unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid
while providing protection for humanitarian workers.
Fourthly, in the context of Somalia facing a natural
disaster emergency, we urge the United Nations,
AMISOM and its partners to support Somalia in
addressing the impact of climate change, which has led
to increased food insecurity. It is possible here to work
on expanding the use of renewable energy in peace

S/PV. 8965

processes, which my country sees as an important
step in reducing the impact of climate change, not to
mention its low cost and benefits to local communities.
My country commends the effective measures
being taken to combat piracy as well as other steps,
which are evidence of what can be achieved through
strengthening partnerships and multilateral action in
facing regional and international challenges and issues
while promoting international peace and security.
In conclusion, my country calls on the international
community to reaffirm its commitment to the Somali
people in order for them to achieve security, stability
and prosperity.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): May I start my
intervention by thanking Special Representative James
Swan, Special Representative Francisco Madeira and
Ambassador Olof Skoog for their briefings. Let me also
welcome Ambassador Abukar Osman to this meeting.
I will focus my remarks today on two issues:
elections and security.
As regards the first issue, Brazil welcomes the
significant electoral achievements that Somalia has
demonstrated so far. We have closely followed each
step of that process and carefully studied the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2022/101), which welcomes
the progress made towards the implementation of both
the 17 September 2020 and the 27 May 2021 agreements
on elections.
By acknowledging the crucial completion of the
Upper House process, we hope that the House of the
People elections will follow the same pattern.
We call on Somali society to perceive the 26 per
cent of female representatives elected to the Upper
House as a landmark accomplishment that should
push women’s representation in the politics of Somalia
further forward.
The second issue on which I will focus today
is security. Let me reaffirm Brazil’s firm rejection
and condemnation of terrorism. May I also thank the
troops of the African Union Mission in Somalia and
the Somali armed forces for their brave and vital
daily work in a situation that, as we all know, remains
volatile and dangerous. Moreover, we wish to express
our condolences to the victims of the recent terrorist
attacks, especially those in Banaadir, Jubaland,

22-2582615/19

S/PV.8965

The situation in Somalia

South West and Hirshabelle, as well as those in and
around Mogadishu.
While Brazil fully endorses the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia for the
protection of children in armed conflict and deems
crucial the partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union on this priority issue, we are deeply
concerned at the alarming levels of grave violations
against children reported by Special Representative
Gamba de Potgieter. The mortars launched in Baidoa
on 27 November — which even reached the United
Nations compound — demonstrate the threat that
terrorism poses to political stability. Al-Shabaab
claimed the attack and made it clear that it planned the
action for the first day of elections for the House of the
People in the city.
The decisive interplay between the electoral process
and stability in Somalia is an additional point that I
want to raise. We understand that the health concerns
since 2020 were the main cause of the elections delays.
However, postponed elections, empty legislative seats
and stretched terms all pose risks to political stability.
The threat posed by Al-Shabaab endangers this
scenario even more. That is why Brazil supports the
landmark agreements on elections and urges Somalia
to fully implement them and conclude its selection
of representatives. We also hope that all political
actors — national and local stakeholders — will prioritize
the stability of the federation over the following months.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, James
Swan; the Special Representative of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head
of the African Union Mission in Somalia, Mr. Francisco
Caetano Jose Madeira; and the Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, Olof
Skoog, for their briefings. I welcome the presence of
Ambassador Osman, Permanent Representative of
Somalia, at this meeting.
Recently the Somali parties have been moving
forward with the electoral process, against all odds.
The National Consultative Council, at its meeting in
early January, decided to enhance the electoral process
and expedite its progress. The parties finally settled
their differences through dialogue and consultation,
marking an important step towards the implementation
of the 17 September 2020 and 27 May 2021 agreements.
16/19

15/02/2022

We encourage the Somali parties to continue to put
the greater good of the country first, exercise restraint,
overcome their differences and move forward with the
elections as agreed, so as to create enabling conditions
for national reconstruction.
After 30 years of war, Somalia is facing a multitude
of severe challenges. The international community
should respect the Somali-led and Somali-owned
approach, show the necessary patience and provide
constructive assistance to the Somali elections and
State-building instead of exerting excessive pressure at
every turn.
The security situation in Somalia remains volatile.
So far this year, dozens of people have been killed in
Al-Shabaab’s violent terrorist attacks. The African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has long been
making great sacrifices to secure and stabilize Somalia.
China would like to pay tribute to all the peacekeepers.
Somalia and the African Union (AU) have reached
an agreement on the reconfiguration of AMISOM. We
look forward to an engagement between the United
Nations Secretariat and the Somali Government, the
AU, major donors and other parties so as to present
a realistic and actionable report on the size and
composition of the reconfigured AMISOM and the
logistical support for the Mission in support of the
implementation of the transition plan.
The Council can refer to such a report when
contemplating future decisions. China calls on
the major contributors to keep up sustainable and
predictable funding for AMISOM in order to avoid
funding gaps that might affect the Mission’s counterterrorism operations. The future of Somalia must be
owned by Somalians.
As Somalia’s security sector transition moves into
a new phase, it is incumbent upon the international
community to scale up its support for Somalia and
help it develop the capacity needed to keep the country
secure as soon as possible. At the same time, we should
firmly support Somalia in safeguarding its national
sovereignty and territorial integrity by combating
separatist acts.
Somalia currently faces a dire humanitarian crisis.
The worst droughts in 30 years have caused crop
failure, killed livestock and sent prices soaring, with
70 per cent of the population living below the poverty
22-25826

15/02/2022

The situation in Somalia

line and nearly half of the population in urgent need of
humanitarian assistance.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs recently announced a $1.5 billion humanitarian
response plan for 2022. China calls on the international
community to increase funding and provide emergency
humanitarian supplies to the Somali people, including
food, water and coronavirus disease vaccines. At the
same time, we should recognize the role of development
in improving the humanitarian and security situation
and help Somalia overcome its governance challenges,
improve its development capacities in order to become
self-reliant, create jobs and growth and eliminate the
root causes of conflict.
Somalia is an important country in the Horn of
Africa and its peace and stability is pivotal for regional
dynamics. In order to help the countries of the region,
including Somalia, to meet the triple challenge of
security, development and governance, China has put
forward an initiative of peaceful development in the
Horn of Africa. China will continue to firmly support
the countries of the region in exploring development
paths that cater to their national realities, support the
proper handling of ethnic, religious and border disputes
in the African way and support efforts to build a united,
stable and harmonious environment for development in
the Horn of Africa. China is confident that Somalia and
other countries of the region will be able to take the
destiny of their countries and the region into their own
hands through their own hard work and that enduring
peace, order and stability shall prevail in the Horn
of Africa.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special Representative
Swan, Ambassador Madeira and Ambassador Skoog,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations, for their insightful remarks
and recommendations.
Albania follows with the utmost attention the
ongoing situation in Somalia, a pivotal country for
the Horn of Africa, a region that is facing several
persistent challenges.
I would like to highlight several points.
First, Albania looks forward to the completion
of the electoral process without further delays and
welcomes the 9 January political agreement. We call
on all parties to fulfil their responsibilities and not
jeopardize the success of the elections. We believe that

S/PV. 8965

a transparent and credible electoral process in Somalia
will spur the development of the country and ensure its
security, stability and greater well-being for its people.
Democracy is far more than simple elections. It
is a day-by-day arduous construction. All groups and
components of Somali society must be adequately
represented, especially those whose voices are still not
being heard. We take note of the improvement in the
women’s quota in the Upper House, and we encourage
Somali authorities to confirm their commitment by
raising their representation to at least 30 per cent, as
agreed, in the House of the People. We should not
settle for less, but ask for more, until women can
fully enjoy their lawful rights free from threats and
violence and provide their unquestionable contribution
to the consolidation of democracy and a more
prosperous society.
Secondly, we take note of the encouraging outcome
of the meeting among the African Union Commission
for Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Federal Government of Somalia
on the nature and procedures of the incipient African
Union Transitional Mission to Somalia (ATMIS).
Given that AMISOM’s mandate ends on 31 March,
we call on all stakeholders to spare no effort in working
out the technical details, particularly with regard to
operational and financial aspects of the new Mission.
ATMIS must be able to effectively meet the challenges
ahead and, ultimately, pass the security torch to Somali
security forces.
Thirdly, Albania strongly condemns Al-Shabaab’s
attacks and the ongoing clashes of traditional and
non-traditional actors. Last month, the increase in
number and intensity of terrorist activities led to
an exponential rise in innocent victims. The violent
extremism threat needs to be tackled firmly through
the cooperation of all national and international
stakeholders in order to prevent the security vacuum
from being quickly filled by old and new terrorist groups.
While acknowledging the progress made by
Mogadishu, we must not let down our guard when it
comes to maritime security. As our Somali partners
often highlight, it is not only a matter of combating the
phenomenon of piracy but also, and more importantly,
of fighting all kinds of criminal activities in the
entire region.

22-2582617/19

S/PV.8965

The situation in Somalia

Lastly, Albania follows with deep concern the dire
humanitarian situation in the country. Somalis have
endured decades of conflict, recurrent climate shocks,
including severe droughts, and disease outbreaks. No
efforts should be spared in ensuring humanitarian
assistance and protection to the almost 8 million
people in need. Against that backdrop, special focus
should be placed on women, especially youth, who
face a heightened risk of sexual violence, harassment
and abuse.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s concerns
over the grave violations of children’s rights. The
recruitment of children and attacks on schools and
hospitals cut the younger generation off at the knees
and sign their condemnation. Such acts must be
stopped and cannot be tolerated. Albania stands by the
Somali people and calls on all stakeholders and parties
involved to step up efforts for a more stable, secure and
prosperous Somalia.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We thank Mr. James Swan, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia; Mr. Francisco
Caetano José Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) for their thorough briefings. We
listened to the information provided by Ambassador Olof
Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations. We welcome the participation in
this meeting of Mr. Abukar Dahir Osman, Permanent
Representative of Somalia.
We studied closely the latest report of the Secretary
General (S/2022/101). Somalia continues to move
forward with the electoral process. Elections for the
Upper House of the Federal Parliament were held
in October 2021 and voting for the Lower House is
in full swing. We trust that soon the country will be
able to complete the electoral process in accordance
with the Somalia-wide agreements of 17 September
2020 and 27 May 2021. We urge all branches of the
Somali Government to resolve all disputes exclusively
through dialogue.
We welcome the contribution made by AMISOM
and the Office of Mr. Swan in resolving tensions within
the Federal Government of Somalia in late December
18/19

15/02/2022

and early January. We call on United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia to pay more attention to preventing
such situations, including through engagement with
regional administrations. We hope that all participants
in the Somali political process will continue to work
together to establish a stable federal structure in the
country. The territorial integrity and unity of Somalia
must be preserved.
The security situation in Somalia remains tense.
We are concerned about the significant increase in the
activities of Al-Shabaab, which controls vast areas of
southern and central Somalia. Its fighters continue to
conduct high-profile attacks with large numbers of
victims, including terrorist attacks in cities and attacks
on AMISOM and Somali National Army positions and
bases. We note the efforts of the Somali Government
and other countries of the region in the fight against
terrorism, which constitutes a cross-border threat.
We note some progress in discussions over the
shared position of the African Union and the Federal
Government of Somalia concerning the future security
architecture in the country. We await the report on the
outcome of the work of the international task force on
preparations for the Mission’s new configuration, its
updated concept of operations and the road map for
logistical support.
We call for a balanced approach to the
reconfiguration of AMISOM. It is vital that the views
and priorities of the host country be duly taken into
account. The transfer of responsibility for security to
the Somali National Army must take place gradually in
line with the actual situation on the ground.
We are convinced that in the current conditions of
the ongoing terrorist threat it is premature to talk about
the drawdown of the African peacekeeping mission. We
agree with regional leaders that ensuring the adequate,
predictable and sustainable funding of the Mission
should be a priority. We support the Security Council
considering various options for the international
community to provide additional assistance to the
efforts of the Somalis and AMISOM.
We call on the United Nations and international and
regional partners to continue to support Somalia, while
fully respecting the country’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence and without
interfering in its internal affairs.
22-25826

15/02/2022

The situation in Somalia

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): I would like to extend
to you, Madam President, and the delegation of the
Russian Federation our warmest congratulations and
best wishes for success during your presidency of
the Security Council this month. I would also like to
acknowledge the presence of Mr. James Swan, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia;
Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia; and Ambassador Olof Skoog, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
I thank them for their comprehensive briefings.
The Federal Government of Somalia is pleased to
report that in the past few weeks 45 per cent of the House
of the People has been elected across all federal member
states. That steady progress underlines the fact that the
Federal Government of Somalia is committed to a free,
transparent, credible and inclusive electoral process.
The recent convening of the National Consultative
Council was successfully completed. It provided an
opportunity to address concerns submitted by leaders
of the federal member states, opposition candidates
and civil society. As a result, the agreed rectification
enabled timely progress to the current level of elected
members. The electoral process has regained its
momentum, credibility and trust among the people of
Somalia, and we are adamant about concluding the
electoral process in the shortest time possible.
On the security developments, we had high-level
consultations with the African Union (AU) and signed
an agreement outlining the principles and modalities
for the new transition mission, in which a clear road
map was agreed to deliver three key tasks, as stipulated
in resolution 2568 (2021), namely, a joint concept
of operations, a joint proposal for a new mission and
options for a logistical support plan.
Our recent Federal Government of Somalia, AU
and African Union Mission in Somalia technical teams
concluded a week-long consultation in Addis Ababa
on a strategic objective and the parameters for the
new AU transition mission in Somalia, which focused

S/PV. 8965

on the new expected mandate, the strategic end state,
key objectives, the composition, benchmarks, the exit
strategy and transition phases.
We now have in sight a new mission that will be
agile, mobile and able to fight effectively, but also
whose capability will correspond to the threat levels
in Somalia, guided by the Somali transition plan. Our
objective and priority during the transition phase will
be to strengthen the building of well-trained, equipped,
affordable and self-sustaining Somali security forces.
With those outlined objectives, we can commit to
assuming full security responsibility across Somalia.
Our commitment to our security is not limited to
the land, but includes our national waters. I am pleased
to report that the Office of the Attorney General of
Somalia has been carrying out specialized and rigorous
maritime training for prosecutors, judges, the coast
guard and police and criminal investigation divisions
over the past four years at the level of the federal
member states. We have accelerated our efforts to
build and capacitate our maritime law enforcement
agencies and have established a specialized maritime
unit to specifically deal with international maritime
crime, including the rampant, illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing in Somali waters.
Considering that it is near the end of the three-month
technical rollover of resolution 2608 (2021), we are
pleased about the planned termination of the anti-piracy
Security Council resolution on 3 March. The Federal
Government of Somalia reiterates that it will no longer
request any renewal or modification of that resolution,
since it has successfully achieved its intended objectives
after nearly 15 years. We convey our gratitude for the
collective efforts of our international partners over
the past and recent decades to eradicate the threat of
piracy and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia. We
will continue to work on the security of our maritime
domain and sustainable development in line with the
Somali national priorities.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I will now
adjourn the meeting so that the Council can continue its
discussion on the subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at noon.

22-2582619/19
