VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief and to
report, through the Economic and Social Council, to thc
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth session the ítem entitled "Elimination of ali
forms of religious intolerance" and to consider the report
of the Commission on Human Rights in the context of
that item.
100th p/enary meeting
/ 6 Decemher I 983

38/111.

Implications of scientific and technological
developments for human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/53 of 14 December 1978, in
which it requested the Commission on Human Rights to
urge the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to undertake, as a matter
of priority, a study of the question of the protection of
those detained on the grounds of mental ill-health, with a
view to formulating guidelines,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 351130 B of 11 December
1980, 36/56 B of 25 November 1981 and 37/188 of 18
December 1982, in which it noted with satisfaction the
progress made by the Sub-Commission and urged the
Commission on Human Rights and the Sub-Commission
to continue and expedite their consideration of this question, so that the Commission could submit its views and
recommendations to the General Assembly at its thirtyninth session, through the Economic and Social Council.
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1983/37 of 27 May 1983 and Commission on Human
Rights resolution 1983/44 of 9 March 1983, 144
Noting that the Commission on Human Rights will not
be in a position to submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session through the Economic and
Social Council, as requested in Assembly resolution 3 7/
188, because it was impossible for the Sub-Commission to
conclude at its thirty-sixth session its consideration of the
draft body of guidelines, principies and guarantees, 146
Reaffirming its conviction that detention of persons in
mental institutions on account of their political views or
on other non-medical grounds is a violation of their
human rights,
Noting with satisfaction the progress made by the SubCommission in its consideration of the draft body of
guidelines, principies and guarantees submitted to it,
Again urges the Commission on Human Rights and,
through it, the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to expedite their
consideration of the draft body of guidelines, principies
and guarantees, so that the Commission can submit its
views and recommendations, including a draft body of
guidelines, principies and guarantees, to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session, through the Economic and
Social Council.
/O0th plenar)I meeting
/6 Decemher 1983
146 lhid., chap. XVII.

38/112.

211

Human rights and scientific and technolog1cal developments

rhc eicneral .. L11c111h/_1.
Nol1t1K that scicntitic and technological progress is one
of the importan! factor, in thc drvdopmcnt of huni;m
socicty,
Not1ng once agai11 thc grcat importance of the Dcclaration 011 the Use ofScientitic and Tcchnological Progrcss in
thc lnterests of Peace and for thc Benefit of Mankind.
adoptcd by the General Assembly in its rcsolution 3 'l84
(XXX) of IO Novcmbcr 1975.

Considering that implcmentation ofthe said Declaration
will con tribute to the strcngthening of international pcacc
and the security of pcoples and to thcir cconomic and
social development, as wcll as to international cooperation in the ficld of human rights.
Seriouslv concerned that the results of scientifie and
technologi'cal progress could be used for the arms racc. to
the detriment of international pcace and security and
social progress. human rights and fundamental freedoms
and thc dignity of thc human person.
Recognizing that the establishment of the ncw intcrnational economic order calls in particular for an important
contribution to be made by scicnce and ll'chnology to cconomic and social progress.
Bcaring in mind that the exchangc and transler of scientific and technological knowlcdgc is onc of the importan!
ways to accelerate the social and economic dcvelopment of
thc developing countries.
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of thc Sccrctary-General on human rights and scicntitic and technological developments, 11 •
1. ,<,;tresscs the ímportance of thc implemcntation by
ali States of the provisions and principies containcd in tlw
Declaration on the Use of Scientific and Technological
Progress in the lnterests of Peace and for thc lknelit of
Mankind in ordcr to promote human rights ami limdamental freedoms;

2. Ca/Is upon ali States to makc every cffort to use the
achicvements of science and technology in order to p, o•·
mote peaceful social. cconomie and cultural devl'lop1m·n1
and progress;
3. Requests the specralized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to takc into accou11t
in their programmes and activities the provisions of the
Declaration;
4. lnl'ites those Member States. specializcd agencies
and other organizations of thc Unitcd Nations systcm that
have not yet done so to submit their information pursuant
to General Assembly resolution JSil 30 A of 11 Dccernhc1
1980;
5. Rcquests the Commission on Human Rights to pay
special attention, in its consideration of the item entitlcd
"Human rights and scicntific and technological dcvelopments". to the question of thc implementation of the provisions of the Declaration. taking into considcration the
information subrnittcd by Member States. spccializcd
agencies and othcr organi/ations of thc linited Nations
system purs11ant to (,etl\'ral Asscmbly rcsolution .15, 1.m

A:
