S/PV.9143

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9143rd meeting

Friday, 30 September 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-60738 (E)
*2260738*

S/PV.9143

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

a shadow of doubt, exactly that. We are talking about
a United Nations State Member, a Security Council
member, attempting to annex part of another through
force. The outcomes of those sham referendums were
predetermined in Moscow — and everybody knows it.
They were held behind the barrel of Russian guns.

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/720, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Albania and the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States
America): Yesterday the Secretary-General said,

of

“The United Nations Charter is clear: any
annexation of a State or a territory by another
State resulting from the threat or use of force is
a violation of the principles of the United Nations
Charter and international law”.
That very violation is what we are confronted with
today. The United States has proposed a draft resolution
(S/2022/720), with Albania, to condemn the illegal socalled referendums held on Ukrainian territory. The
draft resolution is straightforward. It condemns those
illegal referendums. It calls on all States to not recognize
any altered State of Ukraine. And it requires that Russia
withdraw its troops from Ukraine immediately.
We have heard from many members over the past
few days that they felt the process was rushed. Let me
be clear: what was rushed was the Russian illegal act
to annex Ukrainian territory. As the Council we had
to respond. This is exactly what the Security Council
was made to do: defend sovereignty, protect territorial
integrity, promote peace and security. The United
Nations was built on an idea that never again would one
country be allowed to take another’s territory by force.
That path, we agreed, leads to history’s most horrific
outcomes. Russia’s attempted annexations are, without
2/11

30/09/2022

Time and time again we have seen the Ukrainian
people fight for their country and their democracy — the
Ukrainian civilian who removed a Russian landmine
with his bare hands; the Ukrainians abroad who returned
to fight for their country; the soldiers sacrificing their
lives to stop Russian advances. Putin miscalculated
the resolve of the Ukrainians. The Ukrainian people
have demonstrated loud and clear that they will never
accept being subjugated to Russian rule. And so the
United States will never recognize any territory Russia
attempts to seize or allegedly annex as anything other
than part of Ukraine. Secretary-General Guterres has
said the same. He said yesterday,
“Any decision to proceed with the annexation of
the Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhya
regions of Ukraine would have no legal value and
deserves to be condemned”.
I repeat: deserves to be condemned.
The Secretary-General then said that it went against
“the purposes and principles of United Nations.
It is a dangerous escalation. It has no place in the
modern world.”
It has no place in the modern world.
We all have an interest in defending the
sacred principles of sovereignty and territorial
integrity — in defending peace in our modern world.
All of us understand the implications for our own
borders, our own economies and our own countries if
those principles are tossed aside. This is also bigger
than any one nation, large or small. It is about our
collective security — our collective responsibility to
maintain international peace and security, not just for
ourselves but for the world. That is what this body is
here to do.
We are the first line of defence for the United
Nations Charter, and we must demonstrate that we take
that defence seriously. We must show that the Council
can work despite the actions of one permanent member.
This is not a moment to stand on the sidelines. This is a
moment to stand up for the United Nations Charter, for
22-60738

30/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

its values, for its principles and for its purposes. And
if Russia chooses to shield itself from accountability,
then we will take further steps in the General Assembly
to send an unmistakable message to Moscow that the
world is still on the side of defending sovereignty and
protecting territorial integrity.
Earlier today, we saw Putin celebrate this clear
violation of international law. He threw a party on
Red Square to pat himself on the back for these illegal
referendums. He is gloating and reminiscing about the
Soviet empire and stated that this was just the beginning.
As we all sit in this Chamber and solemnly consider
this draft resolution, Putin is instead boastfully shoving
our shared values in our faces. It is time we stand up to
defend our collective beliefs together.
In defence of these principles that we hold dear, the
United States is putting forward this draft resolution
with Albania. In defence of all countries to have the
right to be safe from invasion and annexation, we are
voting in favour. And in defence of the world’s collective
peace and security, we urge all other members to vote
in favour as well. Let us show Putin the resolve of the
Security Council.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Russia’s annexations further jeopardize the prospects
for peace and fundamentally undermine the purposes
and principles of the United Nations. The area Russia
is claiming to annex is more than 90,000 square
kilometres. This is the largest forcible annexation of
territory since the Second World War.
There is no middle ground on this. It is, in the end,
a very simple question of principle, as the SecretaryGeneral has said. As members of the Security Council
with the responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security and upholding the United Nations
Charter, we must condemn Russia’s actions and vote in
favour of draft resolution S/2022/720.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are forced to note that some of our
colleagues in the Security Council have reached a new
low. Even the few vestiges of decorum that, it seemed to
us, remained in this Chamber have been violated. I do
not know of any other examples of the Security Council
adopting a draft resolution that directly condemns one
of the members of the Council.
Tell me: does the Council seriously expect Russia
to consider and support such a draft? And if not, then

S/PV.9143

it turns out that the Council is intentionally pushing us
to use the right of the veto in order to then wax lyrical
about the fact that Russia abuses this right. Such openly
hostile actions on the part of the West are a refusal to
engage and cooperate within the Council.
It is a refusal of practices and experience gained
over many years. It is nothing more than a low-grade
provocation with a goal that is clear to all.
On 27 September, we already spoke in detail of the
reasons and the purposes for carrying out referendums
in the Donetsk and Luhansk Republics, as well as in
the Kherson and Zaporizhzhya regions (see S/PV.9138).
On 28 September, the final votes were tallied. The
overwhelming majority of those who voted — 99 per
cent in the Donetsk People’s Republic, 98 per cent in the
Luhansk People’s Republic, 93 per cent in Zaporizhzhya
and 87 per cent in the Kherson region — supported the
integration of these regions into Russia. Despite the
challenging security situation and the provocations of
the Kyiv regime, the overwhelming majority of voters
decided to vote in favour, ranging from 76 per cent
in the Kherson region to 97 per cent in the Donetsk
People’s Republic.
The results of the referendum speak for themselves.
The residents of these regions do not want to return to
Ukraine. They have made an informed and free choice
in favour of our country. The referendums were carried
out in full conformity with the norms and principles
of international law, no matter how our Western
opponents, or even the Secretary-General — who,
suddenly, without having a mandate to do so, decided
to speak on behalf of the entire United Nations — may
try to prove otherwise. More than 100 international
observers — from Italy, Germany, Venezuela and
Latvia — who observed the referendum also recognized
its outcome as legitimate.
Washington, which today is the loudest to criticize
us and to speak of the territorial integrity of Ukraine,
recently declared that they were willing to use force to
protect Taiwan, which is an integral part of the People’s
Republic of China. This is just another glaring example
of double standards.
Today treaties were signed on the accession of
these new regions into the Russian Federation. After
their endorsement by the Russian parliament and the
signing of the presidential decrees, the will of the
residents of Donbas, Zaporizhzhya and Kherson to
reunite with Russia will be fulfilled. There will be no

22-607383/11

S/PV.9143

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

turning back, as today’s draft resolution (S/2022/720)
would try to impose.
The regime in Kyiv, which has put the interests
of its Western sponsors above the interests of its own
people, pushed these regions away from itself, and it is
to blame for this outcome. The Maidan authorities seem
not to have drawn any conclusions so far.
Today we have witnessed yet another atrocity
carried out by the Kyiv regime. The Ukrainian Nazis
have fired on a column of people who were waiting
for permits to enter territory under our control in
Zaporizhzhya, and there have been dozens of deaths.
I want to note that the Council did have the
opportunity to adopt a truly balanced and useful
document. We constructively proposed amendments
that many of those present in the Chamber today
would have supported — amendments on the fact
that it is necessary to respect both the territorial
integrity of all Member States and the principle of
the self-determination of peoples, in accordance
with the Charter and the Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations of 1970; and about the
fact that, pursuant to documents of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, which, by the way,
all Western States have signed, the security of States is
indivisible, and no one State must strengthen its own
security at the expense of the security of others’.
We propose noting the objective fact that members
of the Council have different assessments of the
outcome of the referendums. And who can argue with
the fact that the free expression of the will of the people
is an essential element of a democratic society? Perhaps
those for whom, in the case of Kosovo, no referendum
was necessary, can.
Finally, we proposed having the draft reflect the
Council’s call to all parties to intensify the search for
a diplomatic solution to the conflict. Should this not be
the goal of our joint efforts? It seems that our former
partners from the West have once again demonstrated
that, in reality, they do not want peace in Ukraine. They
dream of Russia’s defeat, and, in the light of the rabid
animosity of the West, they put other goals before us.
The logic of the authors of this document becomes
clear if we look at the non-transparent method that
they have chosen to negotiate it through bilateral
4/11

30/09/2022

consultations where certain members of the Council
were unable to see what their colleagues were thinking
and proposing. We are all well aware of the goal of this
draft and its fate. Its authors are prepared to devalue
the efforts of the Council as the principal organ for
the maintenance of peace and security and brazenly
use this forum as a dress rehearsal before their main
performance in the General Assembly. There, the
West is going to use its familiar scheme to mobilize
resources, exert pressure and twist the arms of all the
Member States that they can reach. Some will falter,
but we hope that many will be able to withstand this
pressure: those who are prepared to hold and protect
their own opinion; those who are prepared to pursue
an independent policy and uphold the principle of the
sovereign equality of States and freedom of action; and
those who oppose the hegemony of one State and its
satellites that do not see other States as equal partners.
We hope that the States Members of the United
Nations will be able to form their own unbiased view of
this emerging situation and make the right choice.
The President (spoke in French): I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, France, Ghana, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico,
Norway, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
Against:
Russian Federation
Abstaining:
Brazil, China, Gabon, India
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 10 votes in favour, 1 against and 4
abstentions. The draft resolution has not been adopted,
owing to the negative vote of a permanent member of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): This is another dark day
for the Security Council, the United Nations and the
world. The Security Council was again taken hostage
on the same issue and by the same country and was
prevented from acting on one of the most important
22-60738

30/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

issues on its agenda. Once again, Russia misused
a unique privilege that the Charter of the United
Nations — the Charter that Russia is shattering in
pieces with its actions — grants permanent members in
order to help them to maintain peace and security and
uphold international law, not to block the Council when
the world needs it.
Draft resolution S/2022/720, proposed today, was
about the most fundamental issues and principles
that bind us together in the United Nations and in the
multilateral world — the preservation of the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and independence of a Member
State. As it has done since 24 February, Russia chose
to stand in total opposition to international law, to its
own commitments and to the repeated appeals from
every corner of the world for it to stop its actions,
change course and work for peace. Today’s vote showed
once more that Russia is and will remain isolated in
its actions and with its positions. Today’s vote showed
that Russia never wanted peace, never wanted dialogue.
What it wanted was part of the territory of Ukraine,
which it now claims as its own. We will not accept that,
and we will not recognize any consequences of Russia’s
actions that will be to the detriment of Ukraine.
What is happening now in Ukraine should be an
alarm bell for the entire world. We should not accept
the illegal annexation of the territory of other countries.
We reiterate the call to all States and international
organizations not to recognize any acquisition by the
Russian Federation of any part of the territory of Ukraine
and to refrain from any action or dealing that might
be interpreted as recognizing any such acquisition. We
must be united and firmly condemn this unacceptable
behaviour and stand in defence and support of Ukraine,
because in that way we are defending the rules-based
international order, international law and the Charter.
We will continue our fight in the General Assembly,
and we will call on the Assembly to defend the Charter
of the United Nations.
As to Russia’s mantra, which draws artificial
parallels with other situations that have nothing to do
with Russia’s aggression, we have expressed ourselves
clearly about it more than once and we are not going
to dignify such claims, which are of the same nature
as “There is no war in Ukraine”, “We have committed
no crimes there” and “We do not want its territory”.
We trust that today everyone’s eyes are more wide open
than ever.

S/PV.9143

Mrs. Kamboj (India): India is deeply disturbed by
the recent developments in Ukraine. We have always
advocated that no solution can ever be reached at the
cost of human lives. We urge that all efforts be made
by the parties concerned for an immediate cessation of
violence and hostilities. Dialogue is the only answer in
settling differences and disputes, however daunting that
may appear at the moment. The path to peace requires
us to keep all channels of diplomacy open. India’s
Prime Minister has unequivocally conveyed that in his
discussions with world leaders, including the Presidents
of the Russian Federation and Ukraine. So has our
External Affairs Minister in his recent engagements at
the General Assembly last week. India’s Prime Minister
has also emphasized that this cannot be an era of war.
We therefore sincerely hope for a speedy resumption of
peace talks to bring about an immediate ceasefire and
resolution of the conflict.
India’s position has been clear and consistent from
the very beginning of the conflict. The global order
is anchored in the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and respect for the
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of all States. The
escalation of rhetoric or tension is in no one’s interests.
It is important that pathways be found for a return to
the negotiating table. Keeping in view the totality of
the evolving situation, India decided to abstain in the
voting on draft resolution S/2022/720.
Ms. Juul (Norway): We voted in favour of draft
resolution S/2022/720. The Security Council has
a responsibility to act to prevent and end acts of
aggression and atrocities, and certainly where breaches
of territorial integrity are concerned. We deeply regret
that the draft resolution was not adopted owing to a
veto cast by a single member. It is wrong that Russia, an
invading force, can also prevent Council action aimed
at ending its aggression.
Moscow has launched an illegal process of
annexation of the Ukrainian regions of Donetsk,
Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhya. The SecretaryGeneral was very clear yesterday when he affirmed
that any annexation of a State’s territory by another
State resulting from the use or threat of use of force
is a violation of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. We fully concur.
Whatever outcome Russia announces in Moscow today
is contrary to international law, has no legal effect
and in no way changes Ukraine’s sovereignty within
its internationally recognized borders. The Russian

22-607385/11

S/PV.9143

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Federation, one of the five permanent members of the
Security Council, has a clear responsibility to respect
the Charter of the United Nations. Yet its actions related
to Ukraine cut against everything that United Nations
membership is supposed to stand for. With its actions,
Russia is isolating itself from the global community,
rejecting multilateralism, international law and the
purposes and principles of the Charter. It also continues
to ignore the global effects it is causing.
It is unacceptable that the Security Council has
again been blocked from taking action on a significant
threat to international peace and security. We are
however assured that the General Assembly will now
have an opportunity to take up this grave and important
issue, and we urge the speedy production of a special
report on this use of the veto.
The position of Norway is clear. We are fully
committed to the sovereignty, unity, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
abstained in the voting on draft resolution S/2002/720,
just now put to the vote. I would like to make the
following statement in relation to the Chinese vote.
First, China’s position on the issue of Ukraine is
consistent and clear. The sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all countries should be safeguarded. The
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations should be upheld. The legitimate security
concerns of all parties should be taken seriously. All
efforts conducive to the peaceful resolution of the crisis
should be supported.

30/09/2022

the United Nations Charter in order to play a responsible
and constructive role in the political settlement of the
Ukraine issue. Any action taken by the Security Council
should be truly conducive to easing the situation and
resolving the crisis, rather than intensifying conflict
and exacerbating confrontation.
Fourthly, the current crisis in Ukraine is the result
of the accumulation and interplay of various conflicts
and tensions over a long period of time. Facts have
shown that political isolation, sanctions and pressure,
stoking tensions and bloc confrontation will not bring
about peace. Instead, they will only worsen the situation
and make the issue more complicated and intractable.
China calls on all parties concerned to exercise
restraint, refrain from actions that exacerbate tensions
and leave space for a solution through diplomatic
negotiations. As a responsible country, China has
always stood on the side of peace. We will continue
to play a constructive role in easing the situation and
resolving the crisis.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Yet again, Russia has abused its veto to defend its
illegal actions. Security Council members have voted
in different ways, but one thing is clear — not a single
other member of the Council recognizes Russia’s
attempted illegal annexation of Ukrainian territory.
Russia’s veto does not change that fact.
The announcement by President Putin today of
the accession of the Ukrainian regions of Kherson,
Zaporizhzhya, Luhansk and Donetsk into the Russian
Federation has no legal effect. It is fantasy. Russia
invasion needs to end.

Secondly, over seven months into the Ukraine
crisis, the crisis and its spillover effects have had a wide
range of negative impacts. The prospect of a prolonged
and expanded crisis is also worrisome. China is deeply
concerned about that prospect. We believe that the
pressing priority is to make every effort to de-escalate
the situation and guide the parties to restart diplomatic
negotiations as soon as possible in order to open the
door to a political settlement, with legitimate concerns
brought into the negotiations and viable options on the
table, in an effort to achieve an early ceasefire.

The world has made that clear for seven months.
Yet Russia’s response has been further escalation,
further mobilization, nuclear threats and, today, another
callous attack on a civilian convoy in Zaporizhzhya.

Thirdly, as the core of the international collective
security mechanism, the Security Council should
maintain objectivity and impartiality and prioritize the
use of the good offices and mediation tools conferred by

Mr. Mythen (Ireland): Ireland voted in favour
of draft resolution S/2022/720. We did so because we
believe that there must be a robust response from the
Security Council to yet another blatant breach of the

6/11

The sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine
is under attack. The international system is being
assaulted in front of our eyes. Russia will not succeed
in this illegal imperialist war. The only question is how
much damage it does and how many lives it wastes
before it realizes that.

22-60738

30/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9143

Charter of the United Nations by the Russian Federation
in its war of aggression against Ukraine.

Council’s exercise of its mandate to promote and
maintain international peace and security.

Ireland remains fully committed to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders. Earlier this week,
Ireland condemned the sham referendums conducted
in occupied Ukrainian territory by Russia or its
proxies. Today we categorically reject the so-called
results of those illegal and illegitimate referendums, an
announcement purporting to annex Ukrainian territory.
They have no legal effect.

The conduct of the referendums and the subsequent
steps taken by the Russian Federation to annex
the occupied territories within the internationally
recognized borders of Ukraine, in our view, are illegal
and constitute serious violations of the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial independence of
Ukraine. They are void and of no legal effect, in our view,
as well as that of many in the international community.

As I said at our meeting on Tuesday (see S/PV.9138),
this is nothing more than a blatant land grab by the
Russian Federation. Let me be clear — Ukraine’s
borders have not changed. The sham referendums
did not reflect the popular or freely expressed will of
the Ukrainian people. They are illegal, they violate
the United Nations Charter, they violate Russia’s
obligations under international law, and they violate the
law of occupation.
Once again, the Russian Federation has shamefully
used a veto in a flagrant attempt to excuse its own
military aggression against Ukraine, a fellow Member
of our United Nations. The shocking images of civilians
killed or injured near Zaporizhzhya this morning are a
stark reminder that it is civilians who are paying the
highest price for Russia’s senseless war.
The use of this anachronistic veto in these terrible
and tragic circumstances is simply reprehensible and
undermines the legitimacy of the Council in the eyes
of the watching world. However, this veto will not
prevent the international community from responding
to Russia’s blatant breaches of international law. This
veto will not deter us from holding Russia accountable
for its actions.
In accordance with General Assembly resolution
76/262, Ireland now calls on the Council to submit a
special report on the use of the veto in this instance to
the General Assembly.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): Ghana voted in support
of draft resolution S/2022/720, as we firmly believe
in its objective — to uphold the rules of international
law and the principles and values of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We regret the unsurprising outcome of the vote
and the fact that, once again, the use of the veto by the
offending State has stood in the way of the Security

As we have repeatedly stated in the Chamber, it
remains our principled position not to recognize the
acquisition of territory by any State through the threat or
use of force. We believe that any attempt to unilaterally
delineate borders and, for that matter, State territory,
is an attempt to unravel the settled and accepted norms
of behavior that have ensured the relative stability of
our international system since this Organization was
established in order to draw the curtains on the era of
conquest of territory by wars. We call on the Russian
Federation to end its aggression against Ukraine, refrain
from any further escalatory action and embrace a new
chapter of peace, cooperation and friendly relations,
which are required of all Member States.
As I conclude my remarks, I reaffirm Ghana’s
firm commitment to respect the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders. In that
regard, I reiterate our continued support for efforts to
help bring an end to the war through peaceful means.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Having suffered the loss of its own territory
by annexation throughout its history as a result of
foreign invasion, Mexico cannot consent to another
country falling victim to such acts of aggression.
Mexico’s position has always been clear on
unnegotiable respect for international law, in particular
the prohibition of territorial expansion through the use
of force or other means that contravene the Charter
of the United Nations. That rule of international law,
explicitly provided for in the Charter of our Organization
and endorsed by the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the jurisprudence of the International
Court of Justice, means that the referendums held in
occupied territories in Ukraine, in the context of an
invasion, have no legal validity.

22-607387/11

S/PV.9143

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mexico
supports
the
sovereignty,
unity,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders. We
reiterate our support for the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and other potential actors to promote dialogue
and diplomacy to find a political path out of the war.
Against that backdrop, Mexico voted in favour of
the draft resolution contained in document S/2022/720.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Brazil abstained in the
voting on the draft resolution presented by Albania and
the United States (S/2022/720).
Brazil expressed its views on the referendums in
Ukraine at the meeting on 27 September (see S/PV.9138).
It is unreasonable to assume that populations in areas of
conflict are able to freely express their will. The results
of such referendums, under the current circumstances,
do not constitute a valid or genuine expression of the
will of the local populations and cannot be perceived
as legitimate.
Brazil stands by the principle of the territorial
integrity of sovereign States.
We acknowledge the drafters’ efforts to amend the
text to make it more focused and streamlined.
On the draft resolution itself, we believe that its
scope and language do not favour an environment
conducive to a solution to the conflict in Ukraine. It is
a repetition of the same dynamics of the past months
in which the Council cannot agree on any constructive
action concerning the conflict in Ukraine. Besides,
the document presented to Council members does not
contribute to the immediate goals of de-escalating
tensions, negotiating a ceasefire and starting
peace negotiations.
We also have a few observations on the process.
To circulate a draft resolution at such short notice for
consultations with our capitals did not allow Member
States the time to express their views and concerns. We
missed a valuable opportunity to engage collectively
in a transparent manner, making full use of our
consultation spaces in the Security Council.
The Council should now explore new courses of
action. In the past seven months, the refusal to consider
alternatives has done nothing to bring about a political
solution to the conflict. On the contrary, it has brought
about further escalation and fuelled counterproductive
narratives in our midst. It is time to do what is expected
8/11

30/09/2022

of us, namely, to find solutions based on straightforward
dialogue and constructive diplomacy, with a willingness
to fully address the concerns of all parties.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): Since the start of the war
in Ukraine, Kenya has consistently called for the
cessation of hostilities to allow for dialogue leading
to a stable European security order. Whether that is
established now or following a protracted war that can
escalate to an extreme danger to international peace
and security, negotiation is inevitable. It is critical
to the world, and especially to developing countries
suffering from increased food insecurity and damaging
economic turmoil, that it be undertaken now in a way
that addresses the security concerns of all parties.
The draft resolution (S/2022/720), whether here
in the Council or in the General Assembly, will not
solve the crisis. Our affirmative vote is based on
Kenya’s principled defence of the Charter of the
United Nations and, in particular, its protection of the
principle of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all Member States.
Our affirmative vote today is necessary on
principle, but insufficient in practically ensuring that
the Security Council carry out its mandate. We urge
all members to do more to find a path to dialogue and
diplomacy, rather than turning the Council into an
arena for the continuation of the conflict by diplomatic
means instead of its resolution.
With its vote, Kenya reaffirms its recognition of
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
its internationally recognized borders.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): The
referendums held over the past week amid the ongoing
armed conflict and the announcement made earlier
today regarding the incorporation of four regions into
the Russian Federation are serious developments in
the conflict. They make finding a peaceful resolution
more difficult and implicate the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and independence of a United Nations State
Member. Those are core principles of the Charter of the
United Nations that are central to peaceful, cooperative
and productive relations between States and essential
for the security and stability of all. Those principles
protect all States, large and small, powerful and weak,
and that has informed our vote today.
The principle of self-determination is also a
fundamental principle enshrined in the Charter we
22-60738

30/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

all ratified, but any tensions between that principle
and the principles of territorial integrity, sovereignty
and independence need not amount to a zero-sum
game. The developments in recent days warrant a clear
statement from the Council underlining the importance
of the fundamental principles of the Charter. We voted
in favour of the draft resolution (S/2022/720) for that
reason, although we would also have liked more time to
engage in further edits to the text and on the substance.
As we have continuously stressed in this Chamber,
the pathway towards a peaceful resolution of the
conflict lies in solutions that involve both sides coming
to the table quickly, without preconditions and with the
support of trusted interlocutors. We urge both Russia
and Ukraine to do so, and I know that many around this
table today — and beyond it — share that view.
The war has gone on too long and destroyed too
many lives. Resolving the conflict is important not only
for Ukraine and Russia and both their peoples, but also
for global peace and security. We all need to stop the
escalation and help create the conditions for peace. We
stand ready to work with all members of the Council to
find ways to effectively address the root causes of the
conflict and support a diplomatic pathway forward.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): Gabon
abstained in the voting on draft resolution S/2022/720,
submitted for consideration by the Security Council.
My country’s position is clear. We are opposed to
the war. We support a diplomatic solution to the war.
Since the start of the crisis, we have hammered home
the point, here in the Council Chamber, that we support
respect for the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. We have continued to call for the cessation
of hostilities and for good-faith negotiations between
the parties. We will continue to call for dialogue and
good-faith negotiations between the parties to put
an end to the war and promote peaceful coexistence
between them.
Because we want to stand on the side of the solution
to the crisis, we reiterate our support for all initiatives
for a diplomatic and negotiated solution to it.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
France most firmly condemns the illegal
annexation by the Russian Federation of the Ukrainian
regions Donetsk, Luhansk and parts of Kherson and

S/PV.9143

Zaporizhzhya. That is why we voted in favour of draft
resolution S/2022/720. France calls upon all countries
that are committed to respecting international law to
join us in our condemnation.
Like Crimea, those regions are an integral part of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
France will never recognize those illegal annexations
or the results of the sham referendums that preceded
them. It is a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine, as well as of the Charter
of the United Nations. The Secretary-General said
it — all decisions that would lead to the annexation
of those territories have no legal validity and should
be condemned.
France welcomes the mobilization on the part of
all members of the Council who voted in favour of the
draft resolution and expressed their commitment to
international law and to upholding the United Nations
Charter. France applauds the open-mindedness and
spirit of compromise demonstrated by the authors of
the draft resolution.
France condemns the veto cast by the Russian
Federation, which again shows its irresponsibility
in carrying out its duties as a permanent member of
the Security Council. The result of today’s voting
is indisputable. Russia stands alone more than ever
before. We regret that the fact that the Council was
unable to vote unanimously to uphold the principles of
sovereignty and territorial integrity, which are, after
all, the very basis of international law.
Ukraine is fighting to protect its right of legitimate
defence. As the President of the French Republic,
Emmanuel Macron, said very clearly, France will
continue to stand with Ukraine against the Russian
aggression and help it to regain its full sovereignty over
its entire territory.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the
representative of Russia in the permanent seat of the
Soviet Union. His lonely hand, raised in opposition
to draft resolution S/2022/720, has again attested to
Russia’s isolation and his desperate attempts to deny
reality and our common commitments, starting with
the Charter of the United Nations.

22-607389/11

S/PV.9143

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Putin’s envoy has followed in the footsteps of his
master in Moscow, where a puppet show was organized
today in an attempt to deny the obvious — that the
aggressive and adventurist regime in Russia is heading
towards its imminent defeat. I will not elaborate on lies
that have nothing in common with reality, because the
reality is quite different.
In reality, Putin has tried to grab territories that
he does not even physically control on the ground. In
reality, Ukrainian forces continue their operations to
liberate our sovereign territories. In reality, at least 30
civilians have been killed and 88 wounded, following
Russia’s shelling of Zaporizhzhya earlier today.
Russia persists in its genocidal practices of killing
Ukrainians, torturing and oppressing them, in the
occupied territories. Therefore, the only way to make
all Ukrainians throughout the sovereign territory of
Ukraine feel safe and under the protection of their State
is to again hoist Ukrainian flags throughout occupied
Donbas, southern Ukraine and Crimea. Ukraine has
every right to liberate its territories and people and will
continue to do that, regardless of Russia’s words or deeds.
Sham referendums are elements of aggression against a
sovereign State, and anyone involved in organizing or
conducting that farce will be held accountable.
The draft resolution was not adopted because of
one negative vote — Russia’s vote. We are tired of
repeating it time and again: allowing Russia to avail
itself of the right of the Soviet Union to veto decisions
of the Security Council effectively prevents this organ
from exercising its primary responsibility under
the United Nations Charter — the maintenance of
international peace and security. At this very moment,
millions of people around the world see on their screens
the devastating impact of the Russian presence in the
Security Council and the Council’s failure to effectively
respond to a most pressing global security threat.
That failure undermines the image and authority
of the United Nations as a whole, which is unjust and
unfortunate, as the Security Council is only one pillar
of the Organization, but it a broken one. Luckily, the
Organization can still rely on its other pillars, which
increasingly demonstrate their determination to step
in and use their potential to the maximum amid the
situation in the Security Council.
I avail myself of this opportunity to again convey
words of appreciation from my President to the
Secretary-General for the clear position and strong
10/11

30/09/2022

statement that he delivered yesterday. It was a statement
of integrity. It was a statement of commitment to
the United Nations Charter and a beacon of hope for
the Members of the United Nations. The SecretaryGeneral said,
“It cannot be reconciled with the international
legal framework. It stands against everything the
international community is meant to stand for. It
flouts the purposes and principles of the United
Nations. It is a dangerous escalation. It has no place
in the modern world. It must not be accepted.”
But let me pose a question here. What if the
Secretary-General were not a person of the highest moral
standards and not so dedicated to the cause of defending
the Charter? That question is not rhetorical one. We
have seen Secretaries-General of different calibres and
backgrounds. We all remember Dag Hammarskjöld,
who defended the purposes and principles of the United
Nations and was never intimidated by Moscow’s direct
threats against him. Yet there were Secretaries-General
who hesitated too long to act to prevent major crises.
Today many of us called on the Russian
representative to respect the Charter of the United
Nations. But let me ask once again: Why should the
Russian Federation respect the Charter, which was not
followed when the Russian Federation was allowed to
occupy the permanent seat of the Soviet Union? Most
Council members have already heard on many occasions
the Ukrainian position on the illegal occupation by
Russia of the Soviet seat in the Security Council. But I
should like to read out Russia’s confession of bypassing
the rules of admission for membership, which is posted
on the United Nations official website. Yuli Vorontsov,
the Permanent Representative of the Soviet Union to
the United Nations, said right in our face in 1991:
“In fact, the whole process outwardly looked like a
simple change of the country name plate at the table
of delegations in the General Assembly and in the
Security Council, Instead of the Soviet Union name
plate, the Russian Federation appeared”.
There was neither a single vote nor a formal decision
in the Security Council or the General Assembly, but
just a notification by President Yeltsin, addressed to
the then Secretary-General, delivered to the addressee
by Soviet Ambassador Vorontsov, as the Permanent
Representative of a new Member State — the Russian
Federation. I hope that the Organization will never
again have Secretaries-General who execute the wishes
22-60738

30/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of Russian Presidents and admit new Members behind
closed doors without the action of the Security Council
or the General Assembly.
One may ask, “What is next?” Will it be attempts
by Russia to manipulate the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly to redraw the political map of the
world, which we may see soon in the coming weeks?
We should no longer tolerate such legal nihilism or the
aggressors’ presence in the seat of a permanent member
of the Security Council. The absence of the necessary
treatment has turned Russia into a cancerous tumour in
the body of the Security Council. It has to be removed
before it metastasizes within the entire body of the
United Nations system.

S/PV.9143

It is time to act. If the Council is incapable of acting
on Russia, it is members’ duty to act without it. Let
me thank all the members that demonstrated during
the vote today their readiness to act as responsible
and committed members of the Security Council.
I thank Albania, France, Ghana, Ireland, Kenya,
Mexico, Norway, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Kingdom and the United States. I thank everyone that
rejected Russia’s negative vote against draft resolution
S/2022/720 — to the benefit of the Security Council,
the benefit of the entire Organization and the benefit of
international peace and security.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

22-6073811/11
