S/PV.7771

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7771st meeting

Wednesday, 14 September 2016, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. McCully/Mr. Van Bohemen/Mrs. Schwalger . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Arcia Vivas

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2016/768)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-28698 (E)
*1628698*

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2016/768)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Canada,
Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy,
the Netherlands, Pakistan, Sweden and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Ms. Joanne Adamson, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/2016/768, which contains
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Afghanistan and its implications for international
peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yamamoto.
Mr. Yamamoto: As I look at the situation in
Afghanistan today, I see opportunity and hope, but
also formidable challenges. The progress made by
the Afghan people over the past 15 years provides
opportunities for further advances. With opportunity
comes hope.
The challenges derive from almost 40 years of war.
Despite very real progress, Afghanistan still has a long
way to go to meet fully the needs of its people. The
upcoming Brussels Conference could provide the time
and space for the Afghan Government to move towards
stability and seif-reliance. The Government should
seize this opportunity. In order to meet its challenges,
2/34

14/09/2016

the Government must be able to act effectively. The
current precarious political situation, including the
tensions between the two leaders of the Government,
must be brought to a resolution. A way must be found
to ensure stability in the Government for the long-term.
As one of the world’s most aid-dependent countries,
it will be difficult for Afghanistan to achieve selfreliance as long as there is conflict. The conflict diverts
resources that would be better spent on developing
Afghanistan and helping its people. Peace is therefore a
requirement. It is imperative that avenues for peace be
explored with the utmost urgency and seriousness. Let
me briefly talk about positive efforts under way that
give cause for hope.
Sustained international support to Afghanistan
is vital. The Warsaw Summit sent a message to the
Afghan people, including anti-Government elements,
that the international community will continue to
support the security sector at the current level until
2020. Afghanistan is now preparing for the Brussels
Conference, at which the equally vital question of
support for Afghan development will be considered.
In Brussels, the Government will have an opportunity
to secure ongoing development assistance at or near
existing levels through 2020. At the meeting of the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board (JCMB) on
4 September, the Government demonstrated that its
preparations for Brussels are well advanced.
I welcome President Ghani’s comprehensive, longterm approach to tackling corruption, which seeks to
develop the architecture needed to prevent corruption, as
well as hold those responsible for corruption to account.
The referral of the first cases to the Anti-Corruption
Criminal Justice Centre demonstrates the Government’s
resolve. Successful, just prosecutions would go a long
way towards boosting public confidence.
I also wish to acknowledge the Government’s
continued progress on other reform and mutual
accountability commitments, in particular with regard
to preparing the Afghanistan National Peace and
Development Framework and successfully negotiating
a new International Monetary Fund programme,
after a strong performance in the area of the staffmonitored programme, including with respect to
revenue collection.
These achievements establish a firm foundation
for the Brussels Conference. By demonstrating the
Government’s commitment to development, economic
16-28698

14/09/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

growth and stability, they can build confidence that
development funds will used for credible, effective
plans. I particularly welcome the inclusiveness of the
Government’s vision for the Brussels Conference. The
Government’s attention to poverty reduction at the
recent JCMB meeting was widely appreciated.
Decades of conflict have left many women
widowed and vulnerable, and as President Ghani noted
at the JCMB, the face of Afghan poverty is female.
Serious attention to poverty reduction therefore
requires dedicated efforts to empower women in both
peacebuilding and development. Government planning
in those areas is progressing and a side event at Brussels
will provide a valuable opportunity to discuss the plans
in depth. Similarly, we look forward discussions in
Brussels focused on promoting regional cooperation,
which is key to the stability and prosperity of the region.
Success in Brussels would mark another important step
for Afghanistan towards self-reliance.
The National Unity Government faces fundamental
challenges, both from outside and from within. Security
and political stability are the most fundamental of
those. On the security front, it has been another difficult
year for Afghanistan. Intensive fighting continues in
hotspots around the country. While Kabul has been the
target of a series of horrendous suicide attacks, several
provincial captials, including Lashkar Gah, Tirin Kot
and Kunduz city, have been under serious pressure,
but none has fallen. The Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces have been able to display more
effective responses compared to last year, and coupled
with tactical operations, they have been able for the
most part to hold their ground.
The impact of the conflict on civilians remains
severe, however. It is with a heavy heart that I must
report that yet again, year on year, civilian casualty
figures are trending upwards. Nowhere is this trend more
apparent than for children, among whom there has been
an 18 per cent increase in casualties, with 388 children
killed in six months. The attack claimed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant against a demonstration in
Kabul on 23 July was a particularly gruesom incident,
with 85 civilians killed. The Government promised
to investigate in full. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan will share the findings of its
own investigation with relevant stakeholders.
I must once again remind all parties to the conflict
to strictly abide by their obligation under international

S/PV.7771

human right and humanitarian law to always place the
preservation of human life above any other consideration
and to give a measurable effect to their commitment
to the protection of civilians, women and children
in particular. Accountability for violations of these
commitments remains weak and must be strengthened
by all parties.
The numbers of people newly displaced by conflict
have been swelled recently by a massive increase in the
number of Afghan families returning from Pakistan.
If current trends continue, Afghanistan will have to
meet the needs of at least 1 million people on the move.
That would require far greater amounts of assistance
and would place an overwhelming strain on already
overstretched health and other social services. Unless
measures are taken soon, many thousands of families
will face the prospect of winter with inadequate shelter
or support.
No effective policies are possible if the Government
is internally divided. Tensions within the Government
have surfaced, with public criticism by Chief Executive
Officer Abdullah Abdullah about what he views as the
incomplete implementation of political agreement of
2014. The two leaders have met several times since then
to try to identify the issues and to seek solutions. Efforts
are still under way and further meetings are expected.
The National Unity Government is at a defining
moment. A way forward must be found through a
realistic and flexible compromise and a show of true
statesmanship. The leaders need to come up with a
solution that will allow for the effective functioning
of the Government, in both the short and long terms.
Afghanistan cannot afford political instability. The
leaders must show the people of Afghanistan and
to the international community that they are able to
govern effectively.
As the second anniversary draws near of the 2014
political agreement that established the National Unity
Government, the political opposition has increasingly
challenged the legitimacy of the Government. The
political agenda must progress constructively, political
stability must be maintained and elections must take
place. The recent signing by the President of the
legislative decree on electoral reform is a constructive
development in that regard. The international
community is deeply committed to supporting the
National Unity Government and would be reassured by
continued stability and its effectiveness.

16-286983/34

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

Peace for Afghanistan is a necessity. Without peace,
Afghans will continue to suffer and economic growth
and prosperity will not materialize. The Taliban has
still not demonstrated explicitly a clear commitment to
a peace process, despite the many offers of engagement
by President Ghani and the international community.
The intensive fighting this summer has shown the
conflict to be an endless cycle of gains and reversals,
of destruction instead of development, and of continued
suffering for Afghan civilians. It is my fervent hope
that, as winter approaches and the tempo of the conflict
slows, the Taliban will show their willingness to enter
into talks with the Afghan Government.
The agreement being negotiated between the
Afghan Government and Hezb-i-Islami shows that the
Government is sincere about negotiations. Experience
shows that peace processes can take months and years.
Measures should be taken to build confidence between
the Government and the Taliban in order to prepare
the way for substantive talks. The sooner a process is
started, the less Afghans will suffer. I would therefore
urge both sides to come together to find lasting peace
for Afghanistan.
Afghanistan has an opportunity to build on the
achievements of the past 15 years and to move towards
stability and self-reliance. With an effective Government
and the continued support of the international
community, it has every chance of success.
The President: I thank Mr. Yamamoto for
his briefing.
After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:
“The Security Council reaffirms its support
to the Government of Afghanistan and, in advance
of the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan to be
held on 5 October 2016, co-hosted by the European
Union and the Government of Afghanistan, calls
on the international community to continue their
civilian and development efforts to assist the
Government and the people of Afghanistan in a
manner consistent with the Self-reliance through
Mutual Accountability Framework and with the
Afghan leadership and ownership.
“The Security Council underscores the
importance of the progress attained by Afghanistan
and calls on all political entities to work together
4/34

14/09/2016

to achieve a peaceful and prosperous future for the
people of Afghanistan.
“The Security Council reiterates its concern
about the security situation in Afghanistan, its
condemnation of the terrorist activities by the
Taliban, including the Haqqani Network, as well as
Al-Qaida, ISIL (Da’esh) affiliates and other illegal
armed groups, and its support to the Government
of Afghanistan and, in particular, to the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces, in their task
of securing their country and in their fight against
terrorism and violent extremism.
“The Security Council also reaffirms its
support to an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
and reconciliation process with a view to achieving
lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan and calls
on all national, regional and international actors to
cooperate in this regard.
“The Security Council reiterates its full
support to the work of United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan in the implementation of
its mandate as per resolution 2274 (2016), and to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan, and reaffirms that Afghanistan’s
future lies in the building of a stable, secure,
economically sustainable State, free of terrorism
and narcotics, based on the rule of law, strengthened
democratic institutions and the guarantee and
enforcement of citizens’ rights and obligations.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2016/14.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): At the outset, let me
congratulate New Zealand for its successful leadership
of the Security Council this month. We express our
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his recent report
(S/2016/768) on the situation in my country. We welcome
Ambassador Tadamichi Yamamoto as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and thank him
for his first briefing to the Council. We look forward to
working closely with him and wish him every success
in his very important task.
16-28698

14/09/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

Since the Council’s latest deliberations on
Afghanistan (see S/PV.7722), on June 21, the country has
seen increased armed clashes and suicide attacks, with
high civilian casualties, which has tested our resilience
and brought the peace process to an impasse. During
the same period, thanks to the continuing support of
the international community, we have maintained
steady progress to enhance the capacity, capability,
professionalism and sustainability of the Afghan
National Defense and Security Forces (ANDSF).
In the midst of vibrant democratic debates as a key
feature of recent political developments, the reform
agenda of the National Unity Government, in line
with Agenda 2030, is bearing fruit. Afghanistan has
achieved progress in regional trade and infrastructure
connectivity, anti-corruption measures, governance,
the rule of law and human rights, legal reform, restoring
fiscal sustainability and the integrity of public finance,
commercial banking, development planning, social
inclusion and private-sector development.
During this summer, the world witnessed terror
spread wildly across the globe, with major attacks
in nearly 20 countries in three continents. From
Libya to Afghanistan, Somalia, Iraq, Yemen, Turkey,
Syria, Bangladesh, France, Libya, Mali, Germany,
India, Angola, the Congo, Pakistan, Nigeria and the
Philippines, terrorist attacks took many innocent lives
and inflicted huge damage. It is clear that, as terrorist
groups face international pressure at the core, they
attempt to strengthen their symbiotic networks and
resort to more desperate attacks far and wide.
Afghanistan has also seen an increase in large scale
terrorist attacks. In June, Da’esh affiliates terrorized
villagers in Nangarhar. A few days later, the Taliban
targeted new police recruits outside Kabul. In July,
Da’esh affiliates struck again, this time against a
peaceful civilian demonstration in Kabul. In August,
the Taliban targeted tourist buses in
Herat, followed by an attack on university students
in Kabul. In September, they targeted civilians, security
officials and an aid group in Kabul. Altogether, around
180 people, predominantly civilians, lost their lives
and 435 were wounded in these attacks, with extensive
damage to infrastructure. Among the victims were
scores of our educated and talented youth who were
committed to the rehabilitation and development of
their country.

S/PV.7771

President Ashraf Ghani on August 25 called
Pakistan’s Chief of Army Staff and asked for serious
and practical measures against the organizers of the
attack on the American University of Afghanistan in
Kabul. These savage attacks in populated urban centres
showcased the cowardly behaviour of the terrorist
groups and their supporters, aimed at compensating for
their so-called spring offensive losses.
We have evidence that most of these attacks were
orchestrated outside Afghanistan. Last week alone we
seized two trailer trucks entering Afghanistan from
Pakistan with 35,700 kilograms of ammonium nitrate,
an amount nearly 20 times larger than what was used
in the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995. Let us take a
second to imagine the magnitude of the devastation had
the attack, or attacks, been carried out against us or
our allies.
Judging from previous experience, as we approach
the General Assembly session, the second anniversary
of the National Unity Government of Afghanistan and
the forthcoming Brussels Conference on Afghanistan,
the Taliban and other terrorist groups may escalate
their attacks to gain international visibility.
The growing violent extremism and terror
worldwide is proof that the current pace of counterterrorism efforts is at best lax compared to the
magnitude of the threat.
Current efforts remain scattered, slow and at times
static, and they have proved incapable of matching
the sophistication and ever-changing tactics of global
terror for its eventual defeat, as far as the experience
of Afghanistan is concerned. As a strategic imperative,
we must move beyond rhetoric and address the enablers
of terrorism, including the role of State elements in
orchestrating and facilitating the growth of terror. We
need to review the state of United Nations counterterrorism efforts to identify and address gaps in their
implementation and assess what needs to be done by the
relevant United Nations agencies to achieve results and
effectively fulfil their mandates.
The Taliban’s brutal attacks have continued in
different parts of the country, with particular focus
on the provinces of Helmand, Kunduz and Paktia.
Their aim is to create a durable political geography
inside Afghanistan for the Quetta Shura and
Haggani leadership.

16-286985/34

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

The response from the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces has been remarkable. Successive
Taliban and Da’esh attacks were repulsed in different
parts of the country, which proves that these extremist
factions do not have the capacity to hold territory
anywhere in Afghanistan. However, we are putting in
place measures to pre-empt rather than react to their
attacks. I am pleased to report that in line with my
Government’s five-year national campaign plan, which
focuses on reconciliation, security and stability, the
mobility and effectiveness of our security forces have
further improved Afghanistan’s resilience in the face of
the the ongoing security challenges.
Moving forward, the continued support of our
international partners remains critically important.
We welcome the outcome of the NATO Warsaw
Summit last July, which extended the Resolute
Support Mission beyond 2016, reaffirmed continuing
national contributions to the financial sustainment of
the ANDSF until the end of 2020 and enhanced our
enduring partnership with NATO. We have committed
to further strengthening our security institutions and
ensuring service delivery within the rule of law. We
will continue to increase our financial contribution to
the ANDSF. The empowerment of women will continue
in all aspects of Afghan society, including service in
the ANDSF and political processes, as well as the full
implementation of Afghanistan’s national action plan
on resolution 1325 (2000). We have already taken
the necessary measures to protect children from the
effects of armed conflict and have witnessed good,
measurable results.
Despite our constant outreach and efforts in the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan Peace
and Reconciliation Process, Pakistan has yet to utilize
the opportunity to play genuine peacemaker. The fact
is deserving of attention that based on the Group’s road
map, they must take the necessary measures against
irreconcilable Taliban elements to win the international
community’s due recognition as a serious and genuine
partner in the fight against terrorism.
We thank the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
for its renewed focus on promoting peace in Afghanistan.
We welcome the upcoming Ulema Conference in Mecca
and Medina, which will bring together global Islamic
scholars to denounce the violence in Afghanistan.
On 21 September we will celebrate the second
anniversary of the signing of the agreement establishing
6/34

14/09/2016

the National Unity Government of Afghanistan. We are
committed to the full implementation of the agreement.
Discussions are ongoing among the leadership of the
National Unity Government to address the overdue
commitments stipulated in the agreement.
Let me assure the Council that our entire political
elite, irrespective of ethnic and linguistic background
or political standing, is committed to preserving the
national interest of Afghanistan, with its full support
behind our national security forces. Developments,
perceived by some as “tensions” in the National
Unity Government, and “rising pressures” by political
opposition groups, are part of a routine exercise of
democratic debate and a hallmark of our vibrant society,
where citizens express their views in accordance with
their democratic rights. The 2016 World Press Freedom
Index ranks Afghanistan higher than all its neighbours
and fourth among 13 countries of South and Central
Asia in terms of ensuring a culture of free speech. We
will work to improve political stability through healthy
dialogue over outstanding issues.
I am pleased to present the highlights of our
achievements from the past three months. Afghanistan’s
development needs are being driven by our extensive
reform measures to curb corruption, improve service
delivery and promote transparency. Our collaboration
with regional partners has resulted in projects that
will transform the economic landscape of our part
of the world. We have already seen the inauguration
of
the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India
natural gas pipeline project, the CASA 1000 electricity
project and the Chabahar Port agreement, all of which
present opportunities for regional cooperation on an
unprecedented scale.
In August, we completed a major housing project of
2,015 residential units in Kabul. Additional projects are
under way to provide over 11,000 residential units, with
support from China and Qatar.
Last week, for the first time in the history of
Sino-Afghan relations, a special cargo train between
the two countries was officially welcomed in Hairatan,
Afghanistan. Additionally, as part of the Khaf-Herat
railway project, an Iranian train entered Afghan soil,
thereby offering new opportunities for increased
economic activity. Such developments reflect a spirit
of constructive cooperation for mutual benefit in our
region. We urge other neighbours to adopt a similar
approach and to avoid measures that undermine
16-28698

14/09/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

relations, such as the the closing of entry ports, trade
blockades, shelling and illegal construction activities
along our south-eastern territory.
We urge the Government of Pakistan to choose the
path of cooperation to reinforce constructive relations
and build trust, a fundamental precondition for peace
and stability for both our countries. In that connection,
we note with satisfaction the announcement on the
completion of Pakistan-funded health projects in
Afghanistan by year’s end. As a principal component
of our foreign policy, we are convinced that regional
cooperation and multilateralism are catalysts for
peace and prosperity. In that respect, we look forward
to the upcoming Afghanistan-India-United States
trilateral meeting, to be held on the margins of the
General Assembly at its seventy-first. Let me inform
the Council that President Ghani is currently in New
Delhi on an official visit, and India has just announced
another $1 billion in aid towards the development of
Afghanistan. We thank India for that pledge.

S/PV.7771

However, mainly due to continual attacks by the
Taliban and other terrorist groups, the number of
internally displaced people has risen, especially in
rural areas. Food insecurity and lack of adequate health
care remain a challenge among that group, and the
Government is focusing its resources to mitigate the
crisis. Under the voluntary repatriation programme, the
number of returnees has increased significantly. The
number of Afghan migrants to Europe has also fallen,
as compared to 2015. We are grateful to the United
Nations and our international partners for the continued
humanitarian assistance.
On counter-narcotics, despite some increase in the
production and cultivation of opium, we are focused
on continuing eradication efforts despite the security
challenges. We are pleased with the outcome of the ninth
session of the Regional Intelligence Working Group on
Precursors, which, among other issues, identified next
steps on the issue of precursor trafficking.

The Anti-Corruption Criminal Justice Centre
and the High Council on Governance, Justice and
Anti-Corruption are already operational and reviewing
Government corruption cases. Our judicial sector is
being revitalized by a set of bold measures. More than
600 judges have been replaced, with 60 judicial officials
being prosecuted for corruption and malpractice. We
have also announced new appointments and conducted
performance reviews to instil a culture of transparency
in our State institutions.

The forthcoming Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan will be an opportunity to showcase to
the global community our long-fought and hard-won
achievements. The focus will be on the joint international
and Afghan efforts to increase the effectiveness of
sustained international support, multiple Afghan reform
measures, including public finance management and
anti-corruption, as well as regional efforts to achieve
peace and economic prosperity. The preparations for
the Conference are ongoing and we have presented
the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework to our partners for their final input.

In tandem with our economic achievements, our
social sector is reaching new heights, with women
increasingly assuming leadership positions at different
levels of Government. There are more women in senior
Government positions now than at any other time in
Afghan history. Among them there are four ministers,
nine deputy ministers, one governor, one deputy head
of the High Peace Council and a number of senior
diplomats at a leadership level. The Ministry of the
Interior has opened six new child-protection units in
police recruitment centres, bringing the country total
to 13. We are committed to the protection of children
and have prohibited security forces from using schools
for military purposes. We are working on the national
policy on civilian casualty mitigation, which will be
adopted across all Government institutions to better
protect our citizens.

In conclusion, the global security scenario is
undergoing significant changes, and Afghanistan’s
role in the fight against terrorism remains pivotal. We
have long suffered at the hands of extremists and paid
a very steep price through the blood and sacrifices
of our people in standing up against it. Innumerable
Afghans have been robbed of the promise of a peaceful
future due to years of instability. However, in the past
15 years, the Government of Afghanistan, along with
many of our international friends, including the United
Nations, has worked hard to restore faith in the values
we cherish — freedom, democracy, good governance,
the rule of law and human rights for all. We look forward
to seeing members of the international community at
the Brussels Conference to reiterate pledges of support
to Afghanistan and to refocus on the long road ahead
in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism. A

16-286987/34

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

win for Afghanistan in that realm would be a win for the
world, and we would be safer and prosperous together.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
New Zealand.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Tadamichi Yamamoto for his briefing.
Mr. Yamamoto has assumed his role at pivotal moment
for Afghanistan.
Afghanistan has been at war for far too long. Indeed,
most Afghan people have no memory of anything
but war. New Zealand speaks today as a country that
has supported Afghanistan in its pursuit of peace and
stability over many decades, stretching back to the
withdrawal of Soviet forces in 1989. Since 2001, more
than 3,500 New Zealanders have served in Afghanistan.
Some have lost their lives there. We have invested
millions of dollars towards supporting Afghanistan’s
economic development and strengthening its security
forces. And we are still there.
New Zealand’s contribution is only a small part
of the enormous investment made by the international
community in Afghanistan’s future over the past 15
years. But as we have heard today, sustainable peace
remains a distant prospect. The Taliban and other
extremist groups continue to pose an existential threat
to the Afghan State and to conduct horrific attacks
against civilians. The people of Afghanistan will require
the support of international partners until the cycle of
war and terror is brought to an end. That is why New
Zealand joined others in Warsaw in July to reaffirm our
support for the security and stability of Afghanistan.
We extended the provision of military mentors to the
Afghan National Army Officer Academy and funding
to the Afghan National Security and Defence Forces.
To take any other course would be to concede to the
terrorists and accept the failure of the Afghan State.
At the same time, experience has also taught us that
no amount of international support can by itself bring
Afghanistan peace. It is time for an honest conversation
about why peace is proving so elusive — and what
needs to change. The future of Afghanistan ultimately
lies in the hands of its Government and its people. Over
the past 35 years, Afghanistan has been plagued by
poor governance. Too often its leaders have prioritized
group and personal interests over the welfare of their
people, and resorted to graft and the use of force to
achieve their goals. The formation of the National Unity
8/34

14/09/2016

Government, two years ago, with its reform agenda,
was cause for new hope. It offered an opportunity for
the country’s leaders to put aside their differences and
to establish a Government free from self-interest and
corruption. But what do we see today?
Today we see a President and Chief Executive
Officer whose relationship is dysfunctional and a
failure to undertake the necessary electoral reforms
to enable parliamentary elections to be held, thereby
undermining the legitimacy of the current Government
and sowing the seeds of future electoral disputes and
instability. We see a Government that, two years into
its existence, has yet to fill senior positions. And
we see a host of promised reforms for improving
governance and tackling corruption that are yet to
be even seriously discussed, let alone implemented.
Those failings are profoundly concerning. Continued
division and dysfunction within the National Unity
Government threatens the progress we have made
together over the past 15 years. At a time when the
international community is renewing its commitment
to Afghanistan, we therefore reiterate our expectations
of the Government in return.
First, we expect President Ghani and Chief
Executive Abdullah to overcome their differences and
to work together for the good of their people. How can
a Government that does not talk to itself hold peace
talks with others? We expect promised reforms to be
implemented and serious efforts to be made to tackle
corruption. We expect credible efforts to enact electoral
reform, and elections to be held in a timely manner.
While prospects for a resumption of peace talks may
be constrained in the short-term, New Zealand urges
the Government to prepare for engagement on peace
and reconciliation with all parties. As unpalatable as
it may be, achieving a stable and peaceful Afghanistan
is ultimately dependent upon achieving some form of
reconciliation with elements of the armed opposition.
We also call on Afghanistan’s neighbours and
international partners to display genuine commitment
to the process. The Taliban sanctions regime should be
used to create, not obstruct, an environment in which
talks can take place. The Afghan Government needs
to take on more ownership of this process, which, if
properly used, could provide leverage in its negotiations
with the armed opposition.
These expectations of the National Unity
Government are conveyed in the spirit of friendship
16-28698

14/09/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7771

and partnership that has underpinned New Zealand’s
support for Afghanistan over the past 35 years. We
remain determined to honour our commitment, but that
will truly benefit the people of Afghanistan only if the
National Unity Government does the same.

the notable successes achieved in previous years. For
our part, we members of the international community
will have an opportunity to renew our political and
financial support for those ongoing efforts for the
benefit of all Afghans.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I would now like to refer to the political situation
in Afghanistan, to which the Special Representative
referred and which is the subject of the report
(S/2016/768) of the Secretary-General. Spain supports
the Secretary-General’s call to all political leaders in
Afghanistan to demonstrate responsibility and a spirit
of cooperation and to always give pride of place to the
common interests and the well-being of the citizens of
Afghanistan as they try to find answers to the challenges
the country faces. The upcoming Brussels Conference
serves to highlight the necessity and importnace of
such unity, both along the path to the Conference itself
as well as in the period immediately following it.

I shall now give the floor to other members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking you, Minister
McCully, for agreeing to preside over this meeting of
the Security Council. I believe that reflects not just
just the importance that New Zealand attaches to this
debate, but also the shared feeling among the members
of the Council in our support of Afghanistan.
I would also like to welcome the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Ambassador Tadamichi Yamamoto, on
his first appearance in the Chamber. The Special
Representative can count on Spain’s support, and I am
sure he can count on the trust of the Security Council.
Allow me as well, as I customarily do — and I
would not have it any other way — to associate myself
with the statement to be delivered later by the observer
of the European Union on behalf of its member States.
Today, we adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2016/14) on Afghanistan. That may be easy
to say, but it is of great importance. First, that is
because of the relevance of that instrument. We should
point that the Council had not adopted a presidential
statement on Afghanistan since 2014. Secondly, that is
because this adoption underscores once again the unity
of the Security Council in its support for Afghanistan,
its Government and its citizens — something that
is extremely important at this time. Thirdly, that is
because of its timeliness. We are a few weeks away
from what will undoubtedly be the most important
international encounter for Afghanistan of recent
years. I am referring to the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan to be held in October. At the Conference,
the Government of Afghanistan will share with the
international community its new National Peace and
Development Framework, which is its strategy to
continue its in-depth work on economic, social and
institutional development in the country on the basis of

Moreover, I cannot fail to mention the delicate
security situation prevailing in the country. Spain
adamantly condemns all acts of terrorism, irrespective
of their justification, and we reiterate our support for
the Government of Afghanistan in its fight against that
scourge. Such actions will not succeed in dampening
the determination of the Afghan people to bring about
a stable and prosperous Afghanistan — a process in
which Afghan women will undoubtedly be called upon
to play an important role. I thank the Ambassador
Saikal for referring to that issue in his statement.
As a delegation that is particularly committed
to that issue, I would also like to thank Special
Representative Yamamoto for his commitment to
the women and peace and security agenda. In July,
together with his team, he briefed the informal group
of experts pursuant to resolution 2242 (2015) and gave
us detailed and valuable information on the issue.
We also welcome the commitments undertaken by
the Government of Afghanistan in recent months, in
particular the adoption of its national action plan on
resolution 1325 (2000) and its national strategy on the
elimination of violence against women. We encourage
the Government to invest in effectively implementing
them. The challenges are huge and much remains to be
done, but this is the correct path.
We also welcome the fact that gender training for
UNAMA personnel has been improved and that the
leadership of the Mission meets regularly to develop
and follow up on its women and peace and security

16-286989/34

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

strategy as part of its efforts to ensure that its Afghan
interlocutors give greater importance to the participation
and protection of women and girls in Afghanistan. For
Spain, that is not a side issue; it is central. That is why
we also believe it is important to include strategic and
disaggregated information on the issue in the regular
briefings to the Council and in the periodic reports of
the Secretary-General. The next UNAMA debate, to be
held under the Spanish presidency, should be a good
time to address the issue.
I do not want to conclude without reiterating
Spain’s support for the efforts towards a peace and
reconciliation process led by and for Afghans. That is
the only way to guarantee lasting, stable peace. To those
ends, cooperation and coordination by all stakeholders
in the region is essential — above all, there is no
substitute for it.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, for his briefing and to express our full
support for the important role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and all the
United Nations agencies in supporting Afghanistan and
coordinating the international community’s assistance,
in accordance with the mandate set by resolution 2274
(2016).
While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the observer of the European Union
later today, I would like to raise several points in my
national capacity.
There were some encouraging signs of progress in
Afghanistan during the reporting period, in particular
in addressing the security, economic and development
challenges faced by the nation. We welcome the
efforts of the authorities in countering corruption
and terrorism, addressing the fiscal gap and poverty
and unemployment, as stipulated in the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework. However,
the ongoing political tensions between Afghan senior
officials over the lack of effective reforms, including in
the electoral sphere, do not reflect well on the National
Unity Government of Afghanistan. They can also
affect the holding of long-awaited parliamentary and
district council elections scheduled for next month. We
call on the Afghan leaders to reunite and to focus on
addressing the promotion of good governance, the rule
of law, anti-corruption efforts and human rights, and on
10/34

14/09/2016

strengthening coordination between the security forces
and law enforcement agencies to ensure that they can
effectively tackle existing security threats.
Promoting a meaningful, Afghan-led and Afghanowned peace process should remain a priority to achieve
a sustainable resolution of the decades-long conflict in
Afghanistan. We regret that during the reporting period
no meetings of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group of
Afghanistan took place, which is tasked with creatomg
a conducive environment for such a process. Likewise,
no reduction of hostilities occurred, as the Taliban
rejected all calls of the Afghan Government to join
the peace and reconciliation process. Moreover, there
are alarming signs about the stalemate in the peace
negotiations of the National Unity Government with
some moderate armed groups and factions. An ongoing
offensive by the terrorists throughout the country and
recurring suicide attacks with improvised explosive
devices in major cities continue to claim a high death
toll, and are having an adverse impact on Afghanistan’s
political, economic and security stability.
As we see it, no tangible progress towards
stabilization can occur without the readiness of other
regional players to set aside differences and to exert
influence on the Taliban leaders by depriving them
of shelter and forcing this movement to renounce
aggression against Afghanistan and earnestly participate
in the peace negotiations. Regional cooperation should
also be focused on finding ways to effectively disrupt
the Taliban and other terrorist groups’ financing by
suppressing the narcotics trade and strengthening
border security to prevent terrorist fighters travelling
to and from the conflict region.
The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan
continues to warrant our attention in the light of the
ever-growing numbers of civilian casualties, especially
among women and children, and the high displacement
rates of those forced to abandon their homes and to seek
refuge from prevalent human rights abuses, in particular
against women and girls. The Taliban’s recruitment
of children is also a cause for great concern. Despite
the announced national policy on civilian casualty
mitigation, almost an equal number of the attacks on the
civilian population are attributed to to anti-Government
groups as to the Afghan national forces.
While taking note of positive developments on the
gender equality agenda, in particular the elaboration of
important legal policies, we would like to underscore
16-28698

14/09/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

the need of ensuring the full implementation of
the national action plan on women and peace and
security as a critical step in elevating women as full
and equal partners in creating a stable future for the
country. That is also the challenge in the context of the
upcoming elections.
Given all those circumstances, it is essential to
provide Afghanistan with appropriate military and
financial assistance to achieve palpable results in
confronting terrorist, economic and humanitarian
threats and to secure a viable future for Afghanistan.
Following the NATO Summit in Warsaw, which
pledged assistance to the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces through 2020, the international
community should seize the opportunity offered by
the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan in October to
support State-building and socioeconomic development
in Afghanistan, including to urgently scale-up
humanitarian aid to address the needs of more than
1 million internally displaced persons and returnees.
Ukraine acknowledges the primary role of
the United Nations in international efforts to
promote peace and stability in Afghanistan and the
valuable contribution of the relevant international
organizations and institutions actively engaged in
assisting Afghanistan. It is highly important to provide
appropriate coordination for those efforts and to avoid
duplication, including through making the best use of
existing mechanisms for coordination.
Building synergies between regional organizations
and further engagement with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe partner countries,
particularly to tackle shared security threats,
including those emanating from Afghanistan, is of
high significance. A stronger partnership with those
organizations present on the ground in Afghanistan
can help us to better target and evaluate our activities.
To that end, the valuable support of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and its regional programme
for Afghanistan and neighbouring countries is of high
relevance. With that in mind, Afghanistan-related issues
should be further dealt with by a very broad spectrum
of actors, while reorienting the policies in Central Asia
to better reflect issues related to Afghanistan.
By adopting today’s presidential statement on
Afghanistan (S/PRST/2016/14), we are sending a clear
sign to the Afghan people about the Security Council’s
full support of Afghanistan in its endeavours to address

S/PV.7771

security, economic and development challenges.
However, it is important that the Afghan Government
proceed with the actual implementation of national
reforms instead of issuing declarative statements.
That will help to preserve the confidence of the whole
international community and its readiness to assist this
country in its struggle for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, while creating a sound foundation for peace,
security and prosperity both in Afghanistan and the
wider region.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in Afghanistan. We wish him every success
in his new important post. We carefully listened to the
remarks of the Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan, Mr. Mahmoud Saikal.
The situation in Afghanistan, despite all the
efforts invested, does not evoke optimism. We note
the deteriorating trend in the area of security. Fighting
has intensified in various parts of the country. The
elimination of the Taliban leader, Mullah Mansoor,
has led to a strengthening of the influence of the
irreconcilable radicals, first and foremost the Haqqani
Network, which has served only to exacerbate
the situation.
We are particularly concerned by the spread in the
influence and the growth in the numbers of the socalled Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and
its drive to gobble up other armed opposition groups,
mainly in the north of the country. If that process is not
thwarted, then by next year we could face an even more
redoubtable force. In that regard, we were surprised by
the fact that in agreeing to the presidential statement
on Afghanistan (S/PRST/2016/14)adopted today, our
American colleagues refused to include into the text
any wording on the growing threat of ISIL. Russia
expects a more active use of force by the United States
to suppress ISIL fighters in this country.
We strongly condemn the brutal terrorist attacks
that have repeatedly struck Kabul and other Afghan
cities during the past three months. We expect that the
organizers of those crimes will be punished harshly,
and that the Afghan authorities will undertake all the
necessary measures to ensure security. We extend our
heartfelt condolences to the families and friends of
those killed and wish a speedy recovery to the victims.

16-2869811/34

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

We support the policy of the Government of
Afghanistan aimed at achieving national reconciliation.
We stand ready to provide assistance in making
progress in the negotiations process, including on our
flexibly approaching the issue of possible easing of the
sanctions regime of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), on the
Taliban, if this does not clash with the national interests
of the Afghan State.
The main task in the reconciliation process, namely,
to draw the Taliban into the peace negotiations, has not
been achieved. The Quadrilateral Coordination Group
format on organizing direct negotiations between Kabul
and the Taliban has not been able demonstrate any
positive results to date. A similar picture emerges in the
negotiations with Hezb-i-Islami Gulbuddin, the Afghan
extremist Islamic party headed by Hekmatyar. There is
little likelihood of a resumption of direct negotiations
between the Taliban and the Afghan authorities by the
end of the year.
We believe that the main responsibility for current
developments in the field of security and the training
of Afghan soldiers and law-enforcement agents lies
with the United States and its NATO allies, which have
not to date achieved the stated goals. Many tasks that
were taken up by the International Security Assistance
Force before the onset of summer remain uncompleted
as well. We hope that keeping 8,400 American military
personnel in the country through to the beginning of
2017, instead of the earlier-planned 5,500, troops as
well as the agreements adopted at the Warsaw NATO
Summit will lead to positive changes in the area of
security. The key to a sustainable situation, in our view,
lies in training and equipping Afghan national security
forces so that they can independently safeguard law and
order in the country.
Narcotics, manufactured in huge quantities in
Afghanistan, threaten the stability of the whole region
and beyond. The flow of opiates substantially fuels the
financing of terrorism. It is especially important to
step up the efforts of the international community in
combating the Afghan drug trade.
We note the growing global understanding of
the importance of the regional context for an Afghan
settlement as well as the increase in the number of
platforms focusing on this issue. We believe that it is
important that in such platforms’ activities regional
players should play the decisive role. In that context, we
12/34

14/09/2016

believe that the Istanbul Process, which was also known
as the Heart of Asia Process, must generate new ideas,
rather than duplicate the work of already successfully
operating regional organizations.
We are convinced that efforts in assisting
Afghanistan must make progress mainly through tried
and tested structures, first and foremost of which is
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO). As is
well known, Afghanistan is an observer of the SCO and
has been so since 2015. In 2015, at the Ufa summit, it
officially requested membership in the organization. To
lend additional momentum to this process, we believe
it would be useful at this stage to re-establish the SCOAfghanistan contact group mechanism. Significant
potential in bolstering cooperation in counterterrorism and counter-narcotics also lies in cooperation
between Afghanistan and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. Minister, for your personal participation today
and for your commitment on this issue of such great
importance to the Security Council. Let me begin by
thanking Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, whom I welcome
as the new Special Representative. I think he is quite
familiar with Afghanistan, and I wish him every
success in his new duties. Finally, I would like to thank
Ambassador Saikal for his briefing.
I, too, align myself in advance with the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the European Union a
little later.
First of all, as we coming up to the second
anniversary of the National Unity Government, it is
important to note the significant progress made by the
Afghan Government since September 2014. France
reiterates its full support for the Afghan Government
and encourages it to step up its efforts in favour of the
development and stabilization of the country.
However, on the eve of the Brussels Conference, the
international community’s support for Afghanistan as
it pursues this transition is essential. The role played by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in that respect is of course central. I wish
to pay tribute to the work undertaken by all United
Nations personnel in Afghanistan over the past 15
years. France is gratified by the fact that the Council
has been able, through the presidential statement that
we have just adopted (S/PRST/2016/14), to reiterate
16-28698

14/09/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

that message of solidarity and support in a context that
remains quite fragile.
Next, and we regularly refer to this point in the
Council, it must be emphasized that the challenges that
Afghanistan faces every day remain quite daunting.
As the Secretary-General indicates in his report
(S/2016/768), despite considerable progress achieved by
Afghan forces, to which I wish to pay tribute for their
commitment and courage, the ongoing deterioration of
the security situation is extremely worrying. The recent
attacks attributed to the Taliban as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province, or Da’esh, show
that the situation remains fragile. France condemns
those acts of terrorism in the strongest possible terms,
and I would like, on behalf of France, to again express
our condolences for those tragedies.
There are a number of difficulties in the economic
area. The unlawful economy, corruption and the
production and trafficking of drugs must be actively
fought, for they are all obstacles to the sustainable
re-establishment of security and development of
Afghanistan. The development of economic trade with
countries of the region and the international community
should be encouraged. As Mr. Yamamoto told me
earlier, this fragile context makes maintaining the
unity of the Afghan Government all the more essential
if the challenges are to be met. We call on the Afghan
authorities to work to that end.
Finally, the concept of an Afghan-led and Afghanowned peace process remains more valid than ever,
as no peace process can be imposed from the outside.
Increased pressure must be exerted on the Taliban by
those who possess any influence on them to provide
every possible opportunity for a political settlement.
It is important that Afghanistan work closely with
its partners in the region on a road map for a sustainable
peace. France also calls on all countries in the region
to actively and unambiguously support the stabilization
of Afghanistan and to contribute positively to the
restoration of lasting peace in the country.
The support of the United Nations, particularly
through UNAMA, is crucial today, at a time when the
flow of refugees who have been expelled from Pakistan
is fraught with the risk of bringing the Government
and the people of Afghanistan face to face with a very
difficult humanitarian situation in the short term, and
with reintegration issues in the longer term.

S/PV.7771

The NATO Summit in Warsaw on 8 and
9 July reaffirmed international support for security
in Afghanistan for the next few years. The
Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, to be held on
October 5, should reaffirm ongoing international
support for development, within the framework of
mutual commitments.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my country’s
full support for the Afghan Government and for the
actions undertaken by the United Nations in support of
its efforts.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join other Council
members in thanking you, Mr. Minister, for convening
this timely discussion on Afghanistan. Your participation
at this meeting, Sir, underlines New Zealand’s deep
and abiding commitment to Afghanistan and its
people. I also wish to congratulate Mr. Yamamoto on
his appointment as the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as
well as to thank him for his briefing. I would also like
to thank Ambassador Saikal of Afghanistan for his
comprehensive statement.
In the interests of time, I intend to focus my remarks
on three key areas, namely, political and security issues;
the protection of civilians, particularly children; and
Afghanistan’s socioeconomic development.
Special Representative Yamamoto’s briefing and
the report (S/2016/768) of the Secretary-General both
clearly depict the persistent challenges in Afghanistan,
especially on the security front. Despite that, we
are encouraged that Afghanistan continues to show
resilience in addressing the challenges and in making
steady progress towards restoring peace and the rule of
law. In that regard, we welcome the progress made by
the Government in filling key executive posts, and the
inclusive manner in which that task was undertaken.
The Government’s commitment and ongoing
efforts to hold parliamentary and district-level elections
are also commendable. The various local peace
initiatives, particularly the adoption of resolutions by
representatives of provisional Governments and civil
society on 20 July, committing themselves towards
working towards peace in their districts, are other
encouraging developments. The incremental progress
achieved in implementing the reform agenda thus far
is a step in the right direction and should be further

16-2869813/34

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

encouraged and supported by the United Nations and
the international community.
The highly volatile security situation within
Afghanistan, particularly the persistence of high-level
Taliban offensive operations, causing the destabilization
of many district centres, continues to be troubling. The
midyear protection of civilians report submitted by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
which recorded 5,166 civilian casualties between
January and June, clearly underscores the gravity of
the situation. That figure marked the highest number
of civilian casualties recorded by midyear reports since
2009. With respect to that unacceptably high figure,
we are highly concerned at the significant increase in
the casualty figures for children, which recorded 388
killed and more than 1,000 injured, marking an incrase
of 18 per cent from the previous cycle in 2015.
The widespread use of children in combat,
particularly by the Taliban, is abominable and must be
strongly condemned by the Council. We also deplore
and condemn the deliberate targeting of education and
health facilities, resulting in the loss of lives, especially
those of children. The Taliban and other perpetrators
responsible for causing such a massive scale of death
and destruction must be held to account. We reiterate our
call on all parties to undertake the measures necessary
to uphold their obligation to ensure the safety, security
and well-being of all children in the country.
On a related note, Malaysia looks forward to the
finalization of the Government’s national policy on
civilian casualty mitigation. Additionally, the issuance
of directives to security forces, prohibiting the use of
schools for military purposes, the opening of six new
child protection units in police recruitment centres,
the release of children from adult detention facilities,
and steps taken to ensure the rights of children held on
national security charges are all positive developments
that will contribute to the country’s long-term peace
and stability. It is our hope that the implementation of
those and other related measures will result in tangible
and positive improvements in the security situation in
Afghanistan.
The promotion of social and economic development
is essential to the long-term stability of Afghanistan. In
that context, we commend and welcome Afghanistan’s
accession as a full member to the World Trade
Organization (WTO). Alongside ongoing cooperation
with regional partners and the international community,
14/34

14/09/2016

including through the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process,
we believe that Afghanistan’s WTO membership will
open doors and boost prospects for further economic
activities that will further improve the socioeconomic
well-being of its people.
The commitment and efforts of the Afghanistan
Government to improve governance and the economic
reform process, including through the implementation
of the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework for 2017-2018 and the Afghanistan National
Peace and Development Framework, are important
steps towards ensuring the country’s long-term
economic sustainability. This must be supported by
the international community. We look forward to the
upcoming Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, which
will present opportunities for partners to complement
and assist the country’s reconstruction and development
efforts.
While we agree that substantial progress has been
made in Afghanistan over the past 15 years, significant
challenges persist and threaten to reverse these hardwon gains. During this critical period, we call on all
parties to demonstrate a spirit of cooperation towards
achieving national unity and lasting stability. I conclude
by reaffirming our full support for the commitment of
the Government of Afghanistan and for the important
role played by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and the authorities towards achieving
last peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to begin by thanking Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, for his important introduction of the
Secretary-General’s quarterly report (S/2016/768). I
thank him for all his efforts since he assumed his post.
We are convinced that he will continue to support the
United Nations presence in Afghanistan and to address
issues of importance to the United Nations and the
Mission he leads.
I commend the Afghan Government for its efforts
to strengthen its national institutions so that they can
address the challenges they face, particularly with
respect to security and terrorism. In that regard, I
stress the historic ties between Egypt and Afghanistan.
We must all come together in support of the National
Unity Government, particularly because the scourge
of terrorism is not limited to its various current
16-28698

14/09/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

manifestations and affects all of Asia, reaching so far
as the Middle East.
The report of the Secretary-General refers to the
increasing danger posed by the presence of Da’esh
in Afghanistan to the international community. The
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province
continues to carry out its terrorist operations in recent
months, despite the attempts of the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces and the international
forces to suppress them. The head of that group was
recently killed. We must continue, in the context of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, to fight and
eradicate that group wherever it is found.
Egypt maintains its cooperation, dating back to
2007, with Afghanistan in the area of strategic training
for the Afghan army and police, under the auspices of
the Egyptian Agency of Partnership for Development.
We hope to engage in tripartite cooperation in that area
and that donors will provide the funding necessary to
cover the expenses for that very important training.
Egypt and Afghanistan also cooperate in other areas,
including the fight against human trafficking and
illegal immigration. Al-Azhar University also plays
an essential role in promoting Islamic thought and
moderation and the rejection ofviolence in Afghanistan
by dispatching instructors to Afghan teaching
institutions and providing annual study grants.
Egypt attaches great importance to the strengthening
and political development of Afghanistan and, in the
light of that country’s key geographical position in the
region, welcomes the various economic initiatives,
such as the transfer of energy resources to the Central
Asian region, the oil pipeline under development, and
a dam that will help to enhance friendly relations and
stability.
Drug trafficking represents a serious threat. We
call on the Afghan authorities to combat such trade
and to cooperate at the regional and international
levels in the context of the war on terrorism. Egypt
firmly supports efforts to develop Afghan society and
restore infrastructure. We have answered the appeal to
participate in the Brussels Conference in October, and
hope to play an active role there in our capacity as a
guarantor of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto for his briefing, and especially for his
focus on both opportunity and hope. The United States

S/PV.7771

welcomes his appointment and thanks him and his
team for their sustained commitment to the Afghan
people. I also thank you, Foreign Minister McCully,
for presiding over this meeting and for New Zealand’s
commitment to supporting Afghanistan, including
through your country’s contribution of personnel
to train Afghan security forces. We also thank you,
Mr. President, for reading out today’s presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/14, which we believe accurately
reflects the realities on the ground, in particular with
regard to security and terrorism.
As we all know, Afghanistan continues to face grave
challenges. But now is not the time for the international
community to disengage from Afghanistan. To the
contrary, we must continue to work with the Afghan
Government and its neighbours to advance a more
secure, prosperous and inclusive future for the Afghan
people. Let me point out three essential ways we can
do that.
First, we can redouble our commitment to
Afghanistan’s security. The United States condemns
the increased attacks this year by the Taliban against
civilians, humanitarian workers and the Government.
The meticulous data collection of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has
made clear the tremendous toll that that violence
has taken on Afghanistan’s civilians. According to
UNAMA, 5,166 civilians were killed or injured in
the first six months of this year — the highest sixmonth figure since 2009. Afghanistan’s children are
among the most vulnerable, as Special Representative
Yamamoto just noted. Between January and June
of this year, 1,509 children were killed or wounded.
Behind those statistics, of course, are devastated and
broken families left behind to experience suffering that
stretches across generations.
Take
25-year-old
Mohammed
Hassan,
a
construction worker killed in a 23 July suicide attack
claimed by Da’esh against peaceful Hazara protesters
in Kabul. When Mohammed was a child, according to
a family member, he lost his father to Afghanistan’s
former communist Government. Mohammed’s death
leaves behind a 5-year-old son and a baby daughter,
another Afghan generation suddenly fatherless due
to violence. As Ambassador Saikal noted, a few
weeks ago the world witnessed the Taliban’s brutality
during the attack against the American University of
Afghanistan, which killed 13 people and wounded
nearly 50 more. The United States extends its deepest

16-2869815/34

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

condolences to the families of the victims. One of
those killed was a law lecturer named Naqib Ahmad
Khpulwak. As an undergraduate at Nangarhar
University, he finished first in his class and went on to
study here in the United States at Stanford Law School,
where he served as a visiting student research scholar
at the Afghanistan Legal Education Project and at Old
Dominion University. He was about to start a doctoral
programme at Oxford. Naqib returned to his country
to help because he believed in it, and now he is gone.
According to reporting, authorities told his family that
he died while trying to help his students escape.
All of us need to step up to help Afghanistan and
end this scourge. The United States is committed to
helping Afghan security forces respond to such attacks
and to counter terrorist groups. That is why President
Obama decided to maintain approximately 8,400 United
States service members in Afghanistan until 2017. As
President Obama said,
“It is in our national security interest that we give
our Afghan partners the very best opportunity
to succeed.”
In recent weeks, the Afghan military and security
services have conducted offensive operations across
the country and thus far have held major cities in this
fighting season. It will nonetheless take years for Afghan
security forces to counter terrorist groups alone. That is
why NATO allies and partners recommitted in Warsaw
in July to help Afghanistan develop the capabilities
of its security forces through 2020. The international
community can further help to end the conflict and
enable a responsible drawdown by helping to establish
a peace and reconciliation process among the Afghan
Government, the Taliban and other armed groups. The
Afghan Government deserves credit for working to
foster that process, and the United States continues to
explore all avenues to bring the Taliban to the table. We
remain open to exploring new opportunities to nurture
regional cooperation once peace negotiations are under
way. And we encourage Afghanistan’s neighbours in
particular to support the Afghan Government in its
pursuit of a negotiated settlement. Promoting peace
also means that all countries in the region must work to
end safe havens for militants and terrorists.
One consequence of Afghanistan’s insecurity is
the challenge of internal displacement. Since early
July, there has been a sharp increase in the return to
Afghanistan of refugees and undocumented Afghans.
16/34

14/09/2016

We are concerned that some of those returns are not
voluntary. Rather, refugees and undocumented Afghans
are returning due to harassment, problems with local
communities abroad and loss of opportunities for selfreliance. Afghanistan’s neighbours must maintain their
commitments to ensure voluntary and safe returns. We
also encourage partners to consider funding the justreleased United Nations $152 million flash appeal for
refugees, which the United States is reviewing now.
Secondly, addressing Afghanistan’s security
challenges requires all of us to invest in promoting
the country’s political stability. Of course, tensions
between President Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive
Officer Abdullah Abdullah have made that objective
harder to achieve. But establishing a more effective
working relationship between President Ghani and
Chief Executive Officer Abdullah was always going to
be a challenging effort. Despite their differences, the
two leaders remain committed to a vision of a more
secure, prosperous and inclusive future for the country.
Both entered into a political agreement to reach certain
goals. It remains up to the leaders of Afghanistan to work
out their governing arrangements. They must remain
engaged and put the interests of Afghanistan first.
When they do, we see that progress is possible.
President Ghani and the National Unity Government
should be commended for taking steps to root out
corruption. The Government has worked to reopen
criminal cases against those who stole money from the
Afghan people, remove corrupt judges and other public
officials and establish the High Council on Governance,
Justice and Anti-Corruption, as Ambassador Saikal also
noted. Earlier this summer, the Government inaugurated
a new Anti-Corruption Criminal Justice Centre, which
is designed to shield investigators, prosecutors and
judges from political pressure in sensitive corruption
cases. If fully implemented, that will be an important
step towards fighting impunity. We must encourage the
Afghan Government to make similar efforts to resolve
other pressing issues, such as electoral reform, and to
follow through on its reform commitments.
Thirdly, turning to Afghanistan’s development,
members of the Security Council share a strong interest
in making sure that the economic conditions are in
place to promote stability. That is why we are urging
countries to participate and make concrete pledges of
development assistance at the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan scheduled for next month. The Conference
will define the future of international assistance for
16-28698

14/09/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

the next four years, through 2020. We recognize that
Governments already made generous commitments to
sustain security assistance to Afghanistan at the NATO
Summit in Warsaw in July. But security assistance is not
enough. Achieving stability in Afghanistan will require
us to renew our commitment to address the dire need
for education, health care and economic opportunity.
And it will require the Afghan Government to renew
its commitment to make the reforms necessary for
international investments in these sectors to generate
economic growth. Any precipitous decline in assistance
will put at serious risks the gains that Afghans have
achieved over the past 15 years. Members of the Council
and the international community cannot forget that
Afghanistan’s security is our security. That was true
in 2001 and it remains true today. When we commit
to a more stable Afghanistan, we are committing to
an Afghanistan that never again serves as a safe haven
for terrorism.
There are many Afghans committed to forging a
better future. One of them was Sami Sarwari, a young
student who was starting as a freshman at the American
University of Afghanistan this year. Sami Sarwari was
a musician on a scholarship who was so talented that he
performed at the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C.,
in 2013. Like many students arriving on university
campuses this fall, Sami was looking forward to
this new chapter in his life. And on Facebook, Sami
checked into the American university of Afghanistan
and posted “I’m in. Looking forward to a beautiful
and bright future”. He died a short while later when
terrorists attacked his campus.
But Sami’s vision is what should animate all of us
here today. With our sustained support, we will keep
working towards a more stable, democratic and free
Afghanistan, the future that so many young Afghans,
people like Sami, want to build.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): Mr. Minister, we welcome
your presiding over this debate and the adoption of
the presidential statement (S/PRST/2016/14) that you
have just read out on behalf of the Security Council
as a demonstration of the Council’s support of and
commitment to Afghanistan. We also welcome the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto.
We thank him for his briefing and extend our praise and
support to UNAMA and its personnel, who are working
in extremely challenging conditions.

S/PV.7771

Two years after the establishment of the National
Unity Government, the situation in Afghanistan
remains unpredictable. Despite the remarkable advances
registered in the past 15 years and the genuine efforts
made by the Government to advance towards peace,
stability and national reconciliation, much remains
to be done. Among the many challenges facing the
country, the fight against poverty, the implementation
of political reforms, specifically the electoral system,
and the security situation remain sources of the utmost
concern. Tackling such challenges requires unity in
the country’s leadership, cooperation and a spirit of
compromise in order to strengthen the Government’s
capacity to implement much-needed reforms for the
benefit of the Afghan people.
Also of great concern is the increasingly volatile
situation in the country, the persistent security
challenges and the growing pressure from the political
opposition, which the ambassador of Afghanistan
describes as “part of a routine exercise of democratic
debate and a hallmark of our vibrant society, where
citizens express their views in accordance with their
democratic rights”. This is remarkable progress in
Afghanistan’s political development, to be maintained
and strengthened.
The security situation has not improved against the
backdrop of the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces’ engagement against the Taliban. Tersistent acts
of violence by terrorists, including the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, suicide bombings and other
forms of violence are the main causes of the ever-rising
numbers of civilian casualties.
UNAMA’s semiannual report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict in Afghanistan, released in
July, sheds grim light on the number of civilian casualties
victims of the conflict. The indiscriminate killing of
civilians deserves our most energetic condemnation,
and once again we urge all parties involved in the
conflict to respect their obligations under human rights
and international humanitarian law.
We praise NATO’s decision, taken at the Warsaw
Summit, by which its members and contributors to the
Resolute Support Mission formalized the agreement on
the continuation of the mission in Afghanistan beyond
2016, a crucial decision considering the intensified
conflict in the country. It is widely understood that
sustained stability and prosperity in Afghanistan are
dependent on national reconciliation based on respect

16-2869817/34

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

for human rights and essential freedoms, on regional
and international cooperation, mutual respect and
non-interference in one another’s internal affairs. The
Afghan Government’s efforts in reaching out to its
neighbours and fulfilling its regional commitments,
mainly concerning security and economic issues, are
praiseworthy, as well as the Chinese initiative to hold
discussions on counter-terrorism measures in the context
of the Quadrilateral Cooperation and Coordination
Mechanism, comprising Afghanistan, Pakistan and
Tajikistan, which resulted in pledges by those countries
to strengthen coordination and information-sharing,
including border management.
Insecurity and deep-rooted discrimination against
women, in particular regarding their fundamental
rights and freedoms, are absolutely unacceptable.
We took note of the statement by the Ambassador of
Afghanistan that
“women [are] increasingly assuming leadership
positions at different levels of Government. There
are more women in senior Government positions
now than at any other time in Afghan history”.
It is our hope that this trend will be irreversible
and that women will occupy their rightful place in
Afghan society.
We welcome the Government’s efforts to combat
violence against women and girls, and the approval
of the strategy and the action plan on the elimination
of violence against women for the period 2016–2020.
We encourage the Afghan Government to effectively
implement the measures laid out in the plan allowing
women to exercise their legitimate rights and
guaranteeing their protection.
In concluding, we wish to reiterate our support
to the Afghan Government in this extremely difficult
struggle against the forces of evil and darkness. The
Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, to be held on
5 October and organized by the European Union
and the Government of Afghanistan, signals the
determination of the international community to
pursue efforts to help the Government and the people
of Afghanistan in a consistent manner to foster
self-reliance and accountability. It is vital that the
international community maintain its commitment
towards Afghanistan, taking into account the fact that
the future of the country depends upon the building
of a stable, safe, economically sound State free
from terrorism and criminal networks, with reliable
18/34

14/09/2016

democratic institutions guaranteeing the rights and
duties of all Afghan citizens.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank the presidency of New Zealand for having
convened this debate under its programme of work and
also to thank Minister McCully for presiding over our
meeting today. I should like also to thank Ambassadors
Yamamoto and Saikal, respectively, for their briefings.
First, I should like to welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Tadamichi Yamamoto, and to wish him every success
in his work. We also thank all of the United Nations
personnel working in Afghanistan for their dedication
and stress the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in fulfilling its
mandate under extremely difficult conditions.
Uruguay would also like to acknowledge the work
of the delegation of Spain in preparing and negotiating
the presidential statement (S/PRST/2016/14) that we
have just adopted today. Uruguay reiterates its support
for the Government of Afghanistan and encourages it to
continue its efforts to move towards a lasting peace that
is based on sovereignty, territorial integrity and national
unity. The instability and insecurity that prevail in the
country continue to require the ongoing support of the
international community to overcome the obstacles that
it is facing in the political and security areas, which
have a direct effect on its economic development. We
deplore the fact that the political divisions seen over the
past few weeks have put the Government’s unity to the
test. In that respect, we call on the country’s authorities
to act with the necessary leadership so as to bring about
an agreement that will provide stability and make it
possible to carry out the relevant reforms for the benefit
of the Afghan people. International solidarity will also
be required to that end. In the same vein, we call for
sustained efforts to bring about direct talks between the
Government and the Taliban that will create conditions
conducive to peace in Afghanistan.
The October Brussels Conference on Afghanistan
will be an important opportunity for the Afghan
people to continue to determine their future and to
achieve progress related to the strengthening of their
institutions, the rule of law, respect for human rights,
economic growth and reduction of poverty, among
others. The support of the other countries in the region
will also be critical to achieving economic growth and
to addressing issues related to peace and security.
16-28698

14/09/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

Security problems continue to beset the Afghan
people and many armed clashes and suicide attacks
persist. We regret that in only the first quarter, the conflict
has killed or wounded 5,166 civilians. Uruguay is still
deeply concerned over the humanitarian situation that
continues to deteriorate with new internal displacements
resulting from the conflict and exacerbated by lack of
access. We regret that humanitarian workers have been
wounded or killed and we deplore continued reports of
limited humanitarian access.
Our country attaches particular importance to the
secure and swift access of humanitarian aid to conflict
zones, in order to avoid critical situations that prolong
the suffering of the civilian population. In that regard,
we note that blocking humanitarian aid is a clear
violation of international humanitarian law.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/768)
indicates, displaced people continue to be extremely
vulnerable. Food insecurity and limited access to
basic services such as health, water and sanitation
have exacerbated the existent health problems and
malnutrition. Over the past 15 years, over 1,100,000
people have been forcibly displaced from their homes
due the conflict, with 245,000 in 2016 alone. The levels
of malnutrition are alarming, affecting 2.7 million
people, including 1 million children under 5. Only 35 per
cent of affected children receive medical attention, and
only 25 per cent of those treatments are successful.
As such, the protection of civilians, particularly
women and children, has become critical. That is why
Uruguay believes there is an urgent need to respect their
fundamental rights. We call for child education and
the adoption of new legislation that will ban abhorrent
practices such as child marriages and bacha bazi, also
known as bacha bereesh.
As set forth in paragraph 34 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the Government continued its
efforts to address violence against women and girls.
On 11 June, the Government approved the 2016-2020
strategy and action plan for the elimination of violence
against women. We hope that strategy will soon bear
fruit and allow Afghan women to emerge from the
stagnation and oppression in which they have lived for
the past 30 years.
Uruguay reiterates its call to fully implement
resolution 2286 (2016) on the protection of the wounded
and sick, medical facilities and medical personnel,
adopted on 3 May by the Security Council, which

S/PV.7771

would be particularly applicable in Afghanistan as it
makes difficult the work of medical personnel in charge
of vaccination campaigns for the civilian population.
Finally, Uruguay wishes to thank all United
Nations personnel and other humanitarian workers who
face extreme security situations on a daily basis. We
trust that their efforts in bringing aid to thousands of
Afghans in need, while putting their own lives at risk
amidst persistent abductions and attacks, along with
appropriate Government measures will soon give rise
to improved living standards for all Afghans.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Let me first express my
gratitude to the presidency for convening this timely
debate. I would like to welcome the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
who made his first briefing today. Japan looks forward
to working with him and is ready to assist his efforts in
any way possible.
As we have heard in the briefing by Special
Representative Yamamoto, Afghanistan has seen
some positive developments, but also has areas that
require further improvement. We welcome the National
Unity Government’s continued reform efforts as the
Brussels Conference on Afghanistan approaches.
International expectations are high for the outcome
of anti-corruption initiatives in support of the steady
implementation of the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework.
Japan welcomes the Government’s establishment
of the Anti-Corruption Criminal Justice Centre. It
is essential that the Center deepen trust between the
Government and Afghan citizens, as well as between
the international community and the Government,
through increased transparency and reform.
Since the previous debate (see S/PV.7722) on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), in June, we have witnessed two major
positive developments in the economic sector. The
first is that Afghanistan achieved full membership in
the World Trade Organization. The second is that the
International Monetary Fund approved a $45 million
three-year extended credit facility agreement for
Afghanistan. Afghanistan’s achievements on economic
reform deserve to be highlighted. Afghanistan is striving
to become an export-oriented economy, and we note
that the National Unity Government has been focusing
on expanding agricultural productivity. Agriculture is a
key sector for generating jobs and income, and over the

16-2869819/34

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

past few years, Afghanistan has invested in irrigation
and water management. Japan supports Afghanistan in
exploring its agricultural potential as part of its efforts
towards self-reliance.
Sadly, there is little good news about Afghanistan’s
political and security situation. On 23 July we saw the
deadliest single terrorist attack in Afghanistan since
2001, while UNAMA reported the highest number of
civilian casualties in a six-month period since 2009.
Japan is also concerned by the continued abductions,
assassinations and military clashes, as well as the
Secretary-General’s recent observation that tensions
have increased significantly between President Ghani
and Chief Executive Abdullah. The peace process
is essential to Afghanistan’s future security, but
unfortunately we have seen no real progress in that area.
Long-standing trafficking in narcotics remains
a persistent and dire problem in Afghanistan. Profits
from the illegal narcotics trade flow to the Taliban
and other insurgent groups, causing many negative
consequences. Japan, together with the Russian
Federation and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, has supported training programmes for counternarcotics police officers from both Afghanistan and
Central Asian countries, thereby simultaneously
contributing to strengthening regional cooperation.
However, there remains much to do in addressing the
country’s ongoing narcotics challenges.
Today, the Security Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2016/14) reaffirming our support
for the National Unity Government. Japan strongly
urges political actors at all levels to work together in
support of a truly united national Government that
can address Afghanistan’s many difficult issues. We
look forward Special Representative Yamamoto’s
leadership in implementing UNAMA’s mandate, and
pledge our continued support for efforts in Afghanistan
going forward.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I join others in
welcoming Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Tadamichi Yamamoto for his first briefing to
the Security Council and thank him for his leadership at
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).
It is sadly apt that we are holding this debate
just a few days after the fifteenth anniversary of the
11 September attacks. It was those barbaric acts of
terrorism that brought the focus of the world and of
20/34

14/09/2016

the Council on Afghanistan. Just 15 years later, that
focus has perhaps faded, but it is undeniable that the
country has been transformed. Yet it is also clear
that Afghanistan still faces enormous challenges to
its stability and security. That is why, 15 years on,
my Government remains committed to Afghanistan’s
stability and development. It is why we announced
at the NATO Warsaw Summit in July that the United
Kingdom would increase its troop contribution to
NATO’s Resolute Support Mission, and that is why we
have committed to provide ongoing financial support
to the Afghan National Security and Defence Forces
through 2020.
International support alone will not solve the
formidable challenges Afghanistan faces. Unity
of purpose and political cohesion are essential for
security and stability. Let us therefore all support and
encourage the National Unity Government as it pursues
its ambitious programme of reform. There is much to
do. Electoral reforms are critical to re-establish public
confidence in Afghan institutions. Anti-corruption
efforts are needed for future prosperit. And overcoming
internal differences will enable the Government to
deliver better services for the population at large. We
recognize that steps towards reform are being taken.
We welcome the Government’s efforts to address
violence against women and girls, and the Special
Representative’s reporting on the issue. The United
Kingdom will continue to support initiatives that
empower Afghan women. Together, we must ensure
that the historic, but fragile, gains on women’s rights
are not lost.
The upcoming Brussels Conference on Afghanistan
in October will be a key moment for the Government to
demonstrate its own commitment to reform. It is also
the moment for the international community to renew
its ongoing commitment to a more stable, secure and
prosperous future for Afghanistan.
While we have seen progress in some areas in the
early years of the transformation decade, many things
still remain to be done. That is easy for me to say in
these comfortable surroundings. My Government is
well aware of the challenges posed by the conflict with
the Taliban and other insurgent and terrorist groups.
Therefore, we firmly believe that a political settlement
is the only viable, long-term solution, and the United
Kingdom strongly supports efforts towards such a
settlement. In that respect, we urge the Government
16-28698

14/09/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

to make every effort to create a broad base of support
for constructive engagement with the Taliban. But
until that peace is secured, the Afghan security forces
must continue their vital work. I pay tribute to their
bravery today. They are standing up to the Taliban and
other groups across the country, staving off pressure
in Uruzgan, Helmand, Kunduz and elsewhere, often
at terrible cost. The United Kingdom is committed
to help develop their capability, and we welcome the
robust actions taken by Afghanistan to combat the
emerging threats posed by Da’esh affiliates in eastern
Afghanistan. The threats arising from those groups are
very real, and united international support is needed
in response.
Afghanistan’s regional neighbours, as well as the
international community, will also have to play their
part to support peace. My Government believes that a
positive, balanced and equitable relationship between
Afghanistan and Pakistan is of particular importance.
It is vital that both sides engage constructively, while
recognizing each other’s constraints and objectives.
Dialogue is important, especially at a time of
heightened tension. In that respect, I want to emphasize
the importance my Government attaches to an effective
response to the emerging refugee crisis. We have
witnessed a dramatic increase in refugee returns,
flowing from Pakistan into Afghanistan. As highlighted
by the Special Representative, the numbers of refugees
and internally displaced persons are unprecedented, and
the National Unity Government will require significant
support from the international community to address
the short-term requirements. It is critical, therefore,
that an agreed action plan be put in place as soon as
possible and that a longer-term approach be developed
to address push-and-pull factors in both countries.
Fifteen years on from the terrible events that led
to international intervention in Afghanistan, it is too
easy to focus on the problems the country still faces.
Yes, we are still some way from shifting gears from
consolidation and stability towards development and
economic growth. But we cannot lose sight of how much
has been achieved. With our continuing assistance
and support, we firmly believe that Afghanistan will
emerge from these challenging times to enjoy the peace
and prosperity that so many of us take for granted.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks New Zealand for convening this debate
on Afghanistan. We welcome Minister for Foreign
Affairs McCully to the Security Council and thank

S/PV.7771

him for presiding over the meeting earlier today. We
also thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
for his briefing, and the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, for
his statement.
Recently, the Afghan National Unity Government
has made unremitting efforts at maintaining national
stability, promoting national reconciliation and pushing
ahead with economic development. Nevertheless,
Afghanistan still faces grave challenges in the political,
economic and security spheres. All communities in
Afghanistan should step up their unity and join forces
in promoting national reconstruction. The international
community should also continue its assistance in support
of Afghanistan and push for the early achievement
of peace, stability and development in Afghanistan. I
would like to emphasize the following points.
First, it is imperative to remain unwavering in
the commitment to the general direction of national
reconciliation. Achieving national reconciliation is
the master key to addressing the problems facing
Afghanistan. All parties in Afghanistan should focus
on national development and the interests of the people
by restarting peace talks. The international community
should continue to step up its efforts and go all-out
in support of an Afghan-led and -owned inclusive
reconciliation process and make substantive efforts for
the achievement of reconciliation in the country.
Secondly, it is crucial to ensure the irreversibility
of the security situation in Afghanistan. Maintaining a
stable Afghanistan in terms of security is of paramount
importance to the development and prosperity of
country. The armed conflicts inside Afghanistan and
the terrorist activities by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham and by Al-Qaida, among others, pose a serious
threat to the security and stability of Afghanistan. The
international community should support Afghanistan’s
national security forces in capacity-building, while
beefing up their independent capacity for self-defence
and counter-terrorism, and safeguarding Afghanistan’s
security and stability.
Thirdly, it is absolutely indispensable to help
Afghanistan bolster its governance without let up.
Matters relating to Afghanistan should ultimately be
determined by the Afghans themselves. Currently,
Afghanistan is engaged in preparing its new National
Peace and Development framework. The international

16-2869821/34

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

community should, on the basis of the development
strategy determined by the Afghans and the specific
needs help the Government, improve administrative
capability and consolidate the fruits of national
reconstruction. All political parties and factions in
Afghanistan should be committed to defusing their
differences through dialogue and consultation and join
hands in advancing the peaceful reconstruction process
in Afghanistan.
Fourthly, it is imperative to ensure that the
development process in Afghanistan makes further
progress without backtracking. Promoting economic
and social development is vital to safeguarding a
stable Afghanistan. The international community should
encourage and support Afghanistan in fully leveraging
its advantages in resources and geographical location
and push for progress in building infrastructure and
developing trade and investment, among other areas.
Meanwhile, it should also promote the development of
friendly relations and cooperation for mutual benefit
between Afghanistan and its neighbours, as well as
Afghanistan’s participation in regional linkages and
communication and economic cooperation, so as to
achieve full integration in regional development.
China is a good neighbour and good friend of
Afghanistan. China supports an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned reconciliation process in the country.
China has taken an active part in various mechanisms,
such as the Quadrilateral Coordination Group made up
of Afghanistan, Pakistan, China and the United States
of America, in an effort to create enabling external
environments for the achievement of reconciliation. We
are ready to link up China’s One Belt, One Road initiative
with the Afghanistan National Development Strategy.
China is also hoping that the related international
assistance mechanisms for Afghanistan will continue
to contribute positively to the achievement of lasting
peace and sustainable development in Afghanistan.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
welcomes the holding of this debate and we are pleased
to see Minister McCully participate in it personally.
This debate, taking place in the context of the
consideration of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/768) on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace security, affords
us a new opportunity to look into the situation in
Afghanistan, which is more worrying than ever. In that
regard, I would like to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
22/34

14/09/2016

Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for this excellent
briefing. I also take this opportunity to wish him every
success in his new duties. Of course, he will be able to
count on the full support of the delegation of Senegal.
Since our previous meeting (see S/PV.7722) here
in the Chamber a few months ago, some progress has
certainly been achieved in Afghanistan. However, we
are forced to note, taking stock of the past threet months,
that the political situation remains rather fragile, while
the security situation continues to deteriorate. That
has resulted in a number of difficulties in terms of
human rights violations and also at the humanitarian
level. However, fortunately, the combined efforts of the
Afghan Government, its regional partners and of the
international community, especially UNAMA, continue
to attenuate the negative impacts of this complex crisis
and provide us with a glimmer of hope.
Following the recent political and security
developments, the situation remains quite concerning.
At the security level, continuing clashes with the Taliban
and other armed groups have claimed an unprecedented
number of civilian lives since the United Nations started
to systematically count the deaths in 2009. That has
also led to a great many displaced persons, as indicated
in the report under consideration, while armed clashes
continue and suicide attacks unfortunately proliferate.
This unfortunate picture has been corroborated by
the attack on 23 July against a Hazara demonstration
in Khorasan province, which was claimed by Da’esh.
Furthermore, prospects for a possible peace process with
the Taliban have remained limited. Their determination
to continue their attacks and to continue to expand
their territorial gains remains almost intact. However,
it is more important than ever to transcend the current
impasse in which the peace negotiations between the
Afghan Government and a number of armed groups
find themselves. NATO’s support to Afghan troops
turns out to be crucial to weaken radical elements and
prompt them to come to the negotiating table.
This is also the right time to encourage the Afghan
Government in its efforts in favour of the protection of
women and children, in a context where violations of
human rights continue to take place.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, it remains
more disquieting with the increase in the number of
displaced people. We pay tribute to the humanitarian
16-28698

14/09/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

community for its commitment in Afghanistan, where
it continues its work to help impacted populations,
especially the most disadvantaged and vulnerable
segments of the population, sometimes at the very risk
of their own lives.
Faced with such an alarming situation, we
should welcome the continuing support shown by the
international community, including NATO forces,
and their continued cooperation with the Afghan
Government. We also pay tribute to the spirit of
cooperation and understanding that has prevailed
between Afghanistan and Pakistan following the June
incidents on the border in Torkham. We welcome the
relaunching of regional cooperation in the diplomatic,
security and economic fields between Afghanistan
and its partners, such as India, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the People’s
Republic of China, Tajikistan and the Russian
Federation. We welcome the Afghan Government’s
continuing preparations for the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan planned for 5 October and the elaboration
of its National Peace and Development Framework. We
hope that the Conference will facilitate the process that
has been launched aimed at achieving lasting peace
and that it will lend momentum to economic and social
development, which will require a bolstering of efforts
in the fight against corruption, as initiated by the
Afghan Government.
In conclusion, my delegation encourages the
Government of Afghanistan and its partners and
neighbours to step up their efforts in favour of a peace,
which we hope will be lasting and to the benefit of all.
Mr. Arcia Vivas (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
begin our intervention by thanking the presidency of
New Zealand for convening this debate, and Minister
McCully for presiding over it. We also thank the Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his briefing.
We welcome him and we support his commendable
efforts as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for peace and stability in Afghanistan. We
should highlight the work done by UNAMA, which
has been essential to promoting peace, national
reconciliation, regional cooperation and economic and
social development. We would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, our friend
Ambassador Saikal, for his statement.

S/PV.7771

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela is very concerned about the delicate political
and security situation in Afghanistan, which poses
great challenges for the country. As the SecretaryGeneral points out in his report (S/2016/768), the
levels of violence arising from the Taliban and other
non-State actors have had great impact on the civilian
population, which has been forced into displacement
to other areas of the country in order to avoid clashes
between armed groups.
The security situation has been adversely affected
by the ongoing military operations of the Taliban,
which have been carrying out a military campaign
that has tested the Afghan national security system.
In that regard, we note with concern how the statistics
relating to armed clashes increased by 14.7 per cent
between May and July. Likewise, the armed conflict in
Afghanistan continues to affect the civilian population,
who are the main victims of armed clashes between
the parties. According to report, 1,600 people were
killed and 3,575 were injured during the reporting
period, the highest figure recorded since 2009.
The UNAMA report indicates that women and children
are the most affected by the spiral of violence. Since
the beginning of 2016, we have seen an increase in
executions of women by non-State actors. To this we
must add the use of children as soldiers and the tragic
toll of 213 boys and girls killed in fighting on the
ground. In that context, Venezuela reiterates its call
for the Taliban insurgents to resolutely join the peace
talks. We support the statement made by the SecretaryGeneral, which has been reported on several occasions,
that direct negotiations between the Taliban and the
Afghan Government are key to this dynamic, but must
not undermine the role of the international community
in support of these initiatives.
We believe that strengthening dialogue and mutual
trust among all parties is essential to consolidating
peace. It is therefore necessary to redouble efforts in
that direction, with the support of the international
community. In this regard, we welcome the efforts of
the High Peace Council, which has made progress in its
programmes of action towards a national reconciliation
strategy.
Afghanistan has also been destabilized by the
presence of the so-called Islamic State, whose terrorist
cells are a threat to peace and security in the region.
In this regard, presidential statement S/PRST/2016/14,
which the Council has just adopted, provides elements

16-2869823/34

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

to that end, while condemning the terrorist attacks of
that organization, such as the latest in Kabul last July,
in which hundreds of civilians were killed by terrorist
acts.
At the political level, we call for the Afghan
leadership to work on behalf of the people and thereby
bridge the differences that hinder the achievement of
the objectives set by the National Unity Government.
In that regard, we welcome the achievements made in
electoral reform, and recognize the intention of the
Afghan Government to hire advisers to the President in
various fields, such as education, security and internal
affairs.
In the field of the political empowerment of women
within the framework of resolution 1325 (2000),
we stress the efforts of the Afghan Government in
adopting the strategy and action plan on the elimination
of violence against women for the period 2016-2020.
We also recognize the interaction between UNAMA
and the authorities of that country to strengthen
protection services for women and eradicate violence
against women. The establishment of centres to
address this issue reflects the commitment of the
Afghan Government in this area, and we encourage
it to continue working in that direction. We welcome
the progress made in increasing the participation of
Afghan women in positions of leadership at various
Government levels.
We emphasize that strengthening dialogue and
cooperation between Afghanistan and Pakistan is
necessary to contribute to stability in the region.
We regret the fact that once again the report reflects
political disagreements between the two countries. In
that regard, we hope that they will be overcome for
the benefit of their peoples. Common challenges in the
political, economic and security fields require greater
understanding on the part of the respective authorities
in order to overcome the mistrust and problems that
affect them. We welcome the strengthening of regional
cooperation between Afghanistan, India and Iran,
which continues with trilateral transport projects and
transit that will facilitate trade among those States and
the countries of Central Asia. The ongoing high-level
visits to Afghanistan are a clear manifestation of this
trend towards dialogue and the solving of problems of
common interest to the region.
The Brussels Conference for the development of
Afghanistan, to be held in October, will be of great
24/34

14/09/2016

importance to promoting the stability, security and
economic and social development of the nation. We
therefore encourage the international community to
continue supporting the people and Government of
Afghanistan by providing resources and building
capacity to promote their development. It is to be noted
that improving the security situation will favourably
affect the country’s political, economic and social
dynamics.
Drug trafficking continues to pose serious threats
to peace and stability in Afghanistan. The Taliban
uses illegal narcotics trafficking to fund its terrorist
activities. As indicated in the report, poppy cultivation
and production in the country have increased, with the
low rate of crop eradication being a most disturbing
element, due to heavy fighting, particularly in the
province of Helmand. In that regard, we welcome the
joint efforts of Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, as well as the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to forge a common
front against this problem in the framework of regional
cooperation. We reiterate that the effective fight against
drugs requires international cooperation, including
that of neighbouring countries, to prevent, combat and
eliminate this scourge.
Finally, we encourage the Government of
Afghanistan to pursue its efforts for a comprehensive and
inclusive political process leading to the establishment
of a firm and lasting peace, to enhance its control over
all its territory and resources, and to strengthen the
State and its institutions on behalf of its people, who
have suffered war and violence for so many years.
The President: The representative of Afghanistan
has asked for the floor to make a further statement. I
give him the floor.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): I just want to make two
brief points.
First, on behalf of my Government, I wish to
officially thank the Security Council for adopting the
very timely presidential statement S/PRST/2016/14,
expressing its unanimous support. Secondly, let me
thank the Foreign Minister of New Zealand, His
Excellency Mr. Murray McCully, for presiding over
today’s meeting on Afghanistan. New Zealand is a
true-blue friend of Afghanistan, and I am sure that
it was in the spirit of such friendship that Minister
McCully spoke so frankly in his statement.
16-28698

14/09/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

However, with all due respect, the debate
over governance in Kabul is an internal matter for
Afghanistan, and we expect our friends and partners
around the world to respect that and understand their
limitations when it comes to the sovereignty of other
countries, just as we respect the sovereignty of New
Zealand and all other countries around the world. The
debate in Kabul is for the sake of the political stability
of Afghanistan, of which our international partners
should be proud. We will have to address anything that
could harm the political stability of Afghanistan.
Our two national leaders at the head of the
Government proved themselves two years ago when,
after a very lengthy marathon election, they came
together and showed a great deal of statesmanship in
putting the National Unity Government together. Of
course, as we said from the start, this has not been an
easy way; there is a troubled way ahead of us, but we
must make it work. And the only way to make it work
is to address the issues rather than ignore them. That is
exactly what we are doing.
The President: I shall now make a further statement
in my capacity of Foreign Minister of New Zealand.
I thank the representative of Afghanistan for
his frank remark in response to my statement. New
Zealand has indeed been a true friend of Afghanistan
over 10 years of effort and lives lost in a very difficult
period. The issue of the stability of the Government
of Afghanistan is fundamental to the success of the
international effort, and we look forward to working
with Afghanistan to make things as strong as possible
both for the international community and for the
Government of Afghanistan.
I resume my functions as President of the Security
Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): My country aligns itself
with the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union, and supports the statement to be
made by the representative of the Netherlands as part
of our cooperation related to the upcoming split term
in the Security Council. We are currently defining our
cooperation around shared goals and values in the firm
belief that this agreement sends a positive political
message of cooperation to tackle common challenges,
of which the situation in Afghanistan is one.

S/PV.7771

I would like to begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his thorough report on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2016/768) and by expressing our
appreciation for the action of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in this complex
scenario. We offer a warm welcome to the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
The challenges Afghanistan is facing remain
daunting. On the security front, the persistent increase
in the number of civilian victims of the conflict is
cause for great concern, and the data on children who
have died or been injured is particularly alarming. The
already serious humanitarian situation has further
deteriorated due to the increase in the number of
internally displaced persons. We condemn most firmly
the terrorist attacks that continue to plague the country,
such as those in Kabul in recent weeks. In the face of
such unjustifiable and indiscriminate acts of violence,
Italy reiterates its full support for and recognition
of the efforts of the Afghan Government to combat
terrorism and the actions of violent armed groups and
to ensure peace and stability for the country. Against
that background, on the occasion of the NATO Summit
held in Warsaw in July, together with its partners in the
Alliance, Italy decided to continue its active engagement
in the Resolute Support Mission as a framework nation,
assisting the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces to enhance their capabilities.
The past months have not seen encouraging
developments towards a possible peace process, which
nonetheless remains the main objective to bring an
end to the violence in the country. Efforts to establish
the conditions that could lead to an Afghan-led peace
process must therefore be renewed. To that end, close
and constructive cooperation among the countries of
the region is essential. We hope that such cooperation
will be based on the understanding that fighting
terrorism and those who aim to violently to destabilize
Afghanistan is in the common interests, as a peaceful
and stable Afghanistan is essential for the stability of
the entire region.
Another basic challenge for Afghanistan is that
of strengthening its institutions and consolidating
economic and social development. The upcoming
Brussels Conference will be a key moment in the
country’s journey to self-sufficiency; to lower its
dependency on international aid; to expand the
progress achieved in the past 15 years in consolidating
democracy, social development, access to health care

16-2869825/34

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

and the promotion of the rights of women and girls; and
to address the underlying causes of Afghan migration
flows, in particular towards Europe, while helping to
improve security conditions. We are aware that, in
order to achieve those ambitious goals, the financial
support of the international community is decisive.
Likewise, the achievement of the goals requires the
utmost determination on the part of Afghanistan in
pursuing the domestic reforms already initiated in that
direction.
We appreciate the commitment of the Afghan
authorities in that regard, as well as the programmes
of action that relate to the Afghan National Peace
and Development Framework and the updated goals
of the Self Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework, which will be presented in Brussels. In
the spirit of the principles of mutual commitment and
mutual accountability, which support the partnership
between Afghanistan and the international community,
it is important that those reform plans be implemented
concretely and effectively. That is what the donor
countries are asking in order to confirm their assistance,
but it is above all also what the Afghan people are
asking for.

14/09/2016

Government is imperative in order for it to effectively
address the multiple challenges that it faces.
The upcoming Conference in Brussels will be
another opportunity for the international community to
signal its sustained support to peace and development
in Afghanistan. Pakistan will continue to support
international efforts for the stability and economic
development of Afghanistan. But external support,
although critical, cannot be a substitute for internal
political stability. Among other factors, that is contingent
upon the successful implementation of reforms by the
Afghan Government and the active promotion of peace
and reconciliation.
The security situation in Afghanistan has continued
to deteriorate with the escalation in violence and a
significant increase in civilian casualties. That is a cause
of great concern not just for Afghanistan’s neighbours,
but also for the entire international community.

Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2016/768) and congratulate
Special Representative Yamamoto on his appointment.

The international community is unanimous in its
view that sustainable peace is achievable only through
a negotiated end to the war. Fifteen years of war waged
by the the world’s most powerful forces could not yield
a military solution; a military solution is even more
unlikely now. Nor should anyone expect that Pakistan
will fight Afghanistan’s war on its soil. Unfortunately,
the Afghan parties themselves appear to have moved
away from the international consensus that peace can
be achieved only through negotiations. Neither side
appears willing to talk, except on their own terms.
Meanwhile, new actors are being introduced into the
conflict. A dialogue between Kabul and the Afghan
Taliban remains the only way to end Afghanistan’s long
night of suffering. Pakistan is willing to help in reviving
the dialogue, as we did in June 2015, at President Ashraf
Ghani’s request. But that requires efforts by all four
members of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group on
the Afghan Peace and Reconciliation Process — namely,
Afghanistan, the United States, China and Pakistan.
This mechanism remains an important vehicle to assist
an Aghan-led and owned peace process.

The report of the Secretary-General paints a
bleak and troubling picture of the security, political
and economic situation in Afghanistan. We support
the Secretary-General’s call on the Afghan leadership
to demonstrate a spirit of cooperation to achieve a
meaningful agreement on the path forward for the
benefit of the Afghan people. The unity of the Afghan

Both sides are now threatened by the rise of Da’esh
in Afghanistan. Several elements of what is known
as the Pakastani Taliban — or the Tehrik-e-Taliban
Pakistan (TTP) — have declared their allegiance or
integration with Da’esh. It is therefore strange that some
of TTP elements, allied with Da’esh, continue to enjoy
the backing of Aghanistan’s intelligence agency. Unless

In the wake of the positive results achieved so far,
it is essential that further concrete and measurable
progress be reached in crucial sectors, such as the fight
against corruption, human rights, the promotion of the
rights of women and their full empowerment throughout
society. To that end, close internal cohesion within
the Government and effective teamwork are absolute
prerequisites. We therefore hope that the differences
that have recently emerged within the Government will
be overcome, whilre renewing the spirit of national
unity at its foundation in the greater interests of the
country and its people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.

26/34

16-28698

14/09/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7771

peace is restored in Afghanistan, it risks emerging
again as a central source of global terrorism.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.

My country has paid an onerous price for almost
four decades of strife and conflict in Afghanistan.
Pakistan continues to play host to the largest protracted
presence of refugees anywhere in the world. Apart from
Afghanistan itself, it is Pakistan that stands to gain the
most from the restoration of peace across our western
border. Pakistan’s counter-terrorism campaign — the
largest and most effective in the world, deploying a
180,000-strong force — has turned the tide of terrorism
in the country. Unfortunately, though, we continue to
encounter threats from TTP elements and its backers
from across the border.

Mr. Thoms (Germany): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Yamamoto for his briefing. I wish him every
success in his important posting at the helm of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and would like to reassure him of our full
support.

We call upon Kabul to ensure that its territory is
not used by anyone to foment terrorism in Pakistan.
To prevent cross-border attacks, Pakistan will fence
extended parts of the border. If the Afghan seeks an end
to such cross-border terrorism, it should support such
fencing and strict controls at the international border.
We will work with the Afghan Government through the
recently constituted high-level consultation mechanism
to address border and other concerns.
The path to peace in Afghanistan is arduous but
achievable. However, it is up to the Afghan parties
themselves to acknowledge that there is no alternative
path to peace other than through unconditional dialogue
and making necessary, although difficult, compromises
to arrive at a negotiated settlement. The people of
Afghanistan deserve no less.
The peoples of Pakistan and Afghanistan enjoy
age-old bonds of kinship, faith and a shared history.
Pakistan has offered unprecedented hospitality and
support to the Afghan people over the past several
decades of their travail and tragedy provoked by foreign
military interventions. We have delayed sending back
Afghan refugees yet again. We allow the transit of
Afghan goods through our ports and over our roads.
We also have displayed extreme forebearance in the
face of unwarranted accusations from certain quarters
in Kabul. We urge the Afghan Government to halt its
belligerent rhetoric. That is in the long-term interests
of its country and its people, as well as of the entire
region. We stand committed to work with the Afghan
Government for the improvement of this relationship
on the basis of shared interests and values, and for the
mutual benefit of our two peoples.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
While Afghanistan has made considerable progress
in many areas over recent years, the security, and
consequently the economic, situation remain extremely
challenging. It is a matter of concern that the number
of civilian casualties is on the rise. As the SecretaryGeneral points out in his report (S/2016/768), the number
of armed clashes rose by approximately 15 per cent, and
the number of casualties among children increased by
18 per cent. The protection of civilians in situations
of armed conflict is paramount under international
humanitarian law. We welcome the Government’s
national policy on civilian casualty mitigation, which
needs to be fully implemented.
It is important that the international community
continue to give its full attention to the situation in
Afghanistan. The Brussels Conference on Afghanistan
will be a chance for the international community to
once more underline its political and financial support
for Afghanistan, while at the same time allowing
the Afghan Government to present its achievements
and the remaining challenges in implementing its
reform agenda.
Afghanistan is Germany’s single largest engagement
in a foreign country, both in civilian and military terms,
and we are conscious of the resulting responsibilities.
Germany is committed to maintaining its support for
Afghanistan. However, it is crucial that inclusive,
effective and reform-oriented governance remain a
priority beyond Brussels. This includes progress on
electoral reforms to pave the way to parliamentary and
district council elections. Also, economic reforms are
of the utmost importance to counter slaw economic
growth. The accession of Afghanistan to the World Trade
Organization is an encouraging sign in this respect.
We encourage the Afghan Government to maintain
its efforts to fight corruption and to implement the
existing strategies in a transparent manner. Visible

16-2869827/34

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

progress in fighting corruption is a strong argument
for justifying the exceptional level of donor support
to Afghanistan. Development and security go hand in
hand. In the long run, a peace and reconciliation process
is the only way to long-term stability in Afghanistan
and the region. Such a process can succeed only if it
enjoys the united backing of all key stakeholders in the
region and beyond.
Germany joins all of Afghanistan’s friends and
partners in a sending the clear message that we
remain committed to supporting Afghanistan, in close
cooperation with the Afghan Government and our
international partners.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Let me start by joining others
in welcoming Mr Tadamichi Yamamoto and thanking
him for his first briefing as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General.
The security situation across Afghanistan
remains challenging. Recent violent attacks in Kabul,
deliberately targeting Afghanistan’s civilian population,
are particularly concerning. We condemn the brutal
tactics used by insurgent groups. In the face of these
attacks, the Afghan people and security forces continue
to demonstrate courage and resilience. Australia
reaffirms its commitment to assisting Afghanistan in
defending its people against the insurgency. We support
the efforts of President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah to maintain the National Unity Government.
Constructive working relationships and a shared vision
across all levels of Government are key to managing
Afghanistan’s security and economic interests.
Australia supports United Nations efforts to assist
returning refugees and internally displaced persons in
a safe, orderly and dignified manner. We encourage
Afghanistan’s neighbours to support a manageable flow
of returnees, enabling the Government of Afghanistan
to respond effectively, particularly in the lead-up
to winter.
This year, the international community continues
to rally its support for Afghanistan with two major
summits. The Warsaw Summit in July demonstrated
ongoing international support for Afghanistan’s security
needs. Australia, alongside international partners,
reaffirmed our commitment to Afghanistan. Together,
we agreed to continue our support for Afghanistan’s
28/34

14/09/2016

security forces, formalizing our commitment to NATO’s
Resolute Support Mission beyond 2016 and to providing
sustainment funding at current levels through to 2020.
The international community also welcomed President
Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah’s commitment
to reforming at Warsaw. We look forward to the
presentation of the Government’s national development
strategy at the Brussels Conference next month, and
to working with Afghanistan to implement these plans
following the Conference.
At Brussels, the international community will
focus on future support for Afghanistan’s development.
Australia recognizes Afghanistan’s efforts in pushing
forward key national reforms in difficult circumstances,
and in particular we support its emphasis on
economic growth, revenue mobilization, employment
and countering corruption. We also welcome the
Government of Afghanistan’s support for gender
equality, including steps towards implementing the
national action plan on women and peace and security
and the elimination of violence against women.
But huge challenges remain to ensuring that reforms
made by the Government are felt by ordinary Afghans.
We look forward to discussing the Government of
Afghanistan’s plans for development and addressing
the needs of the Afghan population, including poverty
reduction, basic service delivery, job creation and
inclusive development.
In conclusion, international efforts in Afghanistan
are supported by a strong United Nations presence,
and Australia values the role that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan plays in guiding
and coordinating international support.
The President: I give the floor to Ms. Adamson.
Ms. Adamson: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Serbia and Albania;
the country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina as well
as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Armenia,
align themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2016/768). I would also
like to thank Special Representative Yamamoto for
his briefing.
16-28698

14/09/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

Let me start by reiterating our full support for the
continuing important role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and all the United
Nations agencies in supporting the Afghan people and in
coordinating the international community’s assistance.
Progress in Afghanistan in recent years has been
remarkable but uneven, and requires consolidation
in many areas. The recent political tensions amid the
country’s security and economic challenges highlight a
persistent fragility. Political stability and predictability
are essential. Preparations for the Brussels Conference
require confidence that there is a stable political
way forward well beyond October, with a need to
compromise and to make concessions wherever
necessary to ensure a viable and durable solution.
This calls ever more for a long-term perspective
and a realistic approach that acknowledges the huge
challenges ahead of us. It calls for the sustained and
predictable support of the international community,
based on mutual accountability principles.
We are collectively committed and contributing to
the stabilization of the region — in the fight against
terrorism, against the illegal economy and narcotics
production, as well as in trying to alleviate migratory
pressures, which represent an increasingly growing
challenge for neighbours near and far, including Europe.
In this context, allow me to say that we deeply deplore
the high number of civilian casualties in Afghanistan,
which, according to the latest United Nations report, are
at record levels. Improving security remains the single
most important factor for stability and development in
Afghanistan. Therefore, we welcome the commitments
made at the NATO Warsaw Summit in July in support
of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.
Looking ahead, we are nowentering the final phase
of organizing, together with the Afghan Government
the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, which
will follow three strands: substantial progress in
Afghan State- and institution-building by effectively
implementing the reforms of the National Unity
Government; international support near or at current
levels up to 2020, and increasing the effectiveness
of aid in support of the new Afghan development
framework; and regional support for a political process
oriented towards stabilization, peace and cross-border
economic cooperation.
We are confident that, by the time of the Brussels
Conference, we will come to a joint vision and

S/PV.7771

development framework for the coming years, on the
basis of credible implementation plans. Following the
recent meeting of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board in Kabul, the European Union and its member
States welcomed the Afghanistan National Peace and
Development Framework. This is a strategic document
that defines future development priorities and guides
Government and donors’ development programming.
Cross-government buy-in, effective implementation
arrangements and timely results of this ambitious
reform programme will determine its success, also in
the eyes of the Afghan population.
The finalization of the new national priority
programmes is one important element in this regard,
as is an agreement on a new annex to the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework that defines
clear progress indicators for the coming years. These
policy documents pave the way for tangible progress in
terms of poverty reduction and the provision of basic
services and public goods. Mutual accountability is the
driving principle. Continued exceptional but gradually
declining financial support over the coming years
will depend on such progress, including the necessary
institution-building to maintain a stable society based
on the rule of law and the consolidation of Afghanistan’s
democratic institutions, as well as a perspective for the
already delayed parliamentary elections.
The fight against corruption remains a critical
challenge, and effective measures leading to actual
results are of paramount importance, as is the
establishment of a reliable rule-of-law framework
which includes civilian policing and a functioning
justice system. They are a precondition for the respect,
protection and promotion of human rights, in particular
women’s and children’s rights.
On behalf of the European Union and its member
States, I would like also to reiterate that joint
State-building and development efforts in Afghanistan
can be sustained only if they are built on reinforced
regional cooperation. Development and security
are interconnected challenges for Afghanistan’s
State-building process and need to be underpinned by
genuine political support at the regional level. This also
includes the increasing humanitarian challenges we face
with the situation of refugees and internally displaced
persons in Afghanistan and the neighbouring countries,
notably Pakistan and Iran. We need to address together
the growing pressure of migration.

16-2869829/34

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

Taking all three strands together, the Afghan reform
agenda, a new development partnership and a new
regional dynamic, a successful Brussels Conference
will send the signal of a renewed and stronger
partnership. A high level of attendance and clear signals
for continued extraordinary support for Afghanistan
will be important to convey a clear message that calls
for tangible progress on the ground; a strong signal for
economic reforms and inclusive growth, job creation
and a much more business-friendly environment; a firm
commitment to political stability; and a new dynamic
towards peace.
Let me conclude by thanking Special Representative
Tadamichi Yamamoto for his outstanding work in the
past two years as Deputy Special Representative and
by congratulating him on his new position. We wish
him all the best for the challenging tasks that lie ahead
of him. We look forward to continued cooperation with
Mr. Yamamoto.
Mr. Lal (India): I thank you, Madam President, for
having organized this debate. We thank the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative in Afghanistan,
Ambassador Yamamoto, for his briefing and wish
him well in his endeavours for peace in Afghanistan.
We also thank the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, for his
important statement.
We offer our sincere condolences at the loss of lives
and destruction of property in several recent terrorist
attacks in Afghanistan, which killed and maimed
hundreds of innocent people. While the Taliban’s
increased attacks and military gains in the country
have been resisted by the Afghan security forces, these
attacks have only gone up in the last few months, a
trend which cannot be explained as simply a peak in
the fighting season. The current efforts made by the
international community to assist Afghanistan have
clearly not been adequate.
We have noted the flash appeal issued by the
United Nations to assist Afghanistan in managing
and minimizing the huge humanitarian costs that
an expected mass migration of more than 1 million
people in a short period will entail in the midst of the
increasing violence. The Security Council needs to find
the means to reverse the deteriorating security situation
so that the gains made by the people of Afghanistan in
the last 15 years do not wither away.
30/34

14/09/2016

Groups and individuals that perpetrate violence
against the people and the Government of Afghanistan
must not be allowed safe havens in Afghanistan’s
neighbourhood. We note that Afghanistan, along with
the Resolute Support Force, has taken steps to eliminate
the terrorist leaders who were operating from those parts
of Afghan territory controlled by the Taliban and other
terrorist groups. While the Afghanistan Government has
made efforts to combat terrorism, others have callously
looked the other way when Afghanistan is targeted by
the Taliban, the Haqqani network, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham, Al-Qaida, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and
Jaish-e-Mohammed.
The effective implementation of the Security
Council sanctions regime, including that established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, as well
as that established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011),
on the Taliban, is absolutely essential for it to serve as
a strong deterrent to the listed entities and individuals.
The fact that the leader of the Taliban, a proscribed
entity, is not yet designated a terrorist individual
remains a mystery to us. Can we know the rationale for
such an approach? Is it now the thinking that leaders of
proscribed entities will not be held accountable for the
deeds of the listed groups that they head? Is this how
we intend to address one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security?
Or will the response to our queries be a deafening
silence, as was the case when the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), which deals with issues relating to Afghanistan,
met last month, on 8 August? We are unaware of what
was discussed and what was the outcome of these
discussions. Are Member States entitled to know what
this Committee, which acts on their behalf, considers
and decides upon on for all of us? This appears to
be one more instance of the secrecy practiced in the
subterranean universe of the Security Council, which
has now enshrined the principles of anonymity and
unanimity to ensure a lack of accountability to Member
States.
Afghanistan has India’s full support in
strengthening its defence capabilities and in preserving
its sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity, which is
essential for the stability of the region.
16-28698

14/09/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7771

India remains strongly committed to Afghanistan.
The Prime Minister of India has conveyed to the
President of Afghanistan, during his ongoing visit
to India, our offer of an allocation of a further sum
of $1 billion for the requirements of Afghanistan for
capacity-building in spheres including education, health
care, agriculture, skill development, the empowerment
of women, energy, infrastructure and the strengthening
of democratic institutions. India is proud, privileged
and honoured that its engagement in Afghanistan,
through our development partnership, has been a
harbinger of hope and predictability, as conveyed by
President Ghani to Prime Minister Modi earlier today.

continuing deterioration of the security situation in the
country indicates that Afghanistan and the region are
no safer more than a decade after its invasion.

We believe that the path to reconciliation in
Afghanistan should be through a process that is owned
and led by Afghanistan, reflecting the aspirations
of the people of Afghanistan. India will continue to
engage with the international community to assist the
Government of Afghanistan in all possible ways in this
regard.

In my previous statement in June (see S/PV.7722), I
warned about the emergence of Da’esh and its offshoots
in Afghanistan. During the same period, we witnessed
the so-called Islamic State of Iraq and the LevantKhorasan Province (ISIL-KP) claiming responsibility
for the terrorist attack against a demonstration by ethnic
Hazaras on 23 July, which was the deadliest single
incident recorded by the United Nations in Afghanistan
since 2001. That is just another indication of the
threat. ISIL-KP, along with a range of other terrorist
and extremist groups, such as the Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan, in the north, and the East Turkestan
Islamic Movement, appears as an emerging security
threat in Afghanistan. Today, the Afghan National
Unity Government is at the forefront of combating
terrorism, but there is an increased need for the
international community to provide sustained support
to the Government in its fight against terrorism and
extremism, as well as to address its security, economic
and political challenges.

We applaud the role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in providing
assistance for Afghanistan in various sectors in this
crucial transformation decade.
I would like to conclude by reiterating what Prime
Minister Modi told President Ghani: “The 1.25 billion
people of India stand with their Afghan brothers and
sisters”. India reposes its full faith in the brave and
resilient people of Afghanistan and the National Unity
Government for a peaceful, prosperous, stable, unified,
sovereign and democratic Afghanistan as a land bridge
between West, Central and South Asia.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to express my appreciation to New Zealand
for having organized this debate on the situation in
Afghanistan. My thanks also go to the Ambassador of
Afghanistan for his statement. I would like to welcome
and thank Mr. Yamamoto, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his briefing and for presenting the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/768).
Unfortunately, security and instability remain the
major challenges for Afghanistan. The report refers to
a 24 per cent increase in the number of armed clashes
compared with the same period last year, while last
year was reported as the highest number recorded since
2001 in terms of the intensity of armed clashes. This

On peace talks between the Afghan Government
and the Taliban, uncertainty prevails as concerns any
prospect of making peace with them. Iran reiterates its
support for any Afghan-led peace process; at the same
time, we condemn all violent attacks committed by the
Taliban and all other terrorist groups as well as any
cooperation with them, since we believe that this will
encourage them in their odious behaviour and thus be
counterproductive to establishing peace in Afghanistan.

Strengthening our regional cooperation with
Afghanistan is a priority and a major pathway to
consolidating peace and economic growth in the
region. During the past decade, Iran has spent millions
of dollars to help Afghanistan to complete nearly 300
projects in areas ranging from infrastructure to training
and capacity-building in human resources, especially
through the hundreds of scholarships we offer each year.
Afghanistan and Iran continue to cooperate in
those areas, following the 23 May trilateral agreement
with India focused on the Iranian port of Chabahar.
Coordination meetings at the level of the Governors of
the border provinces were held on 25 and 26 July to
discuss security and new trade opportunities involving
the port. The Afghan Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
visited Tehran on 3 August for discussions on trade,

16-2869831/34

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

infrastructure and the presence of Afghan nationals in
Iran, and the Afghan National Security Adviser visited
Iran on 6 and 7 August to discuss border security and
countering violent extremism. The fifth meeting of the
Afghanistan-Iran Joint Economic Commission was
held on 10 August in Tehran, following a four-year
interval. Iran and Afghanistan are also committed to
increasing their connectivity with emphasis on the
Khaf-Herat railway, a 78-mile railroad project in Farah,
and a second bridge over the Hirmand River.
Iran continues to provide its full support for the
promotion of security, stability and comprehensive and
sustainable development in Afghanistan, as we consider
security in Afghanistan to be the security of our own
borders and of the region as a whole. We support
UNAMA and United Nations agencies in their efforts
to provide development and reconstruction assistance
to Afghanistan through the Organization’s genuine
commitment to a sustained partnership with the country,
as set forth in final report of the Tripartite Review
Commission on the United Nations in Afghanistan.
The UNAMA mandate and its good offices should be
used to strengthen national institutions and capacities
in priority areas, as requested by the Government.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): In honour of
New Zealand’s presidency of the Security Council, I
would like to use the Maori greeting “Kia Ora” to first
address you, Madam President.
I align myself with the statement made on behalf
of the European Union a few moments ago. However, I
would like to underline the following.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully supports
the statement made on behalf of Italy, also as part of
our cooperation related to the upcoming split term
in the Security Council. As my Italian colleague just
emphasized, we are currently defining our cooperation
around shared goals and values in the firm belief that
this agreement sends a positive political message of
cooperation to tackle common challenges here at the
United Nations.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his detailed and thorough report (S/2016/768). I would
also like to thank Special Representative Yamamoto
for his briefing. I wish him well in his new position.
32/34

14/09/2016

I would also like to thank my good friend, Permanent
Representative Saikal, for his statement.
Today I will focus on three issues, namely,
reconciliation and security, the Brussels Conference,
and gender issues.
In our view, issues of peace and reconciliation are of
paramount importance. We would highly welcome the
swift signing of an agreement between the High Peace
Council and the Hezb-i-Islami as an encouragement for
other insurgent groups to engage in serious peace talks.
The need for peace and reconciliation is underlined
by the security situation in Afghanistan, as has been
mentioned by many of our colleagues. The report of
the Secretary-General states that the overall security
situation has deteriorated since the beginning of the
year, and it is the people of Afghanistan who have borne
the brunt of violence and terrible atrocities committed
by the Taliban and other armed groups.
Civilian casualties have increased are currently at
the highest level since 2009, according the UNAMA
midyear report. That has resulted in many internally
displaced persons and refugees, as our Australian
colleague just mentioned, and increasing pressure
on migration, including through Europe. The intense
fighting that took place in Tarin Kowt last week, which
is a place of particular concern for the Dutch because
we serve there, shows the fragility of the region and, in
particular, its security situation. In addition, in Kabul
last week, 41 innocent people were killed and more
than 100 were wounded in the two major attacks that
took place there. Our thoughts and condolences go to
the victims and their families.
In our view, those developments demonstrate the
urgent need to improve security for ordinary Afghan
citizens. We commend the Afghan special forces and
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces for
their competent and professional response in countering
the Taliban and other insurgents. The international
community, including the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
has supported those forces for over a decade now, and
we will continue to do so, as was announced in Warsaw.
We look forward to the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan, at which the Minister for Foreign Trade
and Development Cooperation of the Netherlands,
Ms. Ploumen, will participate. We believe the
Conference will be an important moment where the
international community will renew, as it should, its
commitment to the Afghan people.
16-28698

14/09/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

We commend the Afghan National Unity
Government for pursuing an ambitious reform agenda,
especially with regard to tackling corruption and
fostering regional stability and economic growth.
All these issues require stability and the longterm commitment of both the Afghan Government
and the international community. We now urge the
Government to implement those ambitious plans
without further delay.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes
the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework,
which
clearly
demonstrates
the
resolve of the Afghan Government with regard to
Afghanistan’s near future. We look forward to seeing
concrete action to implement the plan in line with the
commitments under the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework.
With regard to gender issues, much progress has
been achieved so far. Millions of women and children
in Afghanistan now have access to basic services,
such as education and health care. Women and girls
are actively taking part in social life, and Afghanistan
has experienced a sharp increase in girls enrolling
in school. Let us not forget that this was unthinkable
during Taliban rule.
At the same time, Afghanistan still faces many
challenges in that context. The position of women
remains precarious. Accordingly, we welcome the
adoption of the Afghan national action plan on
women and peace and security. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands will continue to cooperate with the
Afghan Government and civil society partners to
expedite the implementation of the plan. Women are the
cornerstone of society. Women need to play a crucial
role in rebuilding the country. Women are crucial for
peace and for the long-term sustainable development
of Afghanistan.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
has been an enduring partner of Afghanistan. We
have contributed significantly in the areas of peace,
justice and development. We remain committed to
supporting Afghanistan throughout the transformation
decade — one of ever-greater Afghan ownership and
Afghan leadership. In this spirit of partnership, the
Afghan people can count on us standing by their side.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.

S/PV.7771

Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I am grateful for this
opportunity to address the Security Council. Canada
would like to thank the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan for its ongoing crucial work
in Afghanistan, and welcomes the Secretary-General’s
latest report on it to the Council (S/2016/768).
I would like to proudly state that Canada has had
an active development presence in Afghanistan for
decades, and we remain committed to helping it achieve
its development goals. As testimony to our commitment,
Prime Minister Trudeau recently announced Canada’s
contribution to the next three years of Afghanistan’s
transformation decade. Between 2017 and 2020, Canada
will provide $465 million, consisting of $195 million for
security and $270 million for development assistance.
I would first like to emphasize that no development
can be achieved without the active and substantive
participation of all members of society, including
women and girls. For that reason, Canada takes an
approach favouring women’s and girls’ rights first in all
of our health, education and human rights programming
in Afghanistan. The path to a prosperous and stable
Afghanistan is through empowering Afghan women
and ensuring that their voices are heard and their rights
protected. We are encouraged by the positive steps
that Afghanistan has made in recent years to promote
and protect women’s rights, including strengthening
their legal protection from violence, creating greater
educational opportunities and increasing their inclusion
in public and political life. But more must be done, and
it must be done more rapidly. We believe that such
advances for Afghanistan’s women and girls will help
to advance the rights, security, and empowerment of
all Afghans.
(spoke in French)
Secondly, Canada is concerned about the
deteriorating security levels in Afghanistan over
the past year. The Afghan security forces continue
to deal with considerable challenges from an armed
insurgency that is active across much of the country.
Canada remains committed to supporting the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces and continues
to emphasize the importance of increasing the number
of women recruited into its ranks and ensuring the
protection of women and children.
Thirdly, Canada fully supports an Afghan-led peace
and reconciliation process and calls on the Taliban to
come to the table to negotiate. It is vital to ensure that

16-2869833/34

S/PV.7771

The situation in Afghanistan

the peace process includes meaningful participation by
Afghan women. Canada’s embassy in Kabul has been
working very closely with the Afghan Government to
make this happen through the appointment of strong,
capable Afghan women to the High Peace Council.
We thank the Government of Afghanistan for their
commitment to the issue and reaffirm our desire to see
a peace that can benefit the entire population.
(spoke in English)
Canada stands with the Afghan people as they strive
for a more secure and prosperous future. We support
the Afghan Government and its people in the face of
challenging circumstances, and welcome Afghanistan’s
efforts to counter an escalating insurgency, broker
peace, tackle corruption and much-needed reforms
and pursue economic and social development. Those
are tough challenges. But Canada is committed to
supporting Afghanistan in its continued quest for
stability, accountability and self-reliance.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2016/768), Special Representative Tadamichi
Yamamoto for his briefing and Ambassador Mahmoud
Saikal for his statement. I would also like to express
our appreciation for the work carried out by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
coordinating the international community’s support
for Afghanistan.
As we leave behind the NATO Warsaw Summit and
move towards the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan,
we are indeed at a critical time. We were pleased to see
that the international community will continue with its

34/34

14/09/2016

security and development assistance to Afghanistan.
We also welcome the dedication and determination
of the Government, security forces and people of
Afghanistan and their genuine efforts to overcome the
many challenges they face.
As the Secretary-General’s report shows, the
security situation in Afghanistan remains fragile.
The Afghan security forces’ fighting capabilities and
coordination skills are improving in the light of lessons
learned. However, the insurgents are improving their
techniques, too, and they remain a source of serious
concern. In that regard, continued international support
is vital. At the same time, the peace and reconciliation
process should also continue to be Afghan-owned and
-led. It is crucial to convince the Taliban to come to
the negotiating table. We support the work of several
mechanisms that have been established in various
formats to coordinate efforts in that direction and stand
ready to contribute to them.
In that understanding, we will continue our
bilateral assistance to Afghanistan in the areas of
security and development and our contributions to
NATO as a framework nation, as well as making
genuine contributions to the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process. In Ankara in June, as the co-leader country of
the Counter-terrorism Confidence Building Measures
within the Process, Turkey organized a course in
critical infrastructure protection from terrorist attacks.
We will soon finalize the preparations for two more
events, on radicalization and the financial aspects of
combating terrorism, towards the end of this year.
Before concluding, I would like to emphasize that
Turkey will continue to stand by our Afghan brothers as
long as our help is needed.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

16-28698
