A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/179
28 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 112 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/50/635/Add.2)]
50/179.

Strengthening of the rule of law

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by adopting the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 1/ Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, in cooperation
with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect for and observance
of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Firmly convinced that, as stressed in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the rule of law is an essential factor in the protection of human
rights,
Convinced that through their own national legal and judicial systems
States must provide appropriate civil, criminal and administrative remedies
for violations of human rights,
Recognizing the importance of the role that can be played by the Centre
for Human Rights of the Secretariat in supporting national efforts to
strengthen the institutions of the rule of law,
Bearing in mind that, in its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993, the
General Assembly entrusted the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights with, inter alia, providing through the Centre and other appropriate
institutions advisory services and technical and financial assistance in the
field of human rights, enhancing international cooperation for the promotion
and protection of all human rights and coordinating human rights activities
throughout the United Nations system,

1/
96-76975

Resolution 217 A (III).
/...

A/RES/50/179
Page 2

Recalling the recommendation of the World Conference on Human Rights
that a comprehensive programme be established within the United Nations and
under the coordination of the Centre with a view to helping States in the task
of building and strengthening adequate national structures that have a direct
impact on the overall observance of human rights and the maintenance of the
rule of law, 2/
Recalling also its resolution 49/194 of 23 December 1994, and taking
note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1995/54 of 3 March 1995, 3/
1.
Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the SecretaryGeneral; 4/
2.
Takes note with interest of the proposals contained in the report
of the Secretary-General for strengthening the programme of advisory services
and technical assistance of the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat in
order to comply fully with the recommendations of the World Conference on
Human Rights concerning assistance to States in strengthening their
institutions in the rule of law;
3.
Praises the efforts made by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Centre to accomplish their ever-increasing tasks with
the limited financial and personnel resources at their disposal;
4.
Expresses its deep concern at the scarcity of means at the
disposal of the Centre for the fulfilment of its tasks;
5.
Notes that the programme of advisory services and technical
assistance does not have assistance funds sufficient to provide any
substantial financial assistance to national projects that have a direct
impact on the realization of human rights and the maintenance of the rule of
law in countries that are committed to those ends, but which face economic
hardship;
6.
Affirms that the High Commissioner, with the assistance of the
Centre, remains the focal point for coordinating system-wide attention for
human rights, democracy and the rule of law;
7.
Welcomes the consultations and contacts initiated by the High
Commissioner with other relevant bodies and programmes of the United Nations
system aiming at the enhancement of inter-agency coordination and cooperation
in providing assistance for the strengthening of the rule of law;
8.
Encourages the High Commissioner to pursue these consultations,
taking into account the need to explore new synergies with other organs and

2/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III, sect. II, para. 69.

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1995,
3/
Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/1995/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
4/

A/50/653.
/...

A/RES/50/179
Page 3

agencies of the United Nations system with a view to obtaining increased
financial assistance for human rights and the rule of law;
9.
Requests the High Commissioner to continue to explore the
possibilities of obtaining from all relevant institutions of the United
Nations system, including financial institutions, acting within their
mandates, technical and financial means to strengthen the capacity of the
Centre to provide assistance to national projects aiming at the realization of
human rights and the maintenance of the rule of law;
10.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-first session on the results of the contacts established
in accordance with paragraph 9 above, as well as on any other developments
pertaining to the implementation of the above-mentioned recommendation of the
World Conference on Human Rights. 2/
99th plenary meeting
22 December 1995
