United Nations

A/RES/55/68

General Assembly

Distr.: General
31 January 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 107

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/55/595 and Corr.1 and 2)]

55/68.

Elimination of all forms of violence against women,
including crimes identified in the outcome document of
the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly,
entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and
peace for the twenty-first century”

The General Assembly,
Recalling the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
which, inter alia, calls for international cooperation in promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to
race, sex, language or religion,
Recalling also the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the Declaration on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, 2 the Declaration on the
Elimination of Violence against Women, 3 the United Nations Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 4 the Beijing Declaration 5 and
Platform for Action 6 adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women, the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted on 25 June 1993 by the
World Conference on Human Rights, 7 and the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, 8
Reaffirming the obligations of all States to promote and protect human rights
and fundamental freedoms, as enunciated in the Charter, and reaffirming also the
obligations of States parties under international human rights instruments, in
particular the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 9 the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,9 the Convention on the
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2263 (XXII).
3
See resolution 48/104.
4
See resolution 1904 (XVIII).
5
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
6
Ibid., annex II.
7
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
8
See resolution 55/2.
9
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
2

00 56347

A/RES/55/68

Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 10 the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 11 the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, 12 the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment 13 and the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families, 14
Reaffirming also the outcome document of the twenty-third special session of
the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and
peace for the twenty-first century”, 15
Reaffirming further the call for the elimination of violence against women and
girls, especially all forms of commercial sexual exploitation as well as economic
exploitation, including trafficking in women and children, female infanticide, crimes
committed in the name of honour, crimes committed in the name of passion, racially
motivated crimes, the abduction and sale of children, dowry-related violence and
deaths, acid attacks and harmful traditional or customary practices, such as female
genital mutilation and early and forced marriages,
Stressing the importance of the empowerment of women as a tool to eliminate
all forms of violence against women, including crimes identified in the outcome
document of the twenty-third special session,
1.
Expresses deep concern at the persistence of various forms of violence
and crimes against women in all parts of the world, especially all forms of
commercial sexual exploitation as well as economic exploitation, including
trafficking in women and children, female infanticide, crimes committed in the
name of honour, crimes committed in the name of passion, racially motivated
crimes, the abduction and sale of children, dowry-related violence and deaths, acid
attacks and harmful traditional or customary practices, such as female genital
mutilation and early and forced marriages;
2.
Stresses that all forms of violence against women, including crimes
identified in the outcome document of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly, 15 are obstacles to the advancement and empowerment of women,
and reaffirms that violence against women both violates and impairs or nullifies the
enjoyment by women of their human rights and fundamental freedoms;
3.
Also stresses the need to treat all forms of violence against women and
girls of all ages as a criminal offence punishable by law, including violence based on
all forms of discrimination;
4.
Reaffirms that there is increased awareness of and commitment to
preventing and combating violence against women, including crimes identified in
the outcome document of the twenty-third special session, and in this context
welcomes various legal, administrative and other measures taken by Governments
for their prevention and elimination, and calls for high priority to be attached to the
further strengthening of such measures;
10

Resolution 34/180, annex.
Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
12
Resolution 44/25, annex.
13
Resolution 39/46, annex.
14
Resolution 45/158, annex.
15
Resolution S-23/3, annex.
11

2

A/RES/55/68

5.
Urges Member States to strengthen awareness and preventive measures
for the elimination of all forms of violence against women, whether occurring in
public or private life, by encouraging and supporting public campaigns to enhance
awareness about the unacceptability and the social costs of violence against women,
inter alia, through educational and media campaigns in cooperation with educators,
community leaders and the electronic and print media;
6.
Expresses its appreciation of the work being done by non-governmental
organizations, including women’s organizations, community-based organizations
and individuals, in raising awareness about the economic, social and psychological
costs of all forms of violence against women, including crimes identified in the
outcome document of the twenty-third special session, and in this regard encourages
Governments to continue their support to the work of the non-governmental
organizations in addressing this issue;
7.
Calls upon States to fulfil their obligations under the relevant human
rights instruments and implement the Beijing Platform for Action 6 as well as the
outcome document of the twenty-third special session;
8.
Encourages States parties to include in their reports to the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and other relevant treaty bodies,
wherever possible, sex-disaggregated data and information on measures taken or
initiated to eliminate all forms of violence against women, including crimes
identified in the outcome document of the twenty-third special session;
9.
Urges relevant entities of the United Nations system, within their
mandates, to assist countries, upon their request, in their efforts aimed at preventing
and eliminating all forms of violence against women, including crimes identified in
the outcome document of the twenty-third special session, and in this regard
expresses its appreciation of the work being done by the United Nations Population
Fund, the United Nations Children’s Fund and the United Nations Development
Fund for Women and other relevant funds and programmes aimed at preventing and
eliminating violence against women and girls;
10. Invites the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on
violence against women, its causes and consequences, to further devote equal
attention to all forms of violence against women, including crimes identified in the
outcome document of the twenty-third special session, in her work and her reports,
within her mandate, to the Commission on Human Rights and the General
Assembly;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on this
matter to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session.
81st plenary meeting
4 December 2000

3
