UNITED NATIONS

COUNCIL

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
UN 1.!@$4
n\:*

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR
WV 1 4 1982

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.. ......
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2142) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*..........
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 26 April 1979 from the Chargt d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Ivory Coast to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13276) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1

1

VPV.2142

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Records of the Security Council The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2142nd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 27 April 1979, at 4 p.m.
President:

Mr. Ole ALGiRD

(Norway).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2142)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. .Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 26 April 1979 from the ChargC d’Affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Ivory Coast
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/13276)
:
The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 26 April 1979 from the &u-g6 d’Affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Ivory Coast
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13276)
1. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received letters from the representatives
of India, the Ivory Coast, Kenya, Sri Lanka and the Sudan
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the question on the agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the pro+
.’
.,..
sional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, hr. JaGal (India),
Mr. Sangaret (Ivory Coast), Mr. Maina (Kenya),. Mr: Fernando (Sri Lankti) and Mr. Sahloul (St&n) took the places
reservedfor them at the side of the Council ;Chamber. :
2. The PRESIDENT:
I should also like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received a letter dated
27,,April from the representatives of Gabon, Nigeria and
Zambia [S/132811J which reads as follows:
“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council,‘ have the honour to request that the Council should

extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure to Mr. Call&us Ndlovu, representative of
the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe, to participate in the
Council’s consideration of the ‘Question concerning the
situation in Southern Rhodesia’.”
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to the request.
It was so decided.
3. The PRESIDENT: The Council is meeting today in
accordance with the request made by the Group of African
States at the United Nations in a letter dated 26 April from
the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the
Ivory Coast to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Council [S/23276).
4. The first speaker is the representative of the Ivory
Coast, who wishes to make a statement in his capacity as
Chairman of the Group of African States for the month of
April. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
5. Mr. SANGARET (Ivory Coast) (interpretation from
French): This is the second time this month that the Chairman of the African Group at the United Nations-that is,
the repesentative of the Ivory Coast-has spoken before
this distinguished body, presided over by you, Sir. That is
why I shah, with your permission, merely endorse the congratulations that have already been addressed to you by the
head of my Mission.
6. I should like, however, to add a few words about your
predecessor, Mr. Harriman of Nigeria, who deservesno less
praise for the able and skilful way in which he conducted the
proceedings of the Council during the month of March.
7. Mr. President, the African Group is deeply grateful to
you for having so quickly agreed to convene a meeting of
the Council, in spite of much work, at the end of this week to
consider the question of recent events in Southern Rhodesia.
g. The voice of the Ivory Coast has always been heard
whenever there has been question of violations of the freedoms and rights of our African brothers-and it is certainly
with that still disadvantaged group that we are now dealing.
That is why I am particularly pleased to have this opportunity to express, on behalf of the African Group, our profound disapproval of the situation and the events taking
place in Southern Rhodesia and also our total condemnation of the so-called internal settlement arrived at in Southem Rhodesia.

9. There is no need to dwell on the deplorable situation
which preceded the so-called elections and which still prevails in Southern Rhodesia: barbaric armed attacks against,
Angola, Mozambique and Zambia by Rhodesian forces
resulting in heavy losses of human lives among the oppressed African population of Zimbabwe; martial law in
effect in the entire Territory; a so-called constitution of
internal settlement negotiated with a few African lackeys,
the aim of which is to maintain the effective political power
of a white minority representing not even 5 per cent of the
population; observers representing only themselves and
coming from goodness knows where to attend the so-called
consultations.
10. That is the general picture of the farce which has been
presented to us and the international community, which
they ndively wish to place before a fait accompli and from
whom they are requesting deficrc and dejure recognition.
That is a challenge thrown down to the international community by the illegal Bhodesian regime, which is openly and
totally supported by the racist regime of South Africa. Only
recently the common denominator-the
South African
regime-was denounced and condemned here by the entire
international community for its practice of the crime of
apartheid, and the Council will have to remember that today
it is still the evil deeds of this ,same racist regime of South
Africa that must be condemned.
11. There is no need to recall that the Patriotic Front has,
since September 1977, in response to the Anglo-American
proposals and all the negotiations undertaken until then,
always made it clear that the problem of Zimbabwe wasnot
the bringing back of blacks into the government by the
election of a black Prime Minister but rather the elimination
of colonialism and all its structures, which should lead to
genuine independence by a democratic process giving rise to
the birth of a free and sovereign Zimbabwe.
12. The much debated internal settlement has been cate;
gorically rejected by the Security Council. By unanimously
adopting resolutions 423 (1978) and 445 (1979), the Council
reaffirmed that the settlement could not make that rebellious regime legal and acceptable, nor could it lessen the
responsibility of the United Kingdom, the administering
Power.

African people with the Patriotic Front, the sole legitimate
representative of the people of Zimbabwe, to whom all of
Africa has given its support.
15. Africa hopes that the United Nations, and particularly
the Security Council, will take firm and appropriate action
to reject and banish the illegal racist regime of Southern
Rhodesia.
16. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Ndlovu,
representative of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe, to
whom the Council has just extended an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make hisstatement.
.
17. Mr. NDLOVU: I should like to begin by thanking the
President and the other members of the Security Council for
giving me this opportunity to appear before the Council.
Last month the Council met to discuss the Smith regime’s
aggression against the neighbouring countries of Zambia,
Mozambique, Botswana and Angola. Today, a month
later, the Council is meeting, it is to be hoped, to reaffirm its
stand against minority rule in Zimbabwe, where minority
rule is now trying to disguise itself behind blacks whom it
has recycled making of them its own allies and weapons
against the people of Zimbabwe. Mr. President, we hope
that under your enlightened guidance this body will take a
unanimous decision to reaffirm its position against racist
oppression in whatever form that evil seeksto disguise itself.
18. In the past few days, the regime of Ian Smith and its
allies have been bombarding the international community
with propaganda, claiming that a majority Government has
been elected under the constitution of the so-called internal
settlement. The people of Zimbabwe have enjoyed the support of the international community in their just struggle
against minority exploitation and racist oppression. We
hope that those who have properly identified themselves
with the struggle of our people for a just and non-racial
society in Zimbabwe will not be misled by recent manceuvres by the enemies of Zimbabwe to entrench minority rule
in our country under the guise of installing a majority
Government. The forces which today want the world to
believe that power has been transferred to the majority are
the same forces which have kept racist Rhodesia alive,
justifying their indefensible actions with the pretext that
their dealings with minority regimes in southern Africa have
been in the interests of the African majority. Those are the
same interests that have bank-rolled groups of so-called
observers who recently flocked to Zimbabwe to monitor the
sham elections, which have been correctly described as a
I.
.
“gigantic popularity trick”.

13. Today the Council is meeting once again to consider
the extension of the so-called internal settlement, that is, the
sham elections, which even exceeded the most optimistic
hopes of their authors since they managed to till the ballot
boxes in excessof 100 per cent. The Council, not so long
ago, in its resolution 445 (1979),‘unequivocally rejected and
condemned those ridiculous manceuvres and it cannot act
differently today. We can only condemn once again the
results of those elections and declare once again that they
19. Western political and news commentators want the
are null and void. In so doing, the members of the Council
-world to judge Smith’s elections independently of the constiwould only be contiiming and reaffirming their earlier decitution upon.which those elections were based. The Patriotic
sion, which should make the obstinate adversaries of a free
Front rejected the so-called internal settlement because it
Zimbabwe understand that a settlement of the colonial
did not settle anything. The constitution of the sMalled
problem of Southern Rhodesia is’not possible zind will not
internal settlement wasnot approved by the majority of tie
be possible without the participation
of
the
Patriotic
Front.
people
of Zimbabwe because the Rhodesian regime did not
.,
want Africans to vote onit, except in’the elections which
14. In this crucial year for the liberation of Zimbabwe, it is
were conducted under conditions of repression, an unpreceabsolutely indispensable to reaffirm
the
solidarity
of
the
dented
display of military might, violence : and the intimida‘,
I
‘, )’
,
2
,,..
..‘ I

tion of the African people of Zimbabwe. Themobiition
of over 100,000 troops and the extension of martial law over
94 per cent of the country meant that the defencelesspeople
of Zimbabwe were forced to vote under the gun. That alone
meant that the so-called elections were not free.
20. Those elections were neither free nor fair because,
before they took place, thousands of opponents of the
Smith r&ime were thrown into prison following the banning of, the Zimbabwe African People’s Union and the
Zimbabwe African National Union in September 1978. The
arrest and detention of opponents of the regime cleared the
way for elements sympathetic to the so-called internal settlement to have free run throughout the country, backed by
the armed .forces which burnt and destroyed homes of
people opposed ‘to the so-called internal settlement. The
grim story of the brutal methods that the regime’s forces
used to get Africans in the rural areas to support the socalled internal settlement and to vote in the elections was
told by one Rhodesian company commander when he said
on 4 March 1979, in an interview with The Observer of
London: ‘The way we’re going about it, this country will
end up with a white majority’*.

24.; Supporters of Ian Smith in the West have been talking
about Smith’s elections as ifthey stood independently of the
constitution on which they are based. Although we have
analysed the constitution of the so-called internal settlement
before this august body, we believe that in the context of this
debate it is necessaryto remind members of the Council that
the constitution under which those elections were hel& not
only gave white voters the privilege, nay the right, to vote to
approve the constitution but also permitted the white
minority to vote separately for the 28 white parliamentary
seats and again to vote alongside black voters for the 72
black parliamentary seats. When expressed as a ratio, the
white vote to the black vote was 11 to 1, in that whites who
are 4 per cent of the population elected 28 per cent of the
parliamentary seats alone and then also voted along with
blacks who are 96 per cent of the population to elect 72
Africans to Parliament. In short, every white voter had 11
votes for every 1 black vote. If that is democracy to some
people, to usit is “apartheidocracy”, that is, a government
of apartheid, for apartheid and by apartheid.

21. For the vast majority of the African people that were
forced to vote in the so-called elections, the voting was a
traumatic experience. In its election arrangements, the
Smith regime laid down elaborate plans designed to give its
armed forces the capability of launching an all~ut military
sweepin rural areas with the aim of ensuring a high turnout.
The methods used left the African civilian population with
very little choice but to vote wherever the regime’s forces were
in control. Given these brutal and savage methods used by
the Rhodesian military against the civilian population, it is
absurd to say that the elections were fair and free.

25. We challenge those who think that a black govemment has now been elected in Zimbabwe to pause and
consider how the elected officials of that so-called govemment- will control the civil service, the police, the armed
forces and the judiciary when the constitution says that
those four institutions should be regulated and controlled
by four commissions totally insulated from the authority of
the elected officials. Under the provisions of that constitution no blacks qualify for appointment to any of the commissions, because in each case the qualifications required
for appointment call for prior experience in service-which
hitherto has been inaccessible to black people. In reality
those commissions will be the government, not Bishop
Muzorewa and his elected co-quislings.

22. In an analysis we put out on 25 April 1979, issued as
document S/13277, we demonstrated how the regime
forced people to vote in the elections. We also showed that
the percentage turnout being played up in the Western-news
media was as fictitious as the figure that the regime claimed
represented the total number of Afric.an workers. Both the
imaginary 2.8 million figure which the regime claimed
represented the total number of Africans qualified to vote
and the percentage turnout of 63 per cent have,been discredited by the evidence that schoolchildren below the age of
18 years were forced to vote in most electoral districts. By
the regime’s own admission, aliens, most of whom are
migrant labourers, were also allowed to vote. Displaced
people or refugees now living as squattersin the urban’areas
were preyed upon by military auxiliaries and forced to vote
under penalty of eviction from the shanty towns.
1.
,23. .-,A human- ‘rights group based in London which
observed Smith’s elections has reported’ the arrest ‘of
teachers in the Shabani area because they would not cooperate with the regime’s orders to compel their pupils to
vote. Given this gross abuse of their power over innocent
civilians by Rhodesian authorities in their attempt to get as
many Africans as possible to vote, we fmd it ridiculous that
: some conservatives in the United States, Britain and Australia shoud be so bold as to peddle the lie that those elections
were free, fair and democratic.

26. Those who think that the Smith elections are likely to
lead to the isolation of the Patriotic Front and result in a
peaceful resolution of the country’s problems are entertaining grand illusions indeed. The resentment and anger of our
people against what has happened run deep. The anger and
resentment of our people cannot be weathered by dropping
bombs on defencelesscivilians and refugees in neighbouring
countries. As far as our people are concerned, Bishop
Muzorewa and his followers are quislings and, as such,
traitors who have sold the country to Smith and South
Africa.
27. Let there be no illusions about what is going to
happen. Bishop Muzorewa and his United African National Council; (UANC) have no capacity to contain the
forces of liberation. Already today, Mr. James Chikerema,
Muzorewa’s Vice-President, denounced the Bishop at a
press conference at Salisbury, accusing the politico-cleric of
nepotism, regionalism and’ foolish leadership. We have
always known the UANC of Bishop Muzorewa to be a
banana organ&on
made up of disparate forces each of
which is pursuing personal ambitions. It has neither political depth nor coherence and, ,as: such, is a conclave of
shiftless power-seekers, whose conception of the struggle
has never gone beyond the quest for personal glory and
self-gratification. This is the reality that must be faced by
those who’want to shield their true intentions in Zimbabwe
behind the UANC of Bishop Muzorewa.

28. Members of the Council probably recall that, shortly
after the signing of the Salisbury agreement on 3 March
1978, Mr. Smith’s Foreign Minister, Mr. P. K. Van der Byl,
described the agreement between his r&ime ‘and the three
blacks-Muzorewa,
Ndabaningi Sithole and Chief Jeremiah Chimu-as “a masterpiece as a politico-diplomatic
exercise’*. Mr. Van der Byi, who was addressing a closed
meeting of whites at Chisipite High School, went on to say
that in the so-called internal settlement his r&ime had “the
advantage of authentic black nationalists defending our
political position”.

33. Bishop Muzorewa has already said that his own
@me will co-operate closely with the South African
r&ime both economically and militarily. Hence, by accepting the results of the elections recently conducted in both
Zimbabwe and Namibia, the world would be endorsing
South Africa’s imperialist designs on Africa as a whole. This
would also amount to endorsing South Africa’s domestic
policies regarding black people.
34. The Western countries that have been ,negotiating
with South Africa on Namibia must realize that, if South
Africa gets the impression that the ,West is willing to go
along with Smith’s fraud in Zimbabwe, the uparrhei$r&ime
will be encouraged to pursue an independent settlement in
Namibia. In short, we call upon all Members of the United
Nations to reject Smith’s elections in Zimbabwe and to
warn South Africa against interference in the ‘internal
affairs of Zimbabwe,
‘.
I
35. We also wish to draw the attention of thir:body to
current moves in the West, particularly in London and in
Washington, to lift economic sanctions against the Smith
regime. Certain conservative groups in the United Kingdom
and in the United States that have always supported
Smith-even before he made the so-called internal settlement with Muzorewa, Sithole and Chirau-have begun to
revive their drive for the lifting of sanctions by their respective countries. The Patriotic Front condemns all such manceuvres and calls upon all Member States to observe these
sanctions against. the Smith r&rime. Any move to lift, sanctions would encourage the racist regime at Salisbury to
extend its aggression against the neighbouring countries of
Botswana, Mozambique-and Zambia. In any case, such a
move to lift sanctions would be in violation of Security
Council resolutions on Southern Rhodesia.

29. It is important that members of the Council should
fully understand on what principles the Smith r&ime has
predicated its acceptance of any settlement formula for
Zimbabwe. The three principles upon which the regime has
predicated its acceptance of any settlement formula are:
.’ (a) recognition of the &ime’similaterai
declaration of independence; (b) maintenance of present standards-meaning
.‘.
: white standards-in the running.of government; (c) protection of white property and way ,of life.
30. Those principles upon which the Rhodesian Front
Party had over the years predicated any settlement represented the “political position” that Mr. Van der By1 argued
the three blacks in the so-called internal settlement had
conceded to the Smith r&ime. And, in fact, it is precisely for
that reason that people of Zimbabwe have rejected the
: so-called internal settlement, because not only does it recognize Smith’s unilateral declaration of independence but it
also entrenches white minority rule and protects the inequitable distribution of wealth in the country. The so-called
internal settlement, with its entrenchment of white power in
Zimbabwe, also guarantees the survival of racist South
Africa, in that Zimbabwe becomes a king-size bantustan, a
buffer zone that stands between South Africa and the African revolution. It is for that reason that South Africa has
invested a lot of money and energy to make sure that
Smith’s fraud works.

36. In conclusion we call upon the Security Council to
reaftirm its rejection of the so-called internal settlement and
its elections, to call upon all Member States not to recognize
the puppet regime resulting from the illegal elections, to
denounce apartheid South Africa for providing the Smith
r@ime.with arms to attack neighbouring countries, and to :
warn South Africa against attempting to create a king-size
bantustan in Zimbabwe.

31. South Africa, which entered the negotiation exercise
over the future of Zimbabwe under what it then called
“detente in southern Africa*‘, has linked a solution of the
Rhodesian problem to the solution of the problem of Namibia. Hence Smith’s so-called internal settlement and
South Africa’s Tumhalle arrangement in Namibia are products of South Africa’s strategy to entrench minority rule in
the two countri~ under the guise of majority rule cor1~tit~ti011s..
’
32. If the international community condones.the fraudulent arrangements now being put into effectin Zimbabwe.
and Namibia, this will amount to handing South Africa a
blank cheque to establish a belt of puppet satellite States in
southern Africa. In the event of South Africa’s succeeding.
in creating a belt of puppet States in southern Africa, the
security of the entire continent would be threatened. &artheid South African leaders have of late beentalking about
what they call “fortress southern Africa”. Although leaders
of the South African minority regime speak of ‘Tortress
southern Africa” as if it were something for the future, in,
fact the South African regime of P. W. Botha has already
begun constructing “fortress southern Africa?.

37. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representa-’
tive of the Sudan who wishes to make a statement on behalf
of the current President of the Organization of African
Unity. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
.’
. . s,.
38. Mr. SAHLOUL (Sudan): Mr. President, allow me at
the outset to thank you and through you the other members
of this.body for permitting me, on behalf of the Organ&+.
tion of African Unity, to participate in this discussion of the
item on the agenda of this meeting called in response to the
urgent request by the African Group at the United Nations’
to consider the critical situation in Zimbabwe after the
results of the sham elections carried out last week. . :’ f ..
11
‘I 1
39. The Council. may recall its resolution 445 (i979): in
which it declared that anyelections held under the auspices
of the illegal,racist regime and the results thereof would be
4

null and void and that no recognition would’be accorded
either by the United Nations &any Member State to any
representatives or organ established by that process.

$I the wrong direction will have serious consequences for
fut.ure relationships between those countries that still
believe in the possibility of achieving a peaceful solution in
southern Africa and the African countries.

.

40. The oeonles of Africa are against anv kind of recogrrition being accorded to the present situat<ofi,in Zimbabwe,
and our position in regard to what was known as the
internal settlement was made clear at the time it was
declared. Africa was and still is against any moves or measures designed to leave the state of affairs in southern Africa
under’the control of the white minority groups. The analysis
of the ‘illegal regime’s “Constitution for Zimbabwe-Rhodesia”, prepared by the Commonwealth Secretariat and
distributed by Zambia [S/Z3235J, brought to light the fact
that the‘intemal settlement is no more than a process to
ensure the . perpetuation of the staius quo.

44. It has been widely reported that the racist gang of Ian
Smith, in its desperate attempt to perpetuate its illegal
occupation of Zimbabwe, used all and every possible means
to recruit illegal voters and force them to go to the balloting
centres to cast their votes in favour of particular groups.
Thousands of black workers and employers were herded by
their employers to the polling places to participate in the
elections with the understanding that failure to do so would
be tantamount to disobeying the rules of work and couid be
punishable by im,mediate dismissal from employment and
deprivation of all rightsunder the provisions of the Industrial ConciIiation’Act
and ‘its ‘ancillary
.legislation.
I.
.,.‘..”
,,
45. It has also been reported that youngsters, including
‘teenagers as young as’13 or 14, were driven in school buses
to participate in the elections under the direct supervision of
their teachers and Ministry of Education employees, who,
in their turn, risked their jobs if they failed to do this.

41. It is the sacred duty and. responsibilityof the Security
Council to declare in no unclear terms that these elections,
like those conducted by the .a’urzYzr&gime in Namibia,
are. completely null and void.’ They are null and void
because they were not free, fair or~democrat’ic and because
they aimedat perpetuating and further consolidating power
,ln. the hands of the white racists under the false pretext of
establishing black majority rule. They are null and void
: 46, In addition to ail that;many casesof gross violation,
because the very constitution under which these elections
forgery and fabrication have been detected. Ironically
were carried out is itself illegal and the: environment was
enough, even ‘a person like the Reverend Sithole, one of the
completely unfavourable. How can we expect an election to
founders and the .main theorist of the so-called internal
be fair and democratic when it. was conducted under condisettlement has pronounced himself clearly with regard to
tions of martial law and a state of emergency? How can it be
the elections and denounced them as a fraud. In his rejecfree when huge private armies exist which harass people and., :,....tion.of-the result of the elections, Mr. Sithole stated: “My
forcethem to vote for certain particular parties and threaten
party consider the results as not being the verdict of the
to tire and to execute those who oppose their instructions?
people but of a particular Ministry which has stagemanaged the elections”.
42. Among other things, in document S/13235 the follow@is pointed out: first, the major political movements of
47. In Africa we have a saying, the rough translation of
Zimbabwe have had no hand in framingthe constitutional
which might be, “If thieves differ about sharing the spoils,
~eventually the truth will come out”. Mr. Sithole’s remarks,
arrangements-which were put for approval before only
although .@ish and showing concern for his own narrow
the white community, some 3 per cent of the population;
and vested interests, nevertheless indicate beyond any
Secondly, the constitution is so framed as to restrict the
powers normally exercised by such adegislatureio the point
doubt that the whole thing was a sell-out and nothing but a
where it may fairly be asked whether, in fact,the majority
big joke. It is for the international community to live up to
would be left with, any power with.which to rule;thirdly, the
its responsibility to see to it that no recognition whatsoever
is’accorded these elections and to withhold any possible
qualifications required for appointment to each’of the key
posts established by the constitution are drawn upin such a
support for any bodies, organs or individuals who might try
way as effectively to exclude over 96 per cent of the popula.to step into power as a result of these forged elections.
tion from participating in those institutions for at least a
generation.
48. <We believe that we have gone a long way towards
accommodating the point of view of those who have been
43. We have stressed these particular aspects of the fraudcalling for a settlement through continued dialogue between
ulent constitution to emphasize but a few of the drawbacks
the forces of African nationalism and the proponents of
that are characteristic of the document. We are not trying to
white racism. We also believe that we have reached the end
enter into a discussion of this fraudulent. constitution;’
of the road and that the hour of decision has arrived.
rather, .we are ‘referring to it in view of the fact that some
Fortunzttely we are not the ones who .are asked to decide
haue raised their voices calling for endorsement of the elecbecause our stand is clear beyond any doubt and we are set
tions and recognition of the political set-up that will follow.,
un a course of confrontation ‘with the racist rCgimes. In our
We feel that such people are, to say the least, irresponsible,
view it is up to-those who stand to gain or lose a lot from the
naTve and completely ignorant of the reality of African
coming development in southern Africa to ,decide which
nationalism. What concerns us is the fact that their impact
side to choose. We hope that their decision will be the right
,>. ,
one....
.‘j ‘.
on public opinion in their respective countries may result in
I ,
. .
pressure being exerted on the respective Governments, espy;
eially at a time when some of those Governments are faced
49. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker %the representawith ‘the prospect ,of, political uncertainty. Any step taken
tive of Sri Lanka,’ who wishes to make a statement in his
5

capacity, as Chairman of the Co-ordinating Bureau ofNonAligned Countries. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

defeat by the racists. The so-called elections would in no
way assist the struggle of the international community to
eradicate apartheid and achieve the dignity of man.

50. Mr. FERNANDO (Sri Lanka): Mr. President, let me
at the outset thank you and through you the members of the
Council for giving me this opportunity of participating on
behalf of the non-aligned group of countries in the Council’s deliberations on’ the so-called elections in Southern
Rhodesia. Needless to say the best wishes of my delegation
are extended to you for the successful conduct of the business of the Council. Our thanks are also due to your predecessor,, the representative of Nigeria, who last month
fulfilled his tasks as President with considerable skill and
dedication.

55. It is ironic that even those ,who were part of the
so-called internal settlement have themselves condemned
the elections for what they are. If any Member of the United
Nations accords any form of recognition, blessing-or support for the malformed issue of the so-called elections, that
could only be considered an act which would contribute to
perpetuating the. illegal white minority regime in. Southern
Rhodesia. These elections will not lead to genuine independence and freedom for the people of Zimbabwe. The struggle
for genuine independence and majority rule in southern
Africa, and in particular in Zimbabwe, has been one of the
cornerstones of the policy of the non-aligned movement
since its inception. The non-aligned countries have always
affirmed their faith in the United Nations as an-effective
instrument for promoting international peace and security
and for achieving a better world order for mankind.

51. When the Foreign Ministers of the Coordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned countries met a few months ago in
Mozambique, at the battlefront of the liberation struggle,
they were unanimous in condemning the plans of the racist
regime to hold so-called elections in Zimbabwe. The elections have now taken place amidst a blaze of publicity and
media coverage.

56. On behalf of the Co-ordinating ..Bureau of NonAligned Countries, I would once more reiterate our sincere
call to all Member States to regard the results of the elections as null and void and to see that no recognition or
support is accorded to any representatives or organs established by the so-called electoral process that has taken place.
The non-aligned countries reiterate their firm support for
‘the liberation struggle in Zimbabwe under the Patriotic
Front and pledge their solidarity in the continuation of the
struggle which must inevitably lead to victory and to
genuine independence and freedom.

52. The electionsare to be condemned not only because
the very basis on which they took place was ilIega1, but also
because even in the conduct of essentially fraudulent elections there have been so many reported abuses and malpractices that the entire operation from conception to execution
could at best be described as a fiasco. However* it is not
possible to consider the elections purely as a matter for
ridicule as the intent behind them is clearly to entrench and
perpetuate the political, economic and military power of the
illegal racist minority at Salisbury and to block majority
rule. The Council, by its resolution 445 (1979), declared that
any elections held under the sponsorship of the illegal racist
regime and the results thereof would be null and void and,
further, that no’recognition would beaccorded either by the
United Nations or any Member State to any representatives
or organ established by that process. All.these views were
reiterated and.afErmed by the non-aligned countries in a
communiquC issued by the Co-ordinating Bureau on 16
April [S/1325z].

57. Mr. MUTUKWA (Zambia): Sir, I wish, on behalf of
the delegation of Zambia, to begin by congratulating you
on your assumption of the office of President of the Security
Council for the month of April. Your personal qualities as a
skilful diplomat have. already been amply demonstrated in
the negotiations and consultations on the disturbing situation in Lebanon. It is fitting that the representative of
Norway should preside over the Council as it takes up the
,question of Southern Rhodesia again. Norway, together
with the other Nordic countries, has continued to show
great understanding of the situation in southern Africa and
has rendered considerable assistance to the oppressed peaple of Zimbabwe, Namibia and.South Africa, through their
national liberation movements.
.1 I
58. In.this meeting of the Council, Africa seeks nothing
new. We are not making any unreasonable or exaggerated
demands on the Council. Indeed, the objective of the meeting issimple and limited: We seek only the reaffirmation by
the Council of the position it has already taken in previous.
resolutions, particularly 423 (1978) and 445 (1979), to the:
effect that the regime in Southern Rhodesia remains illegal
and that ‘all its manceuvres to give itself a\ veneer of legitimacy are null and void. Specifically, we are requesting the
Council to reiterate its designation of the’recent sham eleg
tions stage-managed by the Smith regime in Southern
Rhodesia within’the context of its so-called internal settlement as illegal, null and void. In this.regard, the Council
should call upon all States not to accord recognition to any
representatives or organ established in Southern Rhodesia

53. I would take this opportunity to call upon the Council
to consider taking appropriate steps towards effectively
carrying out its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, which would be undermined if the sham elections are in any way givenrecognition. It is also a matter of paramount importance for the
effective discharge of the functions. of the Council .that its
decisions should be completely implemented.
.:
54. When the Foreign Ministers of the Co-ordinating
Bureau met at Maputo, Mozambique; they congratulated
the Zimbabwean patriots and freedom fighters, ledhy the
Patriotic Front, on the-success they ,had achieved on the
battlefield. Perhaps, it was the very successof that liberation
struggle, its extension throughout the entire territory and
the wide support it had among ,the people that,sharpened
the sense of desperation on the part of the-racist.r&gime at
Salisbury and prompted it to foist these elections on Zimbabwe. The elections were in a sense then an admission of
6

_

as a result of the so-called dections. That would be in accord
with resolution 445 (1979). As we know, Smith and his
clique proceeded with the elections in total defiance of the
United Nations.
.59. What we are witnessing in southern Africa, especially
in Zimbabwe, Namibia and the bantustans of South Africa,
is a frantic attempt by the defiant racist minority rulers to
impose puppet regimes so as to perpetuate white racist
minority domination. With black puppets in visible positions, such as that of Prime Minister, the white minority
intend, under these arrangements, to preserve for themselves real power and authority and, as they have done all
along, amass privileges and wealth at the expense of the
black majority.
60. The new rulers at Pretoria have again’shown their
determination to exert full military might in the fruitless
struggle -to make southern Africa safe for racist white
minority rule. There is ample proof of collusion between
South Africa and the Smith r&ime in the military-field. This
is contrary to the earlier protestations of the Pretoria
r&me.
61. I wish to draw the attention of the Council to the
repeated acts of war which Rhodesian military forces and
those of South Africa have unleashed against Zambia and
the other front-line States of Angola, Mozambique and
Botswana. These dastardly acts of aggression have the aim,
inter alia, of destabilizing front-line countries and of killing
refugees and innocent nationals of our countries-this in
addition to the attempts by the minority regime to divert
attention from the wars of liberation now raging inside
Zimbabwe and Namibia. We refuse to be used as scapegoats by the racist maniacs and reject that practice.
62. The real problem in southern Africa is the continued
existence of racist regimes. The problems facing the regimes
at Pretoria and Salisbury are internal ones. It is the
oppressed people of those countries who are up in arms
against their slave-drivers. The international community
should aid those people to achieve their freedom.
63. Regrettably, there is growing evidence of increased
collaboration between certain Western countries and South
Africa, particularly in the military sphere. We are concerned about this matter even in the context of the Rhodesian issue, because it is South African weapons, such ‘as
long-range military aircraft, that have been used to attack
us. This matter should be studied adequately by the arms
.embargo committee’ and subsequently exposed to the international community. Zambia will continue to hold countries which collaborate with the racist regimes responsible
for abetting those r&imes in attacking us and killing inno.cent civilians.
)
/Gj
. r.
,’ I.
*64. ’ We in Zambia have not been impressed by the disturb
‘ing loud noises emanating. from Britain and the United
‘States proposing the lifting of : United Nations-decreed
against Southern Rhodesia and recognition ofthe
.sanctions
*.
,
) ‘Security Council Committee established by resolution 421 (1977)
~‘wnceaing the question of South Africa.
::

‘.

’

puppet 1r&inx. Among the reasons advanced for this
approach is the purported high voter turnout in Zimbabwe. :
Surely, under normal circumstances, this would have been a
helpful, indicator. But, as we are aware, the situation in
Rhodesia is not normal. In fact, we accord no significance
to the bogus elections, which were tantamount to a nonevent.
65. Let me, at this juncture, express the views of my
deregation specifically on the much-publicized issue of the
sham elections in Rhodesia. It is our submission that what
happened in Rhodesia recently was not an objectively conducted election but a simulated one.
66. In making our assessment, we draw a distinction
between appearances and reality. We say that not because
Zambia is opposed to elections as such. To us in Zambia
elections have been a part of our political culture since
pre-independence days. These facts can be verified by any
objective academic observer. What Zambia does not sup
port are stage-managed, fake and simulated elections. The
enlightened segment of the international community should
not allow itself to be deluded,by some of the developments
in Rhodesia, such as simulated elections. The international
community cannot,afford to stand by while Smith and,his
friends continue to engage in dangerous experiments with
the lives of millions of Zimbabweans who are in bondage.
67. No elections can be objectively assessedwithout reference to the politicalframework within which they are conducted. Elections are dialectically linked to a political
system. Elections cannot be conducted in a political
vacuum. In the context of Rhodesia, any serious observer or
assessorof the socalled elections would be well advised to
examine not only the socalled constitution but the entire
political system of contemporary Rhodesia.
,68. The so-called elections ‘in Rhodesia were staged at a
time when a war was raging in that country. Rhodesia is,at
war. The entire country is under a state of emergency and
martial law. Even those who have the most elementarv.
rudiments of legal knowledge know what this state of affairs
entails.
69. Under this state of emergency, the Smith regime has
‘detained thousands of Africans who are opposed to the
+ime and its so-called elections. Millions of Africans in the
rural countryside are confined as inmates of concentration
camps, which are euphemistically called protected villages.
In addition, well over half a million Africans have been
‘uprooted from their homes to become refugees or squatters
on the outskirts of cities and towns.
70. The majority of the electorate in Rhodesia, therefore,
are not free voters as we know them elsewhere: they are a
‘captive audience who can be manipulated by the tigime in
~pursuit of its objective-that is, to’maintain white minority
power in Zimbabwe. Furthermore, in Rhodesia a system of
electoral administration for Africans is virtually nonexistent. The preparations for the so-called elections did not
even include the. demarcation of constituencies or a census
of the population. Instead, .the regime. was mobilizing to
,intensify its repression inside the country. It wasduring that

75. In the view of the Zambian delegation, what should
exercise the minds of all the concerned partic is the question
of the end result of any election. That is the crux.of the
matter. .An election that produces a black ruler in a country
that perpetuates the basic structure of oppression does not
conform to the elementary requisites of independence.
What is at stake in Zimbabwe is not which individual will
become a bantastan-type prime minister. The crux of the
matter is how to achieve the independence of Z,$+abwe,
with the majority in control of the country.

period also that the murderers ofSal@ury andtheir accomplices unleashed several attacks against my country and
Botswana. All these facts, we are told, added up to the
so-called peaceful elections held in Rhodesia.
71. It is well known that the regime mobilized its war
machine and called up reserves on the eve of the “elections”. Soldiers who were mobilized supplemented the massive police force and pat-a-military units. The work ofall the
armed men was to escort voters at gunpoint to polling
booths, on the pretext that voters were being protected. It
was not surprising to learn that it wasonly in the Rhodesian
elections that the voter turnout exceeded 100 per cent of the
voters. This meant that there were more votes than the
number of votes, in a “fair” election.

.

76. If majority rule had been achieved, then there would
be no ,war of liberation inside Rhodesia; Thousands of
guerrihas inside Rhodesia would have laid down their arms.
Thousands of refugees who have fled the tyranny of the
Smith r&ime over the years would have returned to their
motherland. :
77. If we state.the problem in the simplest terms, it is this.
In the long history of decolonization in Africa there has
been no’ country in which there has been a dispute as to
whether or not independence under majority rule had been
achieved. The definition of what constitutes independence
and majority rule is self-evident, and that is what the people
of Zimbabwe who have ‘been struggling for freedom say
they want. Surely the cause of peace and freedom for Zimbabwe cannot be advanced by those who engagein ostrichtype politics as an end.

72. The next question we may ask is: Who were the elect&
rate voting for? It is typical of the racist nature of the
Salisbury regime that only white people voted for white
candidates. Thereafter the whites joined blacks and others
to vote for blacks, ostensibly to produce a. multiracial
society. Surely there is something peculiar about the political chemistry of Rhodesia. In Rhodesia, by virtue of being
white one is automatically entitled to more than one vote.
Yet “one man, one vote” is the universally accepted criterion for voting elsewhere in the world where elections are
conducted fairly.
73. The Zambian delegation has had occasion at previous
meetings of the Council to outline the problems inherent in
the constitution of Rhodesia, which is based on the so-called
internal settlement and which merely seeks to entrench
racist illegal minority rule by other means. We recommend
that delegations should read the analysis of the rebel
regime’s constitution prepared by the Commonwealth
countries in London [S/132353. As has been stated, even the
so-called internal settlement cannot settle the Rhodesian
independence crisis, and that has been proved. That agreement, signed on 4 March 1978, was aimed at circumventing
the real transfer of power from the minority to the majority
through free and fair elections. The so-called Rhodesian
constitution does not provide a framework for Zimbabwe
to be ruled by the majority African people because, as is
typical of all situations of oppression and expfoitation,
power in ail sectors of society in Rhodesia will still be vested
in the minority. Under the provisions of the so-calIed constitution, the minority will control all the commanding heights
of the economy, the instruments of government, the legislative process, the judiciary, the civil service, and the military
and security services.

78. In conclusion, let me state that there is ample evidence
to show that the so-called elections that were conducted in
Rhodesia have brought no change in the situation because
they have not resolved the vital issue of independence and
majority rule. The end product of an election held under the
auspices of an illegal racist regime cannot make either the
election itself or its results legal. The problem of Rhodesia is
still with us. The international community should reject all
deceptive manceuvres by the rebel regime, including the
bogus elections conducted recently.
79. Zambia urges the entire membership of the Council to
live up to its responsibilities. The Council should reaffirm its
urgent appeal to all States not to accord recognition to any
representatives or organs established by that process and to
observe the mandatory sanctions against Southern Rhodesia, sanctions which were decreed by this august body over a
decade ago. It is also the expectation of the Zambian delegation that the Committee on Sanctions* will expedite its work
to enable the Council to consider the extension and tightening of sanctions against the rebels in Rhodesia.

74. It is for reasons that should be self-evident to any
80. My delegation is distressed to observe how ironicitis
sophisticated observer that one wonders why certain sothat the countries that are obstructing conclusion of the
called observers had to trek all the way to Rhodesia. with . work of the Committee on Sanctions are those which in.fact
preconceived notions to see what they set out, to see..For a
.initiated the imposition of sanctions, those that have prlniary .iesponsibility for having colonized Rhodesiamentally myopic observer; the so-called- elections were an
end in themselves. We am told by the propagandist media of- , States that have argued that they want a peaceful solution to
the West that most observers were satisfied that the electhe problem and yet continue to create obstacles tQ ‘the
tions were free and fair because the observers saw many
effective implementation of the mandate of the Committee;.
,‘,
Africans dancing in the streets. Since when has the, intemaon Sanctions.
:
tional community been impressed by the fairness of an
election merely because people, have been seen dancing in
*Security Council Committee established in pursuanceof reSohtt@
253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia.
, ‘_
the streets?
8

81. The people of southern Africa look to the United
Nations, and especially to the Security Council, in these
troubled times. Let no responsible member of this august
body betray the hopes of millions of oppressed people in
southern Africa.

88. To begin with, when the so-called constitution was
drawn up, ihe people of Southern Rhodesia-other than
the 100,OOO-oddsupporters of the illegal regime-were not
given a chance to express themselves on the constitutional
proposals. That is a very important fact. The now-dishonest
Bishop came to the attention of the people of Southern
Rhodesia in 1971, when he led them to reject previous,
similarly fraudulent constitutional proposals. He knew
more than any other person that the constitutional proposals could not be accepted by the majority of the people of
Southern Rhodesia, and therefore the presentation of
those proposals to the people was deliberately avoided.
That major omission also explains in part why the Bishop
made sure no election of leaders would take place. An
election involving African leaders would have been embarrassing because it would have exposed the individuals to
questioning by the electors. It would have led to their having
to answer questions from their own people which they could
not answer. So what has been done in Southern Rhodesia in
the past week? The people have been asked to answer an
irrelevant question. They have been asked which party they
support-which is quite different from supporting leaders.

82. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Kenya, who wishes to make a statement on behalf of
the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
83. Mr. MAINA (Kenya): Mr. President, I would first of
all thank you and the whole Council for affording my
delegation this opportunity to participate in this debate.
Your long and outstanding service to the United Nations as
representative of your great country gives us every confidence that, as we discuss the question of Southern Rhodesia, you will help to guide the Council along the path of
truth and justice.
84. I should like to make only a few remarks in this
debate, representing my Minister, who is the current Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity, although, as the Council well knows, the
African problems are so closely tied together that it makes
no difference whether I speak as a representative of Kenya
or as a representative of the Council of Ministers of OAU.

89. In any case, the fraudulent campaign raised another
irrelevant question. The ballotting process was billed as a
vote to bring peace. I cannot recall any ther place where
people have gone around the country ca4, paigning on the
pretext of an election to bring about peace. The side of
peace-or-no-peace will no doubt speak for itself in due
course. Peace cannot be bought through a fraud: that is our
view. The socalled illiterate people must not be mistakenly
regarded by anyone as foolish or stupid. They certainly are
not. This is a common error, a stunt used in many places to
paint illiterate people as stupid people. This also explains
why many-indeed, I would say all-who were rounded up
to go to the so-called election stations went there without
any question. All the people called upon to go to vote went
to vote. They would have been foolish not to do SO. I can
explain why they went, because we in my country went
through this kmd of process. It is not my intention to blame
anyone at this stage.
90. During Kenya’s struggle for freedom, my people were
rounded up and all put in emergency villages-in Southern ’
Rhodesia they call them “protected villages”. We existed
under emergency conditions and regulations. In Southern
Rhodesia they go even further. Martial law exists in more
than 90 per cent of the country. The emergency villages in
Kenya were .illegal prisons, and I have no doubt that the
protected villages in Southern Rhodesia are illegal prisons.
People are herded into them no less than prisoners are
herded into prisons. Remembering our own experience, I
can well imagine the physical brutality and other forms of
abuse they are being subjected to. The curfew hour arrives;
people go indoors and are locked up-just as we were
locked up. In the morning they are told what to do. Any
deviation is severely punished, and death at the hands
of the guards-or, in the case of Southern Rhodesia, the
protectors-must be a common occurrence. In those circumstances only the stupid or hell-bound fool would be left
behind when the call to go to vote was made.

85. The question of Southern Rhodesia has been before
the Security Council for many years. United Nations economic sanctions are still in force. Anglo-American proposals which the Council was requested to support in 1977 are
still theoretically on the table. And the people of Zimbabwe
are still shedding blood-a lot of blood-for their freedom.
In our view, the purpose of the Council’s meetings on this
occasion is very different. The Council has been convened
to review the fraud that has been enacted in Southern
Rhodesia, in order to place on record its position with
regard to that fraud.
86. My delegation had the occasion to state during a previous debate that the rebel illegal regime of Ian Smith in
Southern Rhodesia did not cease to be illegal merely
because Ian Smith was able to recruit a couple of black
accomplices. At that stage we maintained that certain steps
had to be taken to return Southern Rhodesia to a legal path,
and we tried to outline those steps. We held that the view
that Smith on his own could not return Southern Rhodesia
to a legal path without involving the administering Power,
the United Kingdom. The Africans he recruited did not and
could not replace the administering Power; and we held,
and still hold, the view that the moment the Bishop and the
other recruits joined the illegal regime, they became no
more and no better than the many so-called ministers who
had served under Mr. Smith since 1965. We did not, however, believe that the Africans who joined Mr. Smith could
be part of such a grotesque fraud, which they have the face
to call “elections”.
87. We need only draw the attention of the Council to a
few facts to show that what has taken place in Southern
Rhodesia is not an election but a fraud.
.

91. The so-called elections in a territory under martial law
are no elections at all. My people went through similar
9

motions in order to survive; not until the emergency condi* tions were removed did they speak their mind. Under the
emergency conditions anyone who mentioned the name of
our late President in any favourable light was as good as
dead-at the very least, he would have been detained. After
the emergency conditions were lifted the people, almost
with one voice, spoke their mind and proclaimed him their
true leader.
92. There has been no election in Southern Rhodesia, and
those who are now in the process of organizing a worldwide campaign for the recognition of the illegal and fraudulent regime in that country should know that they are
deceiving themselves if they believe that they are working
for peace. They are working against their own true interests
and those of the people of Southern Rhodesia. They are
guilty of working to prolong the suffering of ,the people of

Litho in United Nations. New York

that country. We know that the illegal regime will become
even more dependent on those external supporters, and the
contlict is bound to continue for a much longer period than
necessary.
93. The Council has a straightforward duty to reject the
fraud that has been perpetrated as no more capable of
deceiving us than were previous frauds organized by the
rebel illegal regime of Ian Smith. The correct line would be
to urge the dishonest Bishop and Mr. Smith to return to
the negotiating process in order to arrive at a solution that
will win world-wide support. We believe that good common
sense will prevail everywhere,. including London and
Washington.

Price: $U.S. 1.50

The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

79-?OOOZ-March

1982-2,250
