S/PV.6986

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6986th meeting

Tuesday, 25 June 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Ms. Jiang Hua
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Maes
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Munir
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. M’Beou
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

13-37262 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1337262*

S/PV.6986

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
The President: As this is the last meeting of the
Security Council that will be attended by our colleague
Susan Rice, who has been the Permanent Representative
of the United States of America to the United Nations for
the past four and a half years, I would like to mark the
occasion by saying, on behalf of all the members of the
Council, that we have greatly appreciated the immense
contribution that she has made to the Council’s work
over that time. On behalf of all of us, I wish her well
in her new position as National Security Adviser. As
she may be the first National Security Adviser to have
been educated at Oxford University, she is certainly
extremely well qualified for the job and we wish her
well in it.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: Under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Fernandez-Taranco.
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: As the human tragedy in
Syria continues to unfold, the whole region is feeling
the reverberations, with neighbours, such as Jordan and
Lebanon, absorbing much of the humanitarian impact.
A resolution is not yet in sight.
Earlier this month, the leaders of the Group
of Eight reached an understanding on achieving a
political solution on Syria and committed to bringing
the Syrian sides to the negotiatingtable. The SecretaryGeneral reiterated his readiness to convene the Geneva
Conference on Syria as soon as possible. He further
welcomed the announcement of additional contributions
of $1.5 billion in humanitarian aid, which is critical to
saving lives.
On the same day, in his message to the international
meeting in in Beijing in support of Israeli-Palestinian
peace, the Secretary-General stressed that resolving
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and safeguarding the

2

two-State solution was no less urgent. The current
regional turmoil makes it all the more imperative to
build upon the opening created by the diplomatic push
by the United States and create a positive momentum
towards an Israeli-Palestinian peace that can provide
a stabilizing horizon and give hope for the whole
region. However, so far there are too few encouraging
signs on the prospects for breaking the deadlock. The
United Nations has consistently pointed out the risks of
prolonged impasse and the consequences of inaction.
The United Nations has welcomed the determined
re-engagement of the United States. In March, the
United States President underlined that peace was
necessary, just and possible. As the international
community, we bear a great responsibility in
transforming that possibility into reality. Secretary
Kerry’s several rounds of visits — he announced that he
would visit Jerusalem and the region for the fifth time
this week — provides the first real opportunity since
October 2010 for a serious effort to reach a final status
agreement. While United States engagement is central,
we are convinced of the need for broader regional and
international engagement in support of any peace effort.
We also welcome the reaffirmed willingness by Arab
States to revive the Arab Peace Initiative. We hope that
the Israeli Government will respond positively.
However much the parties need to re-engage in
negotiations as the only way to achieve the two-State
solution, there must be a substantive and well-prepared
framework, as well as a credible timeline, in order
for talks to have a chance of success. There is also
a need for a conducive environment on the ground,
including confidence-building steps. However, while
substantive progress is urgently needed, rushing the
parties back to the table without having in place the
necessary framework and buy-in from both sides would
be counter-productive. What is also not needed are
unhelpful statements with regard to the prospects for
the two-State solution. Rather, progress necessitates
serious political commitments by both leaders — Prime
Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas — who should
show statesmanship, recognize a partner in each other
and finally negotiate and achieve a two-State solution,
which is a vision that they have both agreed on. However
narrow, the current window of opportunity should not
be lost.
The de-facto settlement restraint observed
earlier this spring has seen signs of unravelling. The
Secretary-General has been particularly troubled by

13-37262

S/PV.6986

reports that planning for hundreds of housing units in
the settlement of Itamar, deep in the West Bank, has
advanced to the next stage, as is also the case in the
outpost of Bruchin. We also note with disappointment
that, according to data released by the Israeli Central
Bureau of Statistics, during the first quarter of 2013
there were 865 starts in construction of housing units
in settlements, representing a 176% increase compared
to the equivalent period in 2012 — a seven-year record.
Those are unhelpful decisions that undermine progress
towards the two-State solution. The Secretary-General
reiterates that settlement activity is illegal, and calls on
Israel to abide by its commitments under international
law and the road map.
A new Palestinian Cabinet was sworn in on 6 June
under the leadership of Rami Hamdallah to carry
on the administration of the affairs of State until a
national consensus Government is formed. However,
in an apparent sign of disagreement about certain
competencies, Prime Minister Hamdallah tendered
his resignation on 20 June, but stayed on as caretaker
until a successor was named. That creates renewed
uncertainty for a Government still relying considerably
on international support and facing a critical period
ahead. The United Nations looks forward to continuing
to work with the Government of Palestine and President
Abbas in support of their state-building agenda and
ongoing efforts aimed at a resumption of meaningful
peace negotiations. The continued viability of the
Palestinian Authority remains a core interest of the
United Nations.
One fiscal factor fuelling concern in that regard is
the Palestinian Authority’s total Government debt of
reportedly $4.2 billion and its deficit, which had reached
$612 million by the end of May. Donor support has
decreased over the past years, and the United Nations is
concerned about possible further cuts. Continued donor
funding is essential to allow the Palestinian Government
to tighten fiscal policy in a manner that does not harm
the private sector or essential social spending.
Important meetings took place during and on the
margins of the meeting of the World Economic Forum
at the Dead Sea in Jordan last month. The “Breaking the
impasse” initiative was unveiled, which we welcome
as a serious expression by influential business leaders
and public opinion from both sides of their wish for a
two-State solution and an urgent appeal to their leaders
to realize it now. At the same event, Secretary Kerry
announced a large-scale initiative intended to spur

economic growth through private investment in the
West Bank and Gaza. Those are hopeful signs. However,
it is absolutely crucial that progress be made on the
political track, absent which sustained growth and
private investment will remain elusive and Palestinian
accomplishments on the state-building agenda will be
difficult to sustain.
The United Nations continues to help to address the
humanitarian and development needs of Palestinians in
Area C, where lifting Israeli restrictions on Palestinian
movement, access to land and water, planning and
construction would unleash the growth potential. We
continue to engage the Israeli Government on a series
infrastructure projects in Area C, and we are in the
process of securing funding for works supporting
the agricultural sector. To more effectively address
development needs in Area C, it is imperative that
Israeli authorities authorize the 32 plans that hve been
submitted for approval, some of which have been
pending since June 2010.
Tensions on the ground are also mounting.
Violence between Palestinians and settlers continued
in the West Bank. A total of five Palestinians,
including one woman, were injured by settlers, while
six settlers, including four women, were injured by
Palestinian stone-throwing. An Israeli bus was shot at
yesterday near Nablus, without resulting in injuries.
Settler violence against Palestinian property under
the so called price-tag attacks also increased sharply,
resulting in extensive material damage. Such attacks
also targeted Christian sites, including the Dormition
Abbey in Jerusalem and the Jaffa Orthodox cemetery.
Between 14 and 16 June, Israeli right-wing activists
reportedly beat and injured three Palestinian women in
West Jerusalem, including a 75-year-old. On 17 June,
the tires of 28 cars were punctured in Abu Gosh, a
village inside Israel that is also populated by Arab
citizens of Israel, and racist slogans were painted on
walls. Prime Minister Netanyahu publicly protested
such acts as running counter to Jewish commandments
and the values of the people of Israel. The day before,
the Israeli Government strengthened the State’s lawenforcement ability to combat price-tag attacks by
declaring their perpetrators an “illegal association”. It
is hoped that this measure will contribute to preventing
such attacks, which must not go unpunished.
The security situation remained comparable to the
previous reporting period, and security coordination

13-372623

S/PV.6986

between Palestinian and Israeli security forces
continued despite some clashes. Israeli security forces
conducted a total of 457 search-and-arrest operations in
the occupied West Bank, resulting in 162 Palestinians
injured, including 58 children and eight women.
Two members of the Israeli security forces were also
injured. Four-hundred and fifty-five Palestinians were
arrested by Israeli security forces, including a Hamas
Palestinian Legislative Council member on 6 June in
Ramallah. On 11 June, Prime Minister Netanyahu said
that Israel has foiled five suicide attacks since the start
of the year.
The majority of injuries resulted from clashes
during Palestinian protests in the occupied West Bank,
including against the barrier, which deviates from the
Green Line in contravention of the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice (A/ES-10/273).
Demolitions of Palestinian property in Area C and
in East Jerusalem continued, albeit at a slower pace,
with a total of 24 structures demolished, leading to the
displacement of 55 Palestinians, including 23 children.
Relative calm returned to Gaza this month, until
it was shattered during the night of 23 June when six
rockets were fired from Gaza into Israel, reportedly by
Islamic Jihad. Two were intercepted by the Iron Dome
missile defence system, and four landed in southern
Israel without causing injuries or damage. In response,
Israel conducted three airstrikes into Gaza yesterday,
targeting sites allegedly linked to weapons-storage
and rocket launching, causing no casualties. Israel
also closed the Kerem Shalom and Erez crossings for
Palestinians. We condemn rocket fire into civilian
areas and urge Israeli restraint. All must abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian law to
protect civilians.
We remain concerned about the state of human rights
and freedoms in Gaza. That includes our deep concern
about four death sentences passed by military courts in
Gaza, between 9 May and 20 June, and two executions
carried out on 22 June, outside of the Palestinian legal
framework. We call on de facto authorities in Gaza to
refrain from carrying out further executions.
Despite our ongoing efforts, we unfortunately must
report further encroachment on freedoms in Gaza,
namely, increasing impediments on humanitarian
operations. Along with inappropriate taxation requests,
exit restrictions have recently been imposed by the
de facto authorities on Palestinian staff of the United

4

Nations, non-governmental organizations and other
organizations, to the point where some staff have
not been able to leave Gaza. We call on the de facto
authorities to rescind these restrictions, and hope that a
solution can be found quickly.
Such measures impair the delivery of muchneeded assistance to Palestinians, as does continuing
violence. The only possible way forward is the full
implementation of the ceasefire understanding reached
on 21 November under Egyptian auspices, which calls
for calm and the full lifting of the closure. We urge
the parties to adhere to its terms to preserve advances
and prospects to implement resolution 1860 (2009)
in full. Our immediate goals continued to include
extending the fishing limit to at least eight nautical
miles, allowing the entry of construction material and
permitting exports to Israel and transfers from Gaza to
the West Bank, while we continue to carry out sizable
programmes that address pressing needs.
In that regard, I would note that preliminary
results of a joint United Nations survey indicate that
food insecurity affects some 1.6 million Palestinians in
the West Bank and Gaza, and has increased to include
34 per cent of households in 2012.
Against such a concerning backdrop, I would
nevertheless like to highlight a moment of joy that
lifted the spirits of Palestinians in the West Bank and
Gaza alike, when on 22 June a young Gazan refugee,
Mohammad Assaf, won the “Arab Idol” televised
song contest, watched by millions throughout the
region and beyond. Following his victory, Mr. Assaf
was named as goodwill ambassador to the Palestinian
fiaspora by President Abbas and as the first Regional
Youth Ambassador for Palestine Refugees by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
Turning to Syria, let me emphasize that the
overall situation continues to deteriorate as a result
of continued violent military confrontation. Direct
involvement by Hizbullah fighters inside Syria has
given new momentum to the Syrian Government’s
military approach and contributed to sectarian and
political tensions throughout the region. Statements of
increased military support to both sides in the conflict
only promise further escalation. The Secretary-General
has repeatedly stressed his opposition to the transfer of
arms and fighters to either side inside Syria.

13-37262

S/PV.6986

In the meantime, the conflict is taking a heavy toll
on the civilian population in Syria. More than 93,000
people have been reported killed. Civilians continued
to flee to neighbouring and regional countries, where
the number of refugees from Syria is now close to
1.7 million. United Nations agencies estimate that
there are more than 6.8 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance inside Syria, including more
than 3 million children. The situation of Palestine
refugees in Syria also remains of the utmost concern.
More than 60,000 have fled to neighbouring Lebanon
and Jordan. There are urgent needs in all sectors of
humanitarian assistance.
The Independent Commission of Inquiry continued
to document serious violations of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, and
reiterated in its report of 4 June (A/HRC/23/58) that
war crimes, crimes against humanity and gross human
rights violations continued apace.
The Secretary-General has insisted that there is
no military solution to the conflict. Only a political
solution can bring the violence and the suffering of
the Syrian people to an end. The Secretary-General
continues his engagement with Member States and
regional organizations in building on the diplomatic
opportunity provided by the understanding reached
between Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and
United States Secretary of State John Kerry on 7 May
in Moscow. In that context, Joint Special Representative
Lakhdar Brahimi and Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman are exploring ways
to ensure the success of the Geneva Conference on
Syria, which would allow the Syrian parties to jointly
determine the full implementation of the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex) of 30 June 2012. To
that effect, they met with Russian and United States
representatives in Geneva today.
With regard to the alleged use of chemical
weapons, the United Nations mission to investigate
allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the
Syrian Arab Republic has so far remained unable to
conduct its fact-finding mission inside Syria due to the
lack of authorization for acess on the part of the Syrian
Government. Several additional allegations of the use of
chemical weapons have been brought to the SecretaryGeneral’s attention by Member States. The mission will
continue to monitor developments and collect available
information. The head of mission, Ake Sellstrám, has
visited some capitals and is currently pursuing other

options for fact-finding activities outside of Syria,
including in neighbouring States.
The Council was briefed in detail last week on
the tense situation with regard to the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) area of
operations in the Golan, which we continue to monitor
with concern. We have repeatedly called for all
violations of the Disengagement Agreement to cease
and have urged the parties strictly to abide by their
obligations. We remain fully committed to UNDOF’s
mandate and are actively looking for replacements for
the departing Austrian troops.
The negative impact of the conflict in Syria on
Lebanon has been more sharply evident in recent
weeks. On 25 May, Hizbullah Secretary-General
Hassan Nasrallah acknowledged Hizbullah’s role in the
fighting alongside the Government in Syria, while other
Lebanese elements are also reported to be providing
support to the other side. Fighters from other countries
are also reported to be participating in the conflict.
Threats of retaliation from Syrian opposition elements
and calls by Lebanese Salafi sheikhs for jihad in Syria
highlight the very real danger of the threat of a spread
of the Syrian conflict to Lebanon. President Sleiman
reiterated his calls for all concerned to adhere to the
Baabda Declaration. The Secretary-General expressed
deep concern about Hizbullah’s increased participation
in the fighting in Syria, and reiterated how important
it was that all Lebanese leaders prevent a dangerous
spillover of the conflict in Lebanon and adhere to the
Baabda Declaration, as essential to Lebanon’s stability
and security. On 20 June, President Sleiman called on
Hizbullah fighters to return to Lebanon.
During the reporting period, more than 60 shells
and rockets were launched from Syria into Lebanon,
causing one fatality and a dozen injuries. On 26 May,
two rockets were fired into Shiite neighbourhoods in
the southern suburbs of Beirut, wounding four people.
On 21 June, another rocket was fired into the southern
Beirut district of Alley. On 5 and 12 June, Syrian
army helicopters fired missiles into the Arsal region
of Lebanon. The Lebanese Armed Forces stated that
their units in that area had taken defensive measures
necessary to react immediately to any further violation.
On 18 June, in a letter for transmission to the President
of the Security Council, President Sleiman protested the
conflicting Syrian parties’ infringement of Lebanon’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

13-372625

S/PV.6986

The violence in Tripoli, which started on 19 May,
continued, causing 36 deaths, including those of two
members of the Army, and wounding 200 others.
Tensions in the northern Beka’a Valley are high, with
attacks and clashes on 27 May and 6 June that left three
Lebanese soldiers and two gunmen dead. Attacks in
Arsal on 11 and 16 June resulted in five fatalities. In
a serious development, violence also erupted in the
southern city of Sidon, where on 23 and 24 June armed
clashes between supporters of a Salafist cleric and the
Lebanese Armed Forces left at least 16 soldiers dead and
15 others wounded. That includes at least two soldiers
killed in a related attack on Army checkpoints at the
entrances to the Ain Al-Hilweh Palestinian refugee
camp outside Sidon. The Secretary-General condemned
the attacks on the Lebanese Armed Forces, stressing
the importance of fully respecting the authority of the
State and its institutions, particularly the Lebanese
Armed Forces, under the leadership of President
Sleiman. He also reminded all concerned in Lebanon
of their responsibility to avoid conflict and uphold the
principles of mutual respect and coexistence.
On 31 May, a majority of the Parliament, from
both political blocs, voted to extend its mandate by 17
months, thereby postponing the elections scheduled for
16 June until a date to be set before November 2014.
Appeals against the extension were put before the
Constitutional Council, but due to the lack of a quorum
the Council was not able to consider them. The extension
of the Parliament’s mandate is therefore confirmed.
Prime Minister-designate Tammam Salam is resuming
consultations aimed at forming a new Government.
The situation in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) along the
Blue Line remained broadly quiet but fragile. UNIFIL
was able to control some tension between Lebanese
civilians and troops of the Israel Defense Forces along
the Hasbani/Wazzani river area. Israeli violations of
Lebanese airspace continued on an almost daily basis

6

and in some instances intensified, notably between
3 and 5 May.
The Middle East is living in dangerous and tragic
days, as the scourge of war is once again destroying
lives and burying hopes. It is a trying period for the
United Nations, and our collective ability to live up to
the values and principles of the Charter is being put to
a hard test. But however difficult the task, the Security
Council and the United Nations at large cannot give up
or let a sense of collective impotence erode our sense
of responsibility. Resolving conflict and finding a way
towards peaceful coexistence and mutual respect for
all is possible. But it requires courageous and mutual
compromises at the national, regional and international
levels, and a commitment to settling conflicts through
peaceful means, not war or violence. That is true in Syria
as it is elsewhere. It is crucial that all act responsibly
and contribute to reversing the negative dynamics at
play in the region. The current situation of unresolved
conflict and prolonged occupation in the West Bank and
Gaza is the cause of much suffering on the Palestinian
side, but it is no good for Israel either. We at the United
Nations are deeply convinced that achieving a twoState solution, ending the occupation begun in 1967
and ending the conflict, as envisaged in the relevant
resolutions of the Council, are in the best interests of
both Israelis and Palestinians. Leaders have a choice
to make, and a responsibility to their people and future
generations. The United Nations will continue to do all
it can to help in the search for peace and the realization
of the universal and legitimate rights of all people in
the region.
The President: I thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for
his briefing.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

13-37262
