S/PV.8379

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8379th meeting

Tuesday, 23 October 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Sipaco Ribala
Mr. Amde
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-33580 (E)
*1833580*

S/PV.8379

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: On 21 September, I warned the
Council that we were losing the fight against famine
in Yemen (see S/PV.8361). Since then, the situation has
worsened. That is why, as required by resolution 2417
(2018), which the Council adopted in May, we issued
the white note that was circulated late last week. In line
with our obligations under the Council’s resolution, my
briefing today focuses on the risk of famine.
Famines are mercifully rare in the modern world.
They used to be ubiquitous and a relatively common
occurrence all over the world throughout more than
99 per cent of human history. It is actually a spectacular
feature of progress in our era that only two famines
have been declared in the past 20 years — the one that
took the lives of a quarter of a million Somalis in 2011
and the famine declared last year that affected a few
tens of thousands of people in South Sudan. It is that
recent progress that makes what we now face in Yemen
so shocking. A famine is declared when the three
thresholds of food insecurity, acute malnutrition and
mortality are all breached together. The three criteria
are that at least one household in five faces an extreme
lack of food, that more than 30 per cent of children under
the age of five are suffering from acute malnutrition
or wasting, and that at least two out of every 10,000
people are dying each and every day.
Assessments conducted a year ago identified 107
out of Yemen’s 333 districts to be at risk of famine,
2/19

23/10/2018

where two of those three thresholds were either already
exceeded or dangerously close to being so. A further
assessment exercise is now under way across the country
and the initial results are expected in mid-November. It
has been more difficult to confirm the position on the
third criteria — the number of deaths due to starvation
or starvation-related disease. However, while mortalityrelated data is difficult to collect and triangulate, health
workers are pointing to the rising number of deaths
linked to food-related factors.
We also know that many deaths are hidden. Only
half of the health facilities in Yemen are functioning
and many Yemenis are too poor to access the ones that
are open. Therefore, unable to reach care, people often
simply die at home. Very few families report those
deaths and the stories of those people go unrecorded.
However, at the end of last year, one aid agency estimated
that 130 children under the age of five were dying every
day from extreme hunger and disease — nearly 50,000
little children during the course of the year. While we
await the results of the assessments that are now under
way, we already know that a further year of war and
economic crisis have pushed millions more Yemenis
towards famine.
So, just to be clear, my assessment and advice to
the Council is that there is now a clear and present
danger of an imminent and great big famine engulfing
Yemen — much bigger than anything that any
professionals in this field have seen during their working
lives. Some people, perhaps including members of the
Council, will be thinking, “Hang on a minute. They
have told us this before and it did not happen”. That is
correct. We warned of famine in Yemen at the beginning
of last year as part of the Secretary-General’s call to
action, which also flagged the risk in Somalia, South
Sudan and north-eastern Nigeria. The response was a
dramatic scaling up of the United Nations coordinated
relief effort, which helped to mitigate the worst impact
of the crisis at the time. I issued a similar warning when
I briefed the Council on 8 November last year on the
likely effect of the economic blockade that had just
been imposed by the international coalition following
missile attacks on Riyadh from inside Yemen. The
blockade was removed and the supervised imports of
food, fuel and medicines resumed through the Red Sea
ports. What I am telling the Council today is that the
situation is now much graver than on either of those
two occasions.
18-33580

23/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Why is that? First, it is due to the sheer number of
people at risk. In my update to the Council last month, I
said that an additional 3.5 million people were likely to
become severely food insecure in the months ahead, in
addition to the 8 million that we were already reaching
each month through the United Nations coordinated
response effort. That is a total of 11 million people.
That is what I said on 21 September. We now think
that that estimate was wrong. Our revised assessment,
which is the result of new survey work and analysis,
is that the total number of people facing pre-famine
conditions — meaning that they are entirely reliant
on external aid for survival — could soon reach not
11 million, but 14 million. That is half of the total
population of the country.
Secondly, beyond the sheer numbers, while millions
of people have been surviving on emergency food
assistance for years, the help that they get is enough
merely to survive, not to thrive. The toll is unbearably
high. The immune systems of the millions of people
who have been on survival support for years on end
are now literally collapsing, making them — especially
children and the elderly — more likely to succumb to
malnutrition, cholera and other diseases.
Last month, I explained the two recent developments
that have deepened the crisis: first, the intensification
of fighting around Al-Hudaydah, choking the lifeline
that the aid operation and commercial imports rely
on; and secondly, the recent further collapse of the
economy. What has happened since then on those
two issues? Fierce clashes continue in Al-Hudaydah,
including intense fighting, shelling and air strikes in
Al-Hudaydah city over the past several days. More
than 570,000 people have been forced from their homes
across the Al-Hudaydah governorate since fighting
escalated in the end of June. Due to ongoing clashes,
the eastern road from Al-Hudaydah city to Sana’a
remains blocked, which impacts trade and convoys
from the key ports that serve all the population centres
of northern Yemen.
Clashes have also continued to block access to a
milling facility that contains enough aid-financed grain
to feed 3.7 million people for a month, and several
humanitarian warehouses in the Al-Hudaydah area
have now been occupied for over two months.
The parties to the conflict continue to violate
international humanitarian law. Since late May, more
than 5,000 separate violations have been recorded,

S/PV. 8379

including mass civilian casualties and destruction or
damage to critical civilian infrastructure, including
hospitals, electricity, water systems, markets, roads
and bridges. Delays in issuing visas, restrictions on
the importation of equipment and cargo, retractions
of permits, interference in humanitarian assessment
exercises, interference in monitoring and other
obstructions all limit the ability of humanitarian
agencies to provide life-saving assistance to innocent
civilians. In the absence of a cessation of hostilities,
especially around Al-Hudaydah, where fighting for
more than four months now has damaged the key
facilities and infrastructure on which the aid operation
relies, the relief effort will ultimately be simply
overwhelmed. The time surely has come for all parties
to heed those warnings.
On the economy, the central problem, as I
explained last month, is that Yemen is almost entirely
reliant on imports for food, fuel and medicine. The
available foreign exchange, from what little remains of
oil exports, money sent home from Yemenis out of the
country and international assistance, has been simply
inadequate to finance adequate levels of import to
support the population. Since 2015, the gross domestic
product — the national income of Yemen — has
shrunk by 50 per cent. More than 600,000 jobs have
been lost and hundreds of thousands of civil servants
and pensioners have not received regular payment
since 2016. More than 1.5 million families are no
longer receiving support through public safety nets and
more than 80 per cent of Yemenis now live below the
poverty line.
The collapse in the domestic economy has been
partially — but only partially — mitigated by aid
efforts, including generous funding this year from the
Gulf, the United States, European countries and other
donors, and that has allowed the United Nations and
its partners to dramatically scale up relief efforts. Aid
agencies continue to implement the world’s largest
humanitarian relief operation in Yemen. More than
200 organizations are working through the United
Nations humanitarian response plan, and we have
delivered assistance to each and every one of Yemen’s
333 districts this year. As many as 8 million people a
month are receiving life-saving assistance under the
programme. But because the aid operation cannot
conceivably meet the needs of all Yemenis, I called last
month for an urgent and substantial injection of foreign
exchange and the resumption of payments to pensioners

18-335803/19

S/PV.8379

The situation in the Middle East

23/10/2018

and key public sector workers, such as teachers and
health professionals.

to play an enhanced role in ensuring the appropriate use
of key facilities, especially around Al-Hudaydah.

There have been constructive discussions on
both those issues and indications of further support,
especially from Gulf countries. Today’s announcement
that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates will provide $70 million to cover allowances
for 135,000 teachers all over the country is important.
However, I fear that overall action in those areas still
looks to be both too small and too slow to reverse the
trajectory towards famine, so my plea is that those
concerned address that as a matter of great urgency.

Secondly, we must protect the supply of food and
essential goods across the country. Humanitarian
and commercial imports must flow into all ports and
onwards to their final destinations. That means lifting
existing and planned restrictions on imports and
keeping the main transport routes open and safe.

At the same time, the Government of Yemen appears
to be planning further restrictions on traders importing
essential commodities. Traders trying to import six
key commodities — wheat, rice, sugar, milk, cooking
oil and fuel derivatives — are now being told that, as
a result of new Government regulations, they must
secure lines of credit from the Central Bank. But only
a handful of lines of credit have been issued since June,
most of them in just the past few days. The enforcement
of those regulations is already having an alarming
effect. Two vessels carrying more than 29,000 metric
tons of fuel have, at the Government’s request, been
refused entry into Yemen in recent days. Last month
I described the impact of desperate fuel shortages. If
current trends continue, water services and sanitation
facilities will inevitably be either curtailed or cut
off altogether.
The Government has announced that it intends
to extend enforcement of the new regulations to food
imports starting 9 November. Unless steps are taken
to expedite the process or waive those planned new
requirements, imports of key food commodities and fuel
could, in our assessment, fall by one half. That would,
for reasons I have already explained, be the death knell
for countless innocent civilians, most of them women
and children. Therefore, I call on all stakeholders to do
everything possible to avert catastrophe. We urgently
seek the support of the Council for action in five areas.
First, there must be a cessation of hostilities in and
around all the infrastructure and facilities on which
the aid operation and commercial importers rely. A
humanitarian ceasefire would reflect the obligations
of the parties to the conflict to uphold international
humanitarian law and to do everything possible to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance. As we
have previously made clear, the United Nations is ready
4/19

Thirdly, there needs to be a larger and faster
injection of foreign exchange into the economy through
the Central Bank, along with expediting credit for
traders and the payment of pensioners and civil servants.
Fourthly, there must be an increase in funding
and support for the humanitarian operation. Given
projected increases in needs — potentially up to
14 million people, as I have said — and the inevitable
lead times, aid agencies need additional resources now
to start scaling up relief efforts.
Fifthly, with so many lives at stake, we call upon
the belligerents to seize this moment to engage fully
and openly with the Special Envoy to end the conflict.
He and I talk about these issues all the time, and we have
discussed the five asks I have set out before members of
the Council today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I apologize to
Mark Lowcock that a previous engagement delayed my
arrival to the Chamber, but I thank him very much for
another sobering briefing. It is very good that the United
Nations can report swiftly to the Council, in line with
resolution 2417 (2018), whenever the risk of conflictinduced famine and widespread food insecurity in
armed conflict contexts occur. In resolution 2417
(2018), the Council expressed its intention to give its
full attention to such information that the SecretaryGeneral provides, and as we on the Council all know,
Yemen has been one of those issues that the Council
follows very deeply and about which it is gravely
concerned. I am pleased to see that the Ambassador has
joined us today.
The numbers that Mark Lowcock has cited are
truly horrifying. The scale is a very grave concern,
and the fact that the crisis does not seem to be getting
18-33580

23/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

better is also something that the Council needs to
take a deep interest in. I will not repeat the figures,
but the fact that they are in the millions ought to be
very salutary for us to think about, and in particular
the acute malnourishment of nearly 2 million children
under the age of five is a warning call. I understand
that nearly 400,000 of those children suffer from severe
acute malnutrition. That is a life-threatening condition
and it requires urgent treatment.
The highest number of severe acute malnutrition
cases is in Al-Hudaydah governorate, where there are
appropriateoximately 100,000 cases. After air strikes
in late July resulted in damage to the main sanitation
facility and water supply, suspected cholera cases
almost doubled, and that of course increases the risk of
a new wave of cholera. Only the humanitarian response
is containing an outbreak like last year’s and a further
disruption of humanitarian operations could have, as
Mark said, catastrophic consequences.
Mark asked for increased funding and more
support to humanitarian operations. The efforts of
the United Arab Emirates and the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia are welcome. As for the United Kingdom, we
are determined to play our part. On World Food Day,
16 October, the United Kingdom announced a package
of over $125 million, which we hope will help UNICEF
tackle malnutrition in Yemen. But funding alone will
not be enough to address the growing risk of famine.
We need urgent action on the part of all parties on the
economy, imports and access, and the protection of
civilians and civilian infrastructure. I want to highlight
four issues in particular.
First, with regard to the economy, we share the
concern about the rapid depreciation of the Yemeni rial.
Soaring prices are putting several basic commodities
out of reach for many Yemenis, and the Central Bank
is struggling to pay public sector salaries. We look to
the Government of Yemen and the Central Bank to
take urgent action to stabilize the rial, for example by
issuing promised letters of credit to Yemeni commercial
food importers. Until that happens, we also suggest that
the Government of Yemen pause the implementation
of Decree 75, which is preventing staple goods, such
as wheat, cooking oil and rice, from getting into the
country at a time when they are most needed.
Secondly, unhindered access for commercial and
humanitarian food and fuel into and throughout Yemen
is essential if famine is to be avoided. The conflict is

S/PV. 8379

cutting off important transport routes, including the
main route between Al-Hudaydah and Sana’a, and
alternatives have become more congested and more
vulnerable. For their part, the Houthis should stop
interfering with the humanitarian response so that
food, fuel and medicines can reach those most in need
throughout the north.
Thirdly, it is essential that military operations
be conducted in accordance with international
humanitarian law. This includes the protection of
civilians and the protection of civilian infrastructure.
We have consistently made this clear in the Council,
but I repeat it again today. Not only is it important that
military operations proceed with regard to the principles
of proportionality, precaution and distinction, but it is
also the case that further damage to food infrastructure,
such as mills and wheat silos, threatens already fragile
food supplies.
Fourthly and lastly, as we have made clear, only
a political settlement will enable the worsening
humanitarian crisis to be properly addressed and will
bring long-term stability to Yemen. We call on all
parties once again to engage constructively and in good
faith with the Special Envoy’s efforts to bring about a
political settlement. We look forward to hearing from
Martin Griffiths again in the Council. We last heard
from him on 11 September (see S/PV.8348) following
disappointing news from Geneva. We support his
efforts, which have continued since then, and we
look forward to further updates in the coming weeks
on progress towards reaching agreement between the
parties on confidence-building measures and a broader
framework agreement.
With regard to the four points that Mark
made — some of which I have covered now — I think
they deserve very urgent consideration by the Council.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs. Mr. Mark Lowcock,
for his briefing to the Council on the latest developments
pertaining to the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
I will focus in my statement on two issues:
developments in the humanitarian situation in Yemen,
and political and security developments.
First, with regard to developments in the
humanitarian situation, we are greatly concerned by
warning of the imminent danger of food insecurity in

18-335805/19

S/PV.8379

The situation in the Middle East

Yemen, as detailed by Mr. Lowcock in his briefing.
More than 3.5 million of our Yemenis brothers are
facing the threat of food insecurity. The continued
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Yemen
is the inevitable result of the ongoing armed conflict,
which affects the economy sector first and foremost.
In the light of the non-payment of salaries and the
unprecedented depreciation of the Yemeni rial against
foreign currencies, the international community has a
major responsibility to support the Yemeni Government
in order to ensure that it succeeds in stopping the
depreciation of the national currency.
The international community must also support
the efforts of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, including
confidence-building measures, to unify the Yemeni
financial institutions, the foremost of which is the
Central Bank, with a view to establishing new
mechanisms to collect revenues from different Yemeni
regions in order to pay the salaries, which undoubtedly
would help to alleviate humanitarian suffering.
In that regard, we commend the support provided
recently by the Government of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia to the Yemeni Central Bank through its
deposit of $200 million, thereby increasing its total
deposits to approximately $3.2 billion. In addition, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, along with the United Arab
Emirates, has also provided $70 million to support the
payment of teacher salaries in Yemen, in coordination
with UNICEF.
Secondly, with regard to political and security
developments, our meeting today to discuss the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Yemen is
an expected result of the coup against the legitimate
Government of Yemen, led by the Houthis, who took
control of most State institutions by military force. The
Houthis have refused to cooperate with any political
effort to end the crisis, as seen recently by their absence
from the consultations that were supposed to take place
in Geneva on 6 September and were fully supported by
the Council.
The Houthis also continue to deliberately obstruct
humanitarian assistance through seizures and looting.
The Houthis have confiscated more than 690 relief
trucks and more than 15,000 food baskets, and detained
and stopped 84 oil and food vessels. As Mr. Lowcock
said, the Houthis have also taken control of humanitarian
warehouses in Al-Hudaydah.
6/19

23/10/2018

In addition, the Houthis have taken control of
Al-Hudaydah city and port and transformed them into a
military operations zone, thereby preventing safe access
to the grain silos and threatening to disrupt international
navigation. The Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014) has condemned Houthi attacks
on commercial vessels in the Red Sea and confirmed
that such attacks violate international humanitarian
law and may seriously affect access to humanitarian
assistance and routes of commercial shipments.
We reiterate that the State of Kuwait stands ready
to support and facilitate all international efforts
aimed at prioritizing the political solution based on
resolutions of international legitimacy. We also stand
ready to facilitate the work of the Special Envoy for
Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and his ongoing efforts
in order to gather all Yemeni parties at the dialogue
table despite the security challenges, including the
Houthi threat to regional peace and security posed by
the targeting of the territories of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia with nearly 250 ballistic missiles and 67,000
explosive projectiles.
In conclusion, we underscore our support for the
efforts of the Special Envoy. Any effort to end the
crisis in Yemen must be based on a political solution
in accordance with the three terms of reference: the
Gulf Initiative and its implementation mechanism,
the outcomes of the national dialogue and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2216
(2015), while ensuring the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Yemen and non-interference
in its internal affairs.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for his briefing. We are grateful to him and
his team for their work to ease the humanitarian crisis
in Yemen.
China expresses its condolences to the Yemeni
victims of tropical cyclone Luban and extends its
sincere sympathy to their families. We wish a speedy
recovery to all who are injured.
Against the backdrop of the ongoing conflict in
locations such as Al-Hudaydah, the humanitarian crisis
in Yemen has worsened and the suffering of the people has
increased. Despite the firm support of the international
community, overall economic and social conditions
in Yemen have continued to deteriorate. Basic public
services such as medical care are dwindling. Food and
18-33580

23/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

fuel prices, which affect people’s livelihood, are on the
rise and the threat of famine looms ever larger. Armed
conflicts have increased civilian casualties, destroyed
infrastructure and impeded access to humanitarian
assistance — a situation that has further exacerbated
the humanitarian crisis. The international community
must take action with a view to alleviating the current
grave humanitarian situation in Yemen. China would
like to make the following points.
First, the parties to the conflict should create
conditions for easing the humanitarian situation in
Yemen. We urge them to abide by international law,
cease hostilities, provide effective, safe and timely
access for the delivery of humanitarian supplies, and
guarantee the normal movement of commercial items.
That will help to stabilize prices and ensure the timely
distribution of humanitarian relief, thereby meeting the
basic needs of the Yemeni people.
Secondly, the international community should
continue to increase humanitarian assistance and provide
medicine, food and other materials in a targeted manner
to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people. We
appreciate the efforts of the World Health Organization
(WHO), the World Food Programme and other agencies
to reduce the threat of cholera and famine, including
the WHO delivery of cholera vaccines to more than half
a million Yemenis in early October.
Thirdly, advancing the political process is the only
fundamental and lasting solution to the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen. The international community should
step up its support for the mediation efforts of the
United Nations and Special Envoy Griffiths to jointly
push the parties to set aside their differences, pursue
de-escalation, adopt confidence-building measures,
such as releasing prisoners, relaunch face-to-face
political dialogue as soon as possible, and establish a
sustainable negotiation process.
In recent years, China has provided several
tranches of assistance to Yemen, including food and
medical supplies, through bilateral channels and
in cooperation with international agencies. In July,
President Xi Jinping announced a new assistance
initiative for Yemen at the eighth ministerial meeting of
the China-Arab States Cooperation Forum. China will
actively honour its commitments to helping alleviate
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. We will continue
to provide assistance to the Yemeni people to the best
of our ability.

S/PV. 8379

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
having taken the initiative of convening this meeting
in the extremely deteriorated humanitarian context of
which we are all aware and which Mr. Lowcock has
just described. His warnings and expectations are very
clear, and we must all act with a sense of urgency in the
light of what he told us. For months, we have seen the
ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
Yemen. War, extreme poverty and economic collapse
have created such a high degree of systemic weakness
of society and the State that we are today at the brink
of catastrophe.
Since our last meeting in the Council a month ago
(see S/PV.8361), the situation has been exacerbated by
the continued fall of the rial, the ongoing fighting in
Al-Hudaydah and a decline in the amount of foodstuffs
unloaded in Al-Hudaydah since September. In addition,
in the south-eastern province of Al-Mahrah, there was
damage caused by tropical cyclone Luban. The result,
as the Special Envoy described, is a risk of widespread
famine that could affect more than 22 million people,
a large-scale cholera epidemic and the possibility that
several generations of Yemenis will be deprived of
an education.
Secondly, in this extremely difficult situation, we
must pursue our efforts to ensure respect of international
humanitarian law, the protection of civilians, and
humanitarian and commercial access and delivery,
as well as to promote the recovery of the Yemeni
economy. Those points are included in the Council’s
21 September presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/18)
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
must implement them in Yemen. Two immediate
concrete goals are to ensure the protection of civilians
from bombing and artillery fire, particularly in a
city as densely populated as Al-Hudaydah, and to
allow civilians to move freely and safely. Civilian
infrastructure must also be protected.
We must continue to strive to achieve other goals
often mentioned in the Council.
First, we must protect humanitarian personnel,
including those working in the rapid response
mechanisms in Al-Hudaydah province and elsewhere in
Yemen, who operate in a very dangerous environment.
They must be able to plan their operations in advance
and implement them safely. I once again convey to them
the full support and admiration of France.

18-335807/19

S/PV.8379

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, humanitarian and commercial access
must be ensured. The ports of Al-Hudaydah and Saleef
must remain open and accommodate at least as many
essential commodities — including food and fuel — as
they did before December 2017. A solution is urgently
needed so that the World Food Programme can access
silos containing essential foods for the population and
then transport them to Al-Hudaydah province and the
rest of the country. The same is true for fuel. The main
artery between Al-Hudaydah and Sana’a must remain
accessible, and we call on the parties to do everything
in their power in that regard.
Finally, it is essential to intensify efforts to contain
the soaring inflation of prices for food items, the
collapse of the rial, and the lack of compensation for a
large majority of Yemenis. There is an urgent need for
progress in the negotiations led by the Special Envoy for
Yemen, Martin Griffiths, with the Yemeni Government
and the Houthi rebels on this topic, particularly with
regard to the restoration of the Yemeni Central Bank.
The work of the international financial institutions
must also continue to make the recovery of the banking
and financial system feasible.
In that context — and I will conclude here — France
reiterates its call on the parties to engage fully with
the Special Envoy in order to reopen the dialogue
and move the political process forward. We know
that only a political solution will make it possible to
put a permanent end to the suffering of the Yemeni
people. The search for that solution is becoming more
and more urgent every day. United Nations mediation
is the only way to revive discussions with a view to
reaching an agreement on the management of the port
of Al-Hudaydah, resuming talks, achieving a durable
cessation of hostilities and defining the parameters for
a political solution.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let me
thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for
his sobering and concerning briefing. Let me also
thank the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) for its efforts on the ground and for
its initiative in providing the Council with a warning
on the increased threat of conflict-induced famine
in Yemen.
OCHA’s warning and this meeting of the Council
are directly based on resolution 2417 (2018), on conflict
and hunger, adopted earlier this year. OCHA’s warning
comes at a crucial point in time, when, following this
8/19

23/10/2018

summer’s escalation of violence, the number of civilians
killed in hostilities every month has almost tripled;
when an economic depression is pushing millions
people further below the poverty line; when cyclones
threaten the lives of already extremely vulnerable
civilians in Yemen; and when the Council’s efforts to
end the terrible conflict have proven to be insufficient.
Last week we hosted a photo exhibit in this building,
with pictures of victims of conflict and hunger. Two
severely malnourished babies from Yemen were among
the victims shown. Those were two faces behind the
staggering statistic of 172,000 severely malnourished
children in Yemen. In that context, I will address three
issues today: first, the threat of conflict-induced famine;
secondly, the constraints on humanitarian access; and
thirdly, the need for compliance with international
humanitarian law.
With regard to my first point, Yemen is a clear
example of the relationship between conflict and
hunger. The reality of the more than 11 million Yemenis
on the brink of famine is entirely man-made. The OCHA
white paper on the increased threat of famine is a good
example of the early warning we need to prevent a fullblown famine in Yemen, although in fairness, as Mark
Lowcock said, this is not the first time the humanitarian
community has warned us of the situation we are now
facing. When the Council recognized the need to break
the vicious cycle between armed conflict and food
insecurity with the adoption of resolution 2417 (2018), it
also committed itself to action. The Council committed
itself to addressing those mad-made crises by enforcing
man-made solutions. The parties to the conflict must
take immediate steps and it is up to the international
community, including the Council, to make sure that
they follow through.
My second point concerns the persisting
humanitarian access constraints the parties need to
address. One month ago, OCHA provided the Council
with concrete asks to all parties to the conflict that
would help avert a famine. It is unconscionable that,
since then, no discernible action has been taken by the
parties involved. Today, let me be all the more clear
about what we expect of the warring parties. Houthiaffiliated militia need to immediately abandon all
humanitarian warehouses they have occupied for
the past two months in Al-Hudaydah. The Yemeni
Government needs to address with the utmost urgency
the import delays caused by Decree 75 before imports
of essential commodities decrease even further. Despite
18-33580

23/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

clearances by the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism, three essential fuel shipments
were delayed in reaching Al-Hudaydah in recent
weeks. Those delays must stop. The coalition needs to
remove unnecessary commercial import restrictions,
which have resulted in container shipments no longer
serving Al-Hudaydah port since last year’s blockade.
Al-Hudaydah port should be open and fully functional.
The Council has stated that repeatedly. The road
connecting Al-Hudaydah and Sana’a needs to be open to
humanitarian goods. We need a humanitarian ceasefire
on the ground, as Mr. Lowcock requested. So far, the
Council has been unified. Let us all unite behind the
five asks Mr. Lowcock mentioned today.
That brings me to my third point — compliance
with international humanitarian law. The conduct of
hostilities continues to be a major contributing factor
to the humanitarian crisis. Air strikes and shelling
have killed scores of civilians. They have also hit
hospitals and water sanitation facilities that Yemenis
depend on for clean drinking water and to prevent
cholera and other diseases. Reports of both the Panel of
Experts on Yemen and the Group of Eminent Experts
on Yemen have highlighted the many transgressions
by all parties to the conflict. In the absence of an end
to the violence, their reporting continues to be crucial.
We call on all parties to cooperate with them and allow
them unimpeded access. Accountability is an essential
ingredient for a peaceful and stable Yemen.
In conclusion, we call on the parties to take
urgent steps to alleviate the humanitarian crisis by
implementing OCHA’s asks before it is too late.
Humanitarian actors on the ground warn us that
anything short of a halt to hostilities may still be
insufficient to avert a famine. We call on the parties to
cease hostilities around humanitarian and commercial
infrastructure, remove all access constraints and
de-escalate. We further call on them to engage with the
Special Envoy without preconditions.
Martin Griffiths’ efforts towards a political
solution continue to have our full support. The parties
must shoulder their responsibility. If not, the Council,
bearing in mind its commitment laid down in resolution
2417 (2018), must consider further steps. We need
immediate and concrete action. Millions of lives depend
on it. The people of Yemen depend on it. The children
of Yemen depend on it.

S/PV. 8379

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin by
thanking Mr. Mark Lowcock for his very objective,
yet alarming, briefing. We would like to express our
gratitude for his efforts, his team and the activities
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in Yemen.
I would also like to thank the United Kingdom
for taking the initiative to convene this very timely
meeting. It demonstrates the desperate urgency of the
humanitarian situation in Yemen. We have observed the
continued deterioration of the living conditions of the
Yemeni population, as just described by Mr. Lowcock.
The situation of civilians is getting worse day by day, as
Yemen is now on the brink of the worst famine. We are
appalled by reports estimating that up to 4 million more
Yemenis may become severely food insecure by the end
of the year if conditions do not improve. The country
may also face a new wave of the cholera epidemic,
as the number of suspected cases has increased. The
dire situation of Yemeni civilians continues to be
exacerbated by the escalation of hostilities and attacks
on civilian infrastructure.
We believe that the highly alarming situation of
children in Yemen requires the special attention of the
Council. Every 10 minutes a Yemeni child dies from
entirely preventable war-related causes, and thousands
have already been killed or injured as a result of conflict.
Currently, almost every child in Yemen is in need of
aid and, according to recent estimates, an additional
1 million children are now at risk of descending into
famine. Those numbers are deeply disturbing and
horrifying. We urge all parties to the conflict, as well
as those with influence over them, to take immediate
action to save Yemeni children from hunger and the
atrocities of war.
We are also alarmed by the escalation of fighting
in and around Al-Hudaydah, where an increase in air
strikes, naval and ground shelling has resulted in scores
of civilian casualties as well as damage to civilian
infrastructure. The intensification of hostilities in
Al-Hudaydah poses a major threat not only to the city
and its inhabitants, but also to the critical lifeline for
humanitarian assistance. The disruption of the strategic
supply chain leading through Al-Hudaydah would have
disastrous humanitarian consequences for millions
of people across the country. It is therefore crucial to
maintain the full functioning of the port and to ensure
that all roads leading from Al-Hudaydah are accessible
in order to enable basic commodities to be delivered.

18-335809/19

S/PV.8379

The situation in the Middle East

The collapse of the economy and State structures
is yet another factor contributing to the further
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
As a result of the rapid devaluation of the Yemeni rial,
prices of basic commodities are skyrocketing and the
purchasing power of millions of people is falling. Could
any of us imagine being forced to live on less than $1 a
day? In the light of such a tragic humanitarian situation,
I would like to point to the provisions of the presidential
statement adopted in March (S/PRST/2018/5) by the
Council and to recall four important points. First,
concrete steps must be taken to de-escalate the
fighting and establish a durable cessation of hostilities.
Secondly, safe and unhindered humanitarian access
must be ensured. Thirdly, international humanitarian
law must be respected and the protection of civilians
ensured at all times. Lastly, immediate measures need
to be taken to stabilize the economy and support the
exchange rate. These issues are still very urgent.
In conclusion, the Council bears the responsibility
for the situation in Yemen. It is time to take concrete
action in order to bring the conflict to an end. We
must stand united in our call to the parties to step
up their engagement in an inclusive, United Nationsled political process without preconditions, so that a
peaceful solution can soon be reached for the sake of
the Yemeni people.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the United Kingdom delegation for
initiating today’s meeting. The situation in Yemen merits
the Security Council’s close attention. Mr. Lowcock
has given us a depressing briefing on the situation in
Yemen, where the world’s worst humanitarian crisis
is unfolding.
This is a structural crisis. It has done irreparable
damage to the country’s economy and population.
The Emergency Relief Coordinator’s dry statistics
cannot convey the full force of the critical situation
in Yemen. A majority of the population is in need of
one or another kind of assistance. Millions of Yemenis
are starving and have no access to essential medical
services or medicines. The country is once again in the
grip of a cholera epidemic. Getting humanitarian aid to
Yemenis should be one of our priorities and should be
provided on a non-discriminatory basis, regardless of
who controls the territory where they live.
We call for a comprehensive cessation of the
violence. We condemn the indiscriminate strikes on
10/19

23/10/2018

civilian targets. We advocate ensuring unconditional
compliance with the provisions of international
humanitarian law and unfettered humanitarian access
to all parts of the country. In order to achieve that,
it will be essential to keep all of Yemen’s seaports,
including Al-Hudaydah and Saleef, as well as its
airports, including Sana’a, open and functioning. It is
important to ensure that there are no obstacles to the
unimpeded movement of humanitarian and commercial
goods traffic along the main routes linking the coast
with the north of the country, where a major part of
the population lives. Russia will continue to provide
unpoliticized humanitarian assistance to Yemenis
in both the north and south. We intend to continue
working on a bilateral and multilateral basis, including
through our regular contributions to the budget of the
World Food Programme.
We operate on the principled position that it is
impossible to improve the situation in Yemen through
humanitarian measures alone and that a political solution
is essential. The Security Council cannot remain
indifferent to the suffering of the Yemeni people and
must work to influence the parties to the conflict, with
the aim of achieving a rapid resumption of negotiations
and agreeing on a ceasefire formula from which a
sustainable political process can emerge. We support
the mediation efforts of Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and believe
that his initiative for launching the negotiation process
is important. He continues to be in contact with all of
the players involved through shuttle diplomacy. We are
convinced that reaching agreement, particularly with
regard to confidence-building measures, is still possible.
We call on all parties to show restraint and refrain from
resorting to force. The history of the conflict in Yemen
has shown that militaristic approaches do not work.
Maintaining calm around Al-Hudaydah and halting
offensive actions should help Mr. Griffiths succeed. For
our part, we will continue to assist the Special Envoy
through our contacts with all of the stakeholders in the
conflict, encouraging them to become actively involved
in the United Nations mediation efforts.
In conclusion, we want to emphasize once again
that whether we are talking about the Yemeni conflict
or conflicts in other trouble spots in the region, these
are all the result of the lack of a comprehensive and
indivisible security architecture in the Middle East
for both the Arab States in the Persian Gulf and Iran.
Russia has long advocated for an initiative establishing
18-33580

23/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

that architecture, which would enable us to exchange
the current climate of threats and confrontation for one
of dialogue and cooperation.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We would like to express
our profound appreciation to the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners for their untiring efforts
to provide life-saving assistance in Yemen under
extremely challenging conditions. We also thank UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing on
those activities and to express our gratitude to the
United Kingdom for calling for this essential meeting.
There can be no doubt that the humanitarian situation
in Yemen and the suffering of the Yemeni people is still
exceptionally worrying. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs has noted that armed conflicts
have intensified in Al-Hudaydah governorate, resulting
in civilians being killed, injured or displaced, and in
the destruction of civilian infrastructure. Overland
access to the city of Al-Hudaydah remains limited,
which affects humanitarian operations. Its port is
vital to humanitarian aid, and it must remain open
and functional. The extremely difficult humanitarian
conditions have been further exacerbated by the rapid
depreciation of the local currency, and the continued
economic decline is pushing millions of Yemenis close
to famine.
Already 75 per cent of the population requires food
assistance. The non-payment of salaries has affected
the already crumbling health service, increasing the
probability of a major cholera epidemic. Thousands
of people have been affected by the severe weather
caused by Tropical Cyclone Luban. The situation has
now amounted to the worst and biggest humanitarian
crisis in the world today. All the reports and figures
from the United Nations and humanitarian agencies
warn that unless urgent and concerted efforts are taken,
the already devastating humanitarian situation will
continue to deteriorate. In the meantime, we welcome
today’s announcement by the United Arab Emirates and
Saudi Arabia that they will provide $70 million through
UNICEF to pay teachers’ salaries.
There are no options left. All parties must fully
cooperate with the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners so that much-needed aid reaches all of those
in need. Safe, unhindered and sustained humanitarian
access remains absolutely vital. The use of the port of
Al-Hudaydah is critical, and the protection of civilians
and civilian facilities must be given high priority.

S/PV. 8379

For the sake of the surviving civilians, who have
endured so much, we strongly appeal to all parties to
exercise maximum restraint, according to established
international humanitarian law. The international
community should take urgent and coordinated action
to address the distortions in the Yemeni economy.
All of those measures are of major importance, but
they will not be sufficient to sustainably address the
unfolding humanitarian tragedy. The deep-rooted crisis
in Yemen demands far more, most urgently, namely, a
comprehensive political solution that addresses both the
suffering of Yemenis and the concerns of the countries
of the region. In that context, diplomacy must provide
the prime response to finding a durable political
solution, while respecting the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Yemen.
It is very clear that the Yemeni crisis can be resolved
only through a Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned process,
facilitated by the United Nations. We fully support
the continued diplomatic efforts of Special Envoy
Griffiths. We call upon all parties to constructively
engage with the Special Envoy to fully reinvigorate the
political process. The Council should also make clear
its continued, full and comprehensive support for his
tireless efforts.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for
convening this meeting, and Mr. Lowcock for once
again informing us about the devastating situation
in Yemen.
We reiterate our deep regret at the continuation of
the conflict in Yemen. Far from a non-existent military
solution, the actions of the parties and their contempt for
international law and international humanitarian law
have aggravated what is already the worst humanitarian
crisis in the world today. We are facing the clear failure
of the Security Council to fulfil its responsibilities
of maintaining international peace and security and
protecting 22 million vulnerable Yemenis.
The continuous bombings and terrorist attacks are
compounded by recurring outbreaks of cholera and the
worst famine that the world has seen in the past 100
years. Girls and boys are the most vulnerable and are
the main victims of the conflict and the humanitarian
crisis. It is estimated that thousands of children under
the age of five could die as a result of malnutrition and
disease in the remainder of the year alone. We believe
that their abandonment by the international community

18-3358011/19

S/PV.8379

The situation in the Middle East

fosters the development of violent extremism that leads
to terrorism.
Peru condemns the Houthi rebels and their
crimes, including indiscriminate attacks against urban
centres in Saudi Arabia, for which they will be held
accountable. We also condemn the attacks carried
out by members of the coalition against civilians and
vital civilian infrastructure for dealing with cholera
outbreaks. We are still awaiting the transparent and
credible investigation requested by the Council to
identify, prosecute and punish those responsible for
the bombing of a bus that killed dozens of children last
August. Impunity is not acceptable.
We note with alarm the prospect of an escalation in
the city and port of Al-Hudaydah, which could further
restrict access to the food, medicine and fuel required
to meet humanitarian needs. Only one vessel carrying
containers has entered that port since November of last
year. We reiterate that ports, airports and land routes
must remain open and operational, as provided for in
the Council’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/5) in
March. Likewise, humanitarian aid and the population’s
access to such aid cannot and should not be conditioned
by any military objective.
In view of that, we reiterate our support for the
efforts of Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, to restore dialogue
among the parties. We also wish to convey, through
Mr. Lowcock, our support for the humanitarian work
of the United Nations and other humanitarian agencies,
whose capacities are overstretched by the scale of
the humanitarian crisis. As has been noted, the battle
against famine is being lost. In that context, it is vital
that the international community also contribute to
financing humanitarian activities, controlling inflation
and stabilizing the local currency, facilitating the
imports of basic goods and kick-starting the economy.
I conclude by noting that Council members,
in particular those with influence over the parties,
can and should do more to protect the population
without resorting to double standards or strategic
considerations. Peru emphasizes the urgent need for a
cessation of hostilities that allows free access to food
and humanitarian aid, as well as the need for the Yemeni
parties to negotiate a political solution. The time to act
is now. We cannot continue to be passive bystanders to
this tragedy.
12/19

23/10/2018

Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Allow me to start by
expressing our condolences and sympathies to the
Government and the people of Yemen following the
devastating tropical cyclone.
I also want to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his
update and for having drawn our attention to the acute
food crisis — indeed famine — in Yemen, as foreseen
in resolution 2417 (2018). Mark Lowcock and the
Humanitarian Coordinator for Yemen, Lise Grande,
have our wholehearted support in their efforts, as do
all United Nations personnel and humanitarians in
Yemen, who are working under what we understand are
extremely challenging and difficult circumstances.
I want to focus mainly on the economic crisis and
the military escalation in Yemen — two factors that are
aggravating the humanitarian disaster that has been the
predictable, but not inevitable, effect of the conflict
being played out in Yemen.
First, on the economy, the numbers presented
today are staggering. As we have heard, if the current
economic crisis continues, an additional 5.6 million
people could risk severe food insecurity in the coming
months. That would add to the individual catastrophe
of millions and bring the total number of people in
pre-famine conditions to 14 million. That famine is the
result of a man-made situation that occurred before our
eyes and on our watch.
To help reverse those trends, we support
Mr. Lowcock’s call today for urgent measures to stabilize
the Yemeni economy. Those include expanding liquidity
to stabilize the currency, expediting applications for
lines of credit for importers of core commodities and
holding back on restrictions in that area, and ensuring
the payment of civil servants — teachers as a first
step — as well as pensioners in the northern part of the
country. We welcome today’s announcement that Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates will provide
teacher allowances across the country, and we heard
Mr. Lowcock’s further recommendations in that area.
However, and turning now to my second point,
on the military escalation, those economic measures
are far from enough. The economic collapse and food
security crisis is not happening in a vacuum; it is a direct
consequence of the ongoing conflict and is aggravated
by the current military escalation. That connection is
painfully apparent in Al-Hudaydah, where the fighting
is not only causing civilian casualties but is also
affecting both aid operations and commercial imports.
18-33580

23/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

We remain particularly concerned about the continued
fighting on the main road to Sana’a, as it is impacting
the vital supply chain and life-line to northern Yemen,
as well as the occupation of humanitarian warehouses
and the blocked access to the vital milling facility.
The Security Council has once again today been put
on high alert, and we have a responsibility to respond.
Based on resolution 2417 (2018), which addresses
conflict-induced food insecurity, and as agreed in
our presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/5) earlier
this year, it is now time to come together and make
equally critical and urgent demands. First, a durable
ceasefire is needed, at least for the purpose set out
by Mr. Lowcock. Secondly, we must provide safe and
unhindered humanitarian access to all those in need,
with ports and key roads kept open and functioning,
including Al-Hudaydah and Saleef. Commercial imports
should also be maintained and expanded to reach all
ports. Thirdly, there must be respect for international
humanitarian law in all circumstances, including by
protecting civilians, medical, humanitarian and United
Nations personnel across the country and meeting
the basic needs of the civilian population. Fourthly,
the Council should urgently call in good faith on the
parties to engage in a United Nations-led inclusive
political process.
As a Council, we should step up our efforts to
support Mr. Griffiths in his commendable efforts. If
we are serious about our constant call that there is no
military solution to the conflict in Yemen, then only
through a negotiated political solution will this war and
the immense suffering that it has caused the people of
Yemen come to an end.
Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for requesting the convening of this
meeting on the humanitarian situation in Yemen, as
well as Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for the detailed briefing that
he just delivered.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reiterates its
concern stated barely one month ago (see S/PV.8361)
about the hostilities that the Yemeni people are
suffering, hostilities that are increasingly exacerbating
existing vulnerabilities. Three years of uninterrupted
conflict and the consequent economic decline have
exhausted coping mechanisms and the livelihoods of
the population, thereby exerting enormous pressure on

S/PV. 8379

the institutions that provide essential basic services,
causing irregularities and interruptions in salary
payments and interrupting the provision of operating
costs for social facilities.
Approximately 1.25 million civil servants have
not received wages, or have only received them
intermittently, since August 2016. It is estimated that
that wage gap is affecting one quarter of the population,
including public officials and their families, leaving
them without a regular income at a time of scarcity and
rising prices, according to a report by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
There is an urgent need for the international
community to find a support strategy to stop the
continued deterioration of the Yemeni rial, which has
more than halved in value since the beginning of the
conflict, creating more development problems for
the population. In that regard, we trust the words of
Mr. Griffiths, who this month in Abu Dhabi hinted
at a possible master plan entailing a set of concerted
measures among the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the agencies of the United Nations, the
Gulf countries and the Yemeni Government.
For the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, the
security of airports and ports, which are gateways
for humanitarian aid and goods, is another very
disturbing issue. In that regard, and in compliance with
international humanitarian law, the warring parties
must refrain from carrying out acts that prevent regular
access to those supplies, in addition to guaranteeing
their safe transport to distribution sites, while ensuring
that they reach all those in need.
Since April of last year, very recent data shows
1.2 million alleged cases of cholera and more than 2,500
deaths associated with the disease, making this one of
the worst outbreaks in recent history. In that regard,
the Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
welcomes and congratulates the joint efforts, supported
by the World Health Organization and UNICEF, that
have just led to the conclusion of a robust vaccination
campaign, vaccinating hundreds of thousands of people.
We hope that that approach will help to limit the spread
of the pandemic.
Before concluding, my delegation once again
urges the parties to abide by the rules of international
humanitarian law and guarantee the protection of
civilian infrastructure and the rights of civilians, so
that the Yemeni population can find a way out of the

18-3358013/19

S/PV.8379

The situation in the Middle East

crisis and return to their homes. Moreover, we ask that
all the parties involved in the conflict participate in the
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
and resume negotiations to reach a political solution,
given that frank and inclusive dialogue among the
parties is the only way to end the conflict.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
thanking Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Mark Lowcock for his comprehensive update
on the humanitarian situation in Yemen, and we convey
our readiness to extend our full support to alleviate the
humanitarian crisis in the country. We also express our
deep appreciation to Mr. Lowcock and, through him, the
staff of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs for working tirelessly in one of the worst
humanitarian crises in the world. My delegation has
closely followed the recent developments and would
like to make the following observations.
Kazakhstan strongly supports the United Nations
call on all parties to safeguard civilian lives, prevent
deaths and injuries, allow freedom of movement and
protect hospitals, clinics and schools, in accordance
with international humanitarian law and human rights
law. In that regard, we welcome the coordinated
efforts of stakeholders, namely, the United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organizations and the Gulf
countries, to provide humanitarian assistance to the
people of Al-Hudaydah. We endorse the United Nations
call on all parties to uphold international humanitarian
law and refrain from the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas.
All parties to the conflict should facilitate the
continuation and expansion of commercial imports into
all ports, including by addressing the delays linked to
Yemeni Government Decree 75 and other restrictions.
That will ensure that critical supplies can travel safely
and quickly along all routes. Presently, the volume of
commercial imports through the ports of Al-Hudaydah
and Saleef continue to be below the needs of the
population. Regrettably, access throughout the country
is still impeded by the ongoing fighting, procedural
checkpoints and the destruction of infrastructure.
We envisage a worsening situation if parties do
not refrain from committing acts that may lead to
an escalation of regional tension and insecurity. My
delegation therefore urges all parties to immediately
contribute to de-escalating violence and ending the
offensive on Al-Hudaydah, as well as an unconditional
14/19

23/10/2018

ceasefire. All sides must find compromises and reject
unilateral decisions that could harm the peace process,
in order to prevent the potential break-up of the country.
We support Mr. Lowcock’s call and acknowledge the
importance of concerted action to address distortions
in the Yemeni economy, including by supporting the
currency, injecting liquidity, expediting lines of credit
for importers and paying pensioners and civil servants.
In that regard, we welcome today’s announcement by
the United Arab Emirates and the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia of a contribution of $70 million through UNICEF
to pay the salaries of teachers in Yemen, including in
Houthi-controlled areas.
Kazakhstan would like to draw the Security
Council’s attention to the plight of 1.8 million children
under the age of five, who are acutely malnourished and
for whom immediate assistance must be mobilized. That
is especially critical in the light of a new nationwide
wave of cholera. The destruction of water supplies must
therefore be prevented at all costs. Women, youth and
civil society organizations need to be encouraged to
play a critical role at the grassroots level, not only to
alleviate suffering but also to become peacemakers and
agents of change.
Finally, Kazakhstan expresses its unconditional
support for the Special Envoy’s efforts and urges parties
to engage in good faith and without preconditions in the
political process. We also call upon the parties to the
conflict to demonstrate flexibility, avoid disagreements
and properly resolve complex issues. We fully agree
with the words of Secretary-General Guterres that
“a negotiated political settlement through inclusive
intra-Yemeni dialogue” (S/PV.8231, p. 2) is the only
solution. All measures must proceed in that direction.
Mr. Ipo (Côte D’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this meeting on the
humanitarian situation in Yemen and thanks Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his very
thorough briefing on the latest developments in the
country’s humanitarian situation.
According to United Nations reports, Yemen is
now facing the worst humanitarian crisis in the world.
Millions of children and families across Yemen may
soon find themselves without food, clean drinking
water and sanitation due to the continued conflict,
particularly the fighting around the port city of
Al-Hudaydah and the worsening economic crisis. An
18-33580

23/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

additional 1.2 million people might soon need basic
water and sanitation assistance, according to estimates
by humanitarian agencies. Families who can no longer
afford basic staples could soon join the 18.5 million
people already affected by food insecurity.
Côte d’Ivoire remains particularly concerned about
continued fighting, particularly around the port of
Al-Hudaydah, the main gateway to approximately 90 per
cent of humanitarian aid and 70 per cent of the country’s
imports. The clashes over control of that strategic port
are hampering the delivery of humanitarian aid and
causing the prices of basic necessities to soar.
Given the serious deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Yemen, Côte d’Ivoire calls on all the parties
to cease hostilities immediately. Convinced that there
is no alternative to a political settlement of the crisis in
Yemen, my country urges the warring parties to resume
negotiations under the Special Envoy’s peace plan. My
country also calls on conflicting parties to remove all
obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian aid to people
in need.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire encourages the parties
to the conflict to take ownership of the peace plan
proposed by Mr. Griffiths. We welcome the work he
has done and call on him to continue his mediation for
an effective resumption of inter-Yemeni dialogue.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Let me
add our voice to those thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock for his deeply concerning, sobering
and important briefing today. We are very grateful for
his hard work and the work that his team does on the
ground in Yemen every day.
The stories behind the huge number of people
affected by the crisis have become all too familiar:
babies ravaged by hunger, too weak to cry, and parents
choosing between critical medical care for a child or
food for their family. Now, as the Under-SecretaryGeneral argued, continued deterioration and newly
acute risk are apparent in every grim update, most
recently in the reports of over 20,000 newly displaced
people in northern Yemen, due to fighting in the area.
There are alternatives to that situation. The
suffering of the Yemeni people is not inevitable. But
unless the fighting stops and there are immediate
efforts to stabilize the Yemeni rial, then the suffering
of those who are already severely food insecure in
Yemen will continue to worsen. In that regard, no one

S/PV. 8379

has worked harder or more tirelessly to bring about a
political solution than Special Envoy Griffiths. He has
our full support and we need him to succeed.
Until we achieve a political solution, we implore
all the parties to take the measures necessary to protect
civilians and critical civilian infrastructure and to
ensure unfettered access for humanitarian goods and
personnel and the movement of essential commercial
goods. The parties must adhere to their obligations
under international law and recognize that damage
to ports and other civilian infrastructure will further
drive food insecurity. In that regard, we urge parties to
consider all possible measures to further mitigate and
reduce unnecessary suffering from the conflict. We
thank the United Nations for its efforts to maintain a
de-confliction mechanism in that context to allow aid
and commercial goods to flow despite the fighting.
We share the Under-Secretary-General’s assessment
that humanitarian assistance, especially in the past
year, has been critical in staving off the worst outcomes
and mitigating Yemeni suffering. The United States is
one of the largest donors of humanitarian assistance
to Yemen, having provided more than $1.2 billion in
humanitarian aid since fiscal year 2017, including food,
medical care, safe drinking water, shelter, psychosocial
support and supplies to fight the spread of disease.
The United States contributions to the World Food
Programme operations have also been vital.
However,
as
the
Under-Secretary-General
said, we can and must do more. And so we are. In
addition to continued humanitarian relief, we are
expanding non-humanitarian assistance to address
the consequences of conflict, including supporting
efforts to enhance the Central Bank of Yemen’s ability
to function, so that it can begin to address Yemen’s
deteriorating economic situation and the currency
depreciation that has made it even harder for Yemenis
to afford to survive.
We will continue all those efforts, and hope that
all parties will also recognize and help to respond to
the suffering. At the same time, there is simply no
alternative to a political solution. The dire situation that
the Under-Secretary-General described is yet another
reminder that this war and the suffering of the Yemeni
people can end only at the negotiating table, not on
the battlefield.

18-3358015/19

S/PV.8379

The situation in the Middle East

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
At the outset, my delegation would like to thank
the United Kingdom for having taken the initiative to
request this meeting. We are also grateful for not only
the briefing delivered by the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock, but also
the work carried out by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs.
After having listened to Mr. Lowcock once again
in this Chamber, we can reaffirm that not only the
international community, but also the Council, has
been warned. We cannot plead ignorance for what
is happening in Yemen. I have listened carefully to
each and every speaker and several words have been
repeatedly used to describe the situation in Yemen:
horrendous, horrifying, catastrophic consequences,
imminent famine, cholera, war, extreme poverty,
vicious clashes and economic collapse, to name a few.
My delegation expresses its serious concern at
the delicate humanitarian situation caused by the
continuing escalation of violence in Yemen, especially
the intensification of bombings, air strikes and the
launching of missiles against civilian populations.
Unfortunately, those armed clashes, which have spread
beyond the airport, have affected the tenth and sixteenth
kilometres of the main road connecting the cities of
Al-Hudaydah and Sana’a, making it almost impossible
to use the road to transport goods and humanitarian
aid. The clashes have also disabled access to the Red
Sea Mills, one of the most important granaries in
Yemen, with the capacity to store enough grain to feed
3.5 million people per month.
Moreover, the cholera outbreak represents a major
concern, since it has infected more than 1.2 million
people in 22 of the 23 governorates of Yemen and
has caused more than 2,500 deaths since it started to
spread in April last year. Unfortunately, the damage
to water treatment facilities and plants, particularly in
Al-Hudaydah, has increased the risk of outbreaks of
cholera and other diseases. In September alone there
were 13 cases of diphtheria and two deaths due to
the disease.
Since the beginning of the conflict, the number of
civilian victims who have died or have been seriously
injured as a result of the clashes and attacks against
civilian spaces and infrastructure amounts to more than
16/19

23/10/2018

16,000 people, of whom more than 2,400 are children.
Unfortunately, that chilling statistic is only increasing,
given that since June there have been more than 170
fatalities and at least 1,700 injuries in the governorate
of Al-Hudaydah alone.
Unfortunately, war, disease and hunger are not
the only challenges the Yemeni people must face, as,
over the past month, the governorate of Al-Mahrah,
in the south-east of the country, has been affected by
Cyclone Luban, as was mentioned by some Council
members, which caused floods affecting more than
3,000 families, claimed the lives of 11 people and left
124 people injured. That situation exacerbates the
urgent need for humanitarian assistance required by the
population to survive.
Given all that has been said, we recall that more than
70 per cent of the imports and humanitarian assistance
that enter Yemen do so by the port of Al-Hudaydah.
Therefore, any kind of attack or military campaign
against that city or port would not only seriously
affect the more than 22 million people who currently
require humanitarian assistance but, according to
the Humanitarian Coordinator for Yemen, Ms. Lise
Grande, it would raise that number to an untenable
level, dangerously increasing the number of people at
risk of famine from 8 million to 13 million.
The military actions in Yemen only serve to
undermine and weaken the efforts of our Organization
and those of the Special Envoy to establish a dialogue
that brings the parties closer to achieving a negotiated
solution to the conflict. For that reason, we call on
all the actors and parties involved to cease violence
immediately, guarantee the integrity of Al-Hudaydah
port and its access roads, abandon any preconditions
to establishing dialogue and implement resolution 2216
(2015), thereby laying the foundation for a political
solution that satisfies the demands and aspirations of
the Yemeni people within the framework of respect for
their sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
Finally, my delegation supports the process of
consultations and dialogue initiated by the Special
Envoy as an important initiative to guide the process
of political negotiation that allows for the peaceful
resolution of the situation in Yemen. We therefore
reiterate our call to the actors and parties involved to
join and contribute constructively to the process.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
18-33580

23/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Binmubarak (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council for this month.
I wish you and the friendly delegation of Bolivia every
success. I also want to thank you for giving us the
opportunity to speak before the Council.
I would like as well to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock
for his briefing and for his efforts and those of his team
in Yemen.
The priority of the Security Council is to maintain
international peace and security by honouring United
Nations resolutions, standards and international laws,
not by imposing a reality on the Yemeni people, as
some are trying to do. The Security Council must
continue to play its role as a body concerned with
maintaining international peace and security, and work
on implementing its resolutions so that the Council
can preserve its credibility in addressing any threat to
international peace and security.

S/PV. 8379

the interests of their rogue leaders working as regional
agents for Iran and Hizbullah.
Since 21 September 2014, my country has been
in a dark tunnel because of the Houthi militias. The
humanitarian situation has deteriorated in Yemen
although the political process had been moving
steadily forward, with the support of the countries of
the region and the international community, towards
achieving security and stability and building a civilian,
democratic, federal State where human rights are
respected, the dignity of women and youth is protected,
and the rights of the child and all vulnerable segments
of society are protected, and the principles of justice
and equality are honoured. However, the militias chose
to violate all humanitarian laws and values by launching
an aggression against the Yemeni people that spared
no one — not journalists, college professors, children,
women or even the Jewish and Baha’i communities,
which is unprecedented in our history.

The Council has been present throughout the stages
of the political process in Yemen since 2011. Together
we have made great strides towards ending the Yemeni
crisis that has been killing our citizens. That progress
has been made in accordance with the agreed terms
of reference: the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its implementation mechanism, the outcomes of
the national dialogue and relevant Security Council
resolutions, notably resolution 2216 (2015).

Secondly, the Houthi militias perpetrated all forms
of killing, torture, forceful displacement of civilians
in all Yemeni cities occupied by force, including the
city of Taiz, whose citizens still suffer to this day, and
other Yemeni cities. Civilians are still suffering from
landmines planted by the Houthi militias, which have
claimed the lives of thousands, including women and
children. The number of landmines planted by the
militias is now some 2 million, and the number of
victims from June 2017 to June 2018 totalled 937 killed
and 2,013 injured.

As members know, the delegation of the Houthi
militias chose not to attend the Geneva consultations.
However the Yemeni Government has supported and
continues to support the efforts of the Special Envoy
for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths. We stand ready to
support his efforts in good faith — given the right
conditions — in any initial consultations that could
represent a true step forward in the Yemeni peace
process and attain a sustainable solution to the Yemeni
crisis. As we discuss the humanitarian situation in
Yemen, we must take into account the following points.

Thirdly, as long as the conflict persists, the Yemeni
people will continue to suffer, and the militias will
continue to violate the rights of the Yemeni people.
They will continue to recruit children, force them to
drop out of school and send them to the battlefronts.
They will continue to exploit the difficult economic
situation of Yemeni families and use orphanages and
youth centres to recruit children to fight in their ranks.
The number of children soldiers now stands at 20,000,
with 1,316 casualties, including 552 were killed and 764
suffering from permanent disability.

First, the humanitarian suffering of the Yemeni
people over the past three years is the result of a wanton
coup against the State. All Yemen’s civil and military
institutions were hijacked by extremist ideological
militias that do not understand the meaning of human
rights, but instead only exploit human rights whenever
it suits their ideological and extremist ideas and serves

Fourthly, the militias have not only perpetrated
those crimes, but also assaulted humanitarian and aid
workers according to reports from aid organizations.
They have detained and prevented the entry of 84 aid
vessels carrying food and oil. They have targeted seven
aid and commercial vessels in the Red Sea and looted
more than 696 trucks carrying aid. They are even selling

18-3358017/19

S/PV.8379

The situation in the Middle East

food items and humanitarian assistance on the black
market and giving them to the poor in exchange for
fighting in their ranks. They have detonated four trucks
and killed two drivers. Last September, those militias
broke into the silos of the World Food Programme in
Al-Hudaydah and kidnapped two workers. They burned
the silos and destroyed over 4,000 tonnes of food items.
They prevented the unloading of 11,979 tonnes of diesel
and 84,326 tonnes of petroleum in Al-Hudaydah seaport.
Everyone knows the grave violations of the Houthis
in the areas under their control. Last month, Human
Rights Watch documented a number of violations
against innocent civilians who were kidnapped and
taken hostage in an immoral and arbitrary way, in
grave violation of international law and international
humanitarian law. Since 2014, that organization has
documented dozens of cases of kidnapping, forced
detainment and disappearance, as well as torture, in
addition to hundreds of cases documented by Yemeni
human rights organizations. The Houthis are not only
perpetrating such blatant violations to silence their
political opponents and critics; they are also using
kidnapping and torture as blackmail to extract money
from innocent civilians in exchange for releasing their
loved ones.
Houthi militias have been torturing, beating,
hanging and removing the nails of detainees and
threatening to rape them or their families in order to
force innocent civilians and their families to pay a
ransom in exchange for their release. The detainees
have started to wish they were dead. Last month, those
militias detained 17 girls at Sana’a University. They
assaulted them for merely participating in a protest
against the policy of starvation adopted by the militias
against civilians in their areas of control. They also
assaulted their families when they called for their
release, in a manner not seen in Yemen prior to the
emergence of those outlaw militias.
The Yemeni Government reiterates its commitment
to international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law. We ask that all those who violate such
laws be held to account. We underscore the importance
of working and coordinating with the relevant entities
and of opening offices for United Nations agencies
working to provide humanitarian assistance in the
temporary capital of Aden and other main cities, so
as to ensure the decentralization of humanitarian
work so that it is not affected by complicated military
operations. It would also ensure that militias do not
18/19

23/10/2018

exploit silos and use them as a cover to perpetrate
military attacks in blatant violation of international
humanitarian law, or plant landmines that impede the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and endanger the
lives of civilians. Humanitarian assistance must be
provided to those in need.
We must also address the difficult economic
situation my country faces as a result of the war and
the fact that Houthi militias have taken control of my
country’s resources, including its internal and external
reserves. That has a grave impact on the lives of the
citizens. The Government of the Republic of Yemen,
represented by His Excellency President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour, has therefore sought to restore
and revive Yemen’s economy. We have taken a number
of essential and inevitable executive measures and
decisions in order to adapt to the exceptional situation.
The Central Bank took several measures to
meet the needs of primary goods importers, such as
implementing a fixed foreign exchange rate policy,
funded by a Saudi deposit, within a period not exceeding
15 days from the date of submission of the application.
We also took the decision to provide $100 million to the
Central Bank in order to cover the needs of small traders
whose applications amount to less than $200,000. We
provided $15 million to meet the needs of the Yemeni
oil company to help it restore market balance by selling
oil at suitable prices. We also took measures to limit the
impact of the black market created by Houthi militias,
organize requests for foreign currency and ensure the
stability of our national currency and prevent the rial
depreciation. That would enable us to provide primary
goods and their derivatives to our citizens.
Pertaining to the measures that Mr. Lowcock
addressed, our economic committee announced today
that it would postpone the implementation of the
executive mechanism related to credit-line measures on
importing commodities. We announced that we would
hold a workshop with Yemeni entrepreneurs and listen
to their views in a way that would facilitate the entry of
essential goods and commodities.
In that regard, we look forward to the vital role that
will be played by the United Nations and other donor
countries and institutions to ensure the stability of
Yemen’s currency by providing assistance to Yemen in
foreign currency and transfers via the Central Bank,
similar to the action taken by the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia. On behalf of the Government and the people
18-33580

23/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

of Yemen, we would like to thank the countries of the
Arab coalition, in particular the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, other donors and the United Nations for
their efforts to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni
people, the latest of which was a $70 million grant
from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates, in coordination with UNICEF, to pay
teacher salaries. I take this opportunity to call on all
donors to meet their obligations under the framework
of the 2018 humanitarian response plan for Yemen. The
humanitarian situation in Yemen should be enough to
turn the Council’s words into action.
We appreciate all of the international community’s
humanitarian efforts to alleviate the suffering of the
Yemeni people. However, we believe that the suffering
is man-made. There will be no sustainable solution
to the crisis unless we first address the root causes
of the problem in Yemen — that is, the coup d’état
perpetrated by the Houthis — by finding a peaceful and

S/PV. 8379

comprehensive political solution, based on the terms
of reference and on Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2216 (2015).
We fear that these meetings of the Council will
become routine. At meetings, Council members
refer to statistics, numbers and victims, but, once
meetings adjourn, that information loses meaning.
As the Council is unable to exert pressure on militias
to compel them to submit to international will and
implement resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, it must send a clear
message to the Houthi militias that underscores that
the international community will not remain silent
while they perpetrate crimes and violations and cause
prolonged humanitarian suffering. They must opt for
either sustainable and genuine peace or face the Yemeni
people and the international community.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

18-3358019/19
