14

General Aaembly-Tblrty-fourtb Session

available to all nations, in particular the developing
countries,
Conscious of the continuing need to protect mankind
from the perils resulting from the misuse of nuclear
energy and noting with appreciation in this connexion
the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency in
the implementation of the relevant provisions of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 10
and other international treaties, conventions and agreements designed to achieve similar objectives,
Appreciating the assistance given by the International
Atomic Energy Agency to the Internat10nal Nuclear Fuel
Cycle Evaluation, which will be completed in February
1980,
Noting the excellent safety record of nuclear power
generation but aware of the need to pay continuing attention to the question of nuclear safety and waste
management,
Bearing in mind the special needs of the developing
countries for technical assistance by the International
Atomic Energy Agency in order to benefit effectively
from the application of nuclear technology for peaceful
purposes as well as from the contribution of nuclear
energy to their economic development,
.
1. Takes note of the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency;
2. Notes with satisfaction the continuing efforts of
the International Atomic Energy Agency to strengthen
further its activities in the field of technical assistance to
developing countries and urges all States to help the
Agency to achieve this objective by increasing their voluntary contributions;
3. Notes with appreciation that the negotiations on
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material were concluded successfully at Vienna on 26
October 1979 with the signing of the final act and that
the Convention will be opened for signature on 3 March
1980 at United Nations Headquarters in New York and
at the Head9.uarters of the International Atomic Energy
Agency at Vienna;
4. Commends the International Atomic Energy
Agency for its continuing efforts to ensure the safe and
secure use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes
throughout the world and notes with satisfaction the
steady improvement of the Agency's safeguards system;
5. Notes with appreciation the special measures
taken by the International Atomic Energy Agency to
expand and strengthen its programmes in nuclear safety,
particularly aimed at helpmg Member States to develop
their nuclear regulatory framework, to acquire adequate
cadres of trained personnel and to deal effectively with
any emergency that may occur;
6. Urges all States to support the endeavours of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, pursuant to its
statute, in furthering the peaceful uses of nuclear power,
improving the effectiveness of safeguards and promoting
nuclear safety;
7. Notes with satisfaction:
(a) The continuing work of the International Atomic
Energy Agency in keepin~ under review the world's
uranium resources, production and demand, the expansion of the Agency's International Nuclear Information
System, the setting up of the International Tokamak
Reactor workshops, intended to prepare a project for
demonstrating the technical feasibility of generating elec10

Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.

tricity by nuclear fusion, and the assistance given by the
Agency to Member States in assessing the role that nuclear power can play in their energy development;
(b) The progress made by. the International Atomic
Energy Agency towards establishing a system of international storage of plutonium and the action it has taken
in regard to the international management of spent fuel;

8. Notes that the recommendation contained in
paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 33/3 of 2
November 1978 will be considered by the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency at
its twenty-third regular session and expresses the hope
that the matter will be brought to an early conclusion;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Director-General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency the records of the thirty-fourth session of the
General Assembly relating to the Agency's activities.

53rd plenary meeting
2 November 1979

34/20.

Third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea 11

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3067 (XXVIII) of 16 November 1973, 3334 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974,
3483 (XXX) of 12 December 1975, 31/63 of 10
December 1976, 32/194 of 20 December 1977 and
33/17 of 10 November 1978,
Taking note of the letter dated 4 September 1979
from the President of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea to the President of the
General Assembly12 informing the latter that, on the
basis of a time-table for its work under which it was to
complete the preparation of a convention on the law
of the sea in 1980, the Conference had decided to recommend to the General Assembly that provision should
be made for it to hold one session, divided into two parts,
in 1980, apart from a possible final session at Caracas
for signature, and that the dates for the two parts of
the session would be from 27 February to 4 April in
New York and from 28 July to 29 August at Geneva,
Considering that the Conference discussed a recommendation regarding a study on the training of nationals
of developing countries in deep-sea mining but did not
have the tiQte to approve formally a decision in that
regard,
l. Approves the convening of the two parts of the
ninth session of the Third United Nations Conference on
the Law of the Sea in New York for the period from 27
February to 4 April and at Geneva for the period from
28 July to 29 August 1980;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity
as Secretary-General of the Conference, to prepare a
study on the training needs of developing countries in
deep-sea mining and related activities for submission to
the Conference as early as possible in 1980.

61 st plenary meeting
9 November 1979
See also sect. X.B.1, decision 34/407.
Records of the General .Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, .Annexes, agenda item 22, document A/34/479.
11

12 Official
