A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/191
18 February 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 94 (e)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/53/609/Add.5)]
53/191. Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, particularly in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/198 of 18 December 1997 and other resolutions relating to the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, particularly in Africa,1
Reiterating its decision, in conformity with paragraph 17 of its resolution 52/198, to include in the
calendar of conferences and meetings for the biennium 1998–1999 the sessions of the Conference of the
Parties to the Convention and its subsidiary bodies2 envisaged for that biennium, taking into account the
request of the Conference of the Parties at its first session, held at Rome from 29 September to 10 October
1997,3
Noting with satisfaction that a large number of States and one regional economic integration
organization have ratified or acceded to the Convention, and confirming its globality and the worldwide
support it enjoys,

1

A/49/84/Add.2, annex, appendix II.

2

As defined in accordance with articles 22, paragraph 2 (c), and 24 of the Convention.

3

ICCD/COP(1)/11/Add.1, decision 4/COP.1.

99-76867

/...

A/RES/53/191
Page 2

Expressing its deep appreciation to the Government of Senegal for the generous offer to host the
second session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention,
Expressing its deep appreciation to the Secretary-General and to all bilateral and multilateral
contributors, including intergovernmental, regional and non-governmental organizations, for the
contribution and the support they provided to the interim secretariat of the Convention,
Noting with appreciation the work undertaken by the interim secretariat in contributing to the
ratification and implementation of the Convention at the national, subregional and regional levels,
including in promoting public awareness,
Looking forward to the continued efforts of the Conference of the Parties and its subsidiary bodies
in addressing desertification and drought issues in the light of the provisions of the Convention, as well
as of the decisions taken by the Conference of the Parties at its first session,4
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General5 on the implementation of resolution 52/198,
submitted in accordance with paragraph 21 thereof, and noting in this context the statement made on 22
October 1998 to the Second Committee of the General Assembly by the Executive Secretary of the
Convention on the progress made by all actors in implementing the provisions of the Convention,6
1. Welcomes the convening of the second session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, particularly in Africa, at Dakar, from 30 November to 11 December 1998, in accordance
with paragraph 19 of its resolution 52/198;
2. Calls upon all States and other actors to contribute to the successful outcome of the second
session of the Conference of the Parties;
3. Also calls upon all countries that are not yet parties to the Convention to ratify or accede to the
Convention as soon as possible;
4. Notes that the United Nations, the Convention secretariat and the Government of Germany signed
a headquarters agreement on 18 August 1998,7 which will be before the Conference of the Parties at its
second session for adoption, subject to ratification by the German Parliament;
5. Invites the host Government and the Convention secretariat to contribute fully to the relocation
of the secretariat and its effective functioning at Bonn, and also invites the secretariat to continue its
efforts with a view to finalizing the relocation as soon as possible;

4

See ICCD/COP(1)/11/Add.1.

5

A/53/516.

6

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Second Committee, 22nd meeting,
and corrigendum.
7

ICCD/COP(2)/8 and Corr.1 and Add.1 and 2.
/...

A/RES/53/191
Page 3

6.

Notes with concern that the Global Mechanism did not begin operating on 1 January 1998;

7. Notes with appreciation the efforts made by the International Fund for Agricultural Development
to establish the framework for the separate identity of the Global Mechanism within the Fund, and looks
forward to a prompt start to its activities, in conformity with the provisions of the Convention and relevant
decisions taken by the Conference of the Parties at its first session;
8. Urges all States parties to the Convention to pay promptly and in full on or before 1 January
of each year, starting in 1999, the contributions required for the core budget of the Convention envisaged
in the financial rules of the Conference of the Parties,8 so as to ensure continuity in the cash flow required
to finance the ongoing work of the Conference of the Parties, the subsidiary bodies, the permanent
secretariat and the Global Mechanism;
9. Notes with appreciation the financial support already provided on a voluntary basis by some
States parties, and reiterates its appeal to Governments, all interested organizations and the private sector
to make promptly further voluntary contributions in support of the activities and functioning of the Global
Mechanism;
10. Calls upon Governments, regional economic integration organizations and other interested
organizations, as well as non-governmental organizations and the private sector, to contribute generously
to the General Fund, the Supplementary Fund and the Special Fund, to be established by 1 January 1999
in accordance with the relevant paragraphs of the financial rules of the Conference of the Parties;9
11. Also calls upon developing countries that are parties to the Convention to accelerate the process
of elaboration and adoption of national action programmes, and calls for the implementation of those
adopted through, inter alia, the conclusion of partnership agreements, including consideration of the
contributions of non-governmental organizations;
12. Further calls upon the international community, in particular the developed countries and the
United Nations system, and invites the multilateral financial institutions and all other interested actors, to
support the efforts of affected developing countries in the process of elaborating and implementing action
programmes to combat desertification, including, as appropriate, interregional programmes and platforms
of cooperation, by providing them with financial resources and other forms of assistance;
13. Invites the Conference of the Parties at its second session to facilitate and launch the process of
elaborating and negotiating an additional regional implementation annex to the Convention for the
countries of the Eastern and Central European region, with a view to finalizing it as soon as possible;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session on
the outcome of the second session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, as well as on
measures taken for the implementation of decisions adopted by the Conference at that session;

8

ICCD/COP(1)/11/Add.1, decision 2/COP.1, annex, para. 14.

9

ICCD/COP(1)/11/Add.1, decision 2/COP.1, annex, paras. 7-11.
/...

A/RES/53/191
Page 4

15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the sub-item entitled
“Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in Africa”.
91st plenary meeting
15 December 1998
