VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

175

tee against Apartheid, the United Nations Council for Na­
and anti-racist organizations and other solidarity groups to
mibia, the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
strengthen and enlarge the scope of their activities in support
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of the objectives of the Programme for the Decade;
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the
8. Again requests the Security Council to consider, as
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
a matter of urgency, the imposition of full mandatory sanc­
Palestinian People and the Commission on Human Rights,
tions under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
through
its Ad Hoe Working Group of Experts on Southern
against the racist regime of South Africa and the strength­
Africa, for their contribution to the implementation of the
ening of the embargo on arms, with a view to putting an
Programme for the Decade and invites them to include in
end to all military and nuclear collaboration with South
their activities the preparations for the Conference;
Africa;
20. Decides to consider at its thirty-eighth session, as
9. Reaffirms the decision7 by which it approved the
a matter of high priority, the item entitled ''Implementation
Declaration of the International Seminar on the Implemen­
of the Programme for the Decade to Combat Racism and
tation and Reinforcement of the Arms Embargo against South
Racial Discrimination" .
Africa, 8 held in London from 1 to 3 April 1981 under the
auspices of the Special Committee against Apartheid;
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982
10. Vigorously condemns the collaboration of certain
Western States, Israel and other States and of transnational
corporations and other organizations which are maintaining
or continuing to increase their collaboration with the racist • 37/41. Second World Conference to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination
regime of South Africa, particularly in the political, eco­
nomic, military and nuclear fields, thereby encouraging that
The General Assembly,
regime to persist in its inhuman and criminal policy of brutal
oppression of the peoples of southern Africa and in its denial
Recalling its resolution 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November
of human rights;
1973, by which it proclaimed the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
11. Calls once again upon all Governments that have
not yet done so to take legislative, administrative and other
Mindful of the Declaration and the Programme of Action
measures in respect of their nationals and the bodies cor­
adopted by the World Conference to Combat Racism and
porate under their jurisdiction that own enterprises in south­
Racial Discrimination, 6
ern Africa in order to put an end to such enterprises;
Recalling paragraph 26 of the programme of activities to
12. Calls upon all States to adopt, as a matter of high
be undertaken during the second half of the Decade for
priority, measures declaring punishable by law any dissem­
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, con­
ination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred and
tained in the annex to its resolution 34/24 of 15 November
outlawing organizations based on racial hatred and preju­
1979, in which the Assembly decided that an important
dice, including neo-Nazi and Fascist organizations and pri­
feature of the second half of the Decade should be the
vate clubs and institutions established on the basis of racial
holding of a Second World Conference to Combat Racism
criteria or propagating ideas of racial discrimination and
and Racial Discrimination,
apartheid;
Bearing in mind its resolution 35/33 of 14 November
13. Invites Member States, the organs and bodies of the
1980, in which it decided to hold in 1983, as an important
United Nations system and the specialized agencies to con­
event of the Decade, a Second World Conference to Combat
tinue their efforts with a view to the protection of the rights
Racism and Racial Discrimination, which, while reviewing
of all migrant workers and their families;
and assessing the activities undertaken during the Decade,
should have as its main purpose the formulation of ways
14. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Preparatory Sub-Committee for the Second World Confer­
and means and of specific measures aimed at ensuring the
ence to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination on its
full and universal implementation of United Nations reso­
first session;9
lutions and decisions on racism, racial discrimination and
apartheid,
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Pre­
paratory Sub-Committee with all necessary assistance;
Bearing in mind also the provisions of its resolution
36/8 of 28 October 1981 regarding the preparations for
16. Further requests the Secretary-General to appoint,
the Conference,
after consultation with the regional groups, in 1982, a Sec­
retary-General of the Second World Conference to Combat
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
Racism and Racial Discrimination, who shall have the rank
1982/32 of 5 May 1982, which contains recommendations
of Assistant Secretary-General and shall be responsible for
regarding the organization of the Conference,
the organization of the Conference and co-ordination with
l. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
Member States, organs and bodies of the United Nations,
1982/32;
specialized agencies and intergovernmental and non-gov­
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of the
ernmental organizations;
Philippines for its offer to act as host to the Second World
17. Invites Member States to continue to co-operate
Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
with the Secretary-General as part of the Programme for the
3. Decides to convene the Conference at Geneva from
Decade and the preparations for the Conference;
l to 12 August 1983;
18. Invites the appropriate organs and bodies of the
4. Recommends the draft provisional agenda for the
United Nations system to contribute to the preparations for
Conference as contained in the annex to the present resolution;
the Conference;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to invite:
19. Expresses its satisfaction to the Committee on the
(a) All States to participate in the Conference;
Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Special Commit(b) The United Nations Council for Namibia to partici­
, Resolution 36/8, para. 9.
pate in the Conference, in accordance with paragraph 3 of
8 A/36/190-S/14442, annex.
9 E/1982/26.
General Assembly resolution 32/9 E of 4 November 1977;

176

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

6. Further requests the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) Representatives of national liberation movements
recognized in its region by the Organization of African Unity
to participate in the Conference in the capacity of observer,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3280
(XXIX) of 10 December 1974;
(b) Representatives of organizations which have re­
ceived a standing invitation from the General Assembly to
participate in the sessions and the work of all international
conferences convened under its auspices in the capacity of
observer to participate in the Conference in that capacity in
accordance with General Assembly resolutions 3237 (XXIX)
of 22 November 1974 and 31/152 of 20 December 1976;
(c) The specialized agencies concerned, as well as in­
terested organs and bodies of the United Nations system,
to be represented at the Conference;
(d) Interested intergovernmental· organizations to be
represented by observers at the Conference;
(e) The Special Committee against Apartheid to be rep­
resented by observers at the Conference;
if> The Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to be
represented by observers at the Conference;
(g) The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Dis­
crimination to be represented by observers at the Conference;
(h) The Commission on Human Rights to be represented
by observers at the Conference;
(i) The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People and the Special Committee
to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights
of the Population of the Occupied Territories to be repre­
sented by observers at the Conference;
(j) Other interested committees of the United Nations
to be represented by observers at the Conference;
(k) Non-governmental organizations in consultative sta­
tus with the Economic and Social Council which have con­
tributed to the achievement of the goals and objectives of
the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Dis­
crimination and to the implementation of the Programme of
Action adopted by the first World Conference, taking into
account also their record in the field of struggle against
racism and racial discrimination, to be represented by ob­
servers at the Conference;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, as part of the pre­
paratory process, to take adequate steps to ensure that max­
imum publicity shall be given to the Conference and, to that
end, to allocate the necessary resources from the regular
budget;
8. Calls upon all States to contribute to the success of
the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Dis­
crimination, in particular by their active participation in the
Conference;
9. Urges all States to co-operate with the Secretary­
General of the Conference in the preparatory work and to
consider the setting up of national committees for publiciz­
ing the aims and, eventually, the main results of the
Conference;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the work of the
Conference;
11. Decides to consider at its thirty-eighth session, as
a matter of high priority, an item entitled ••Second World
Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination'' .
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

ANNEX
Draft provisional agenda for the Second World Conrerence
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination

I.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Opening of the Conference.
Election of the President.
Opening addresses.
Adoption of the rules of procedure.
Election of other officers.
Credentials of representatives to the Conference:
(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee;
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee.

7.
8.
9.

Adoption of the agenda.
Organization of work.
Political, historical, economic, social and cultural factors leading to
racism, racial discrimination and segregation and apartheid.
Review and evaluation of activities undertaken to achieve the goals
and objectives of the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination at the national, regional and international levels and
in implementation of the Programme of Action adopted at the first
World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination.
Main obstacles to the full eradication of racism, racial discrimination
and apartheid.
Determination of further action-oriented national, regional and in­
ternational measures to combat all forms of racism, racial discrim­
ination and apartheid:

10.

11.
12.

(a) Adoption of legislative, judicial, administrative and other meas­
sures at the national level to improve relations among racial
groups and to prohibit racial discrimination, including dissem­
ination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred, and all
racist organizations such as Nazi and neo-Nazi organizations;
(b) Action in the field of education, culture, research and infor­
mation and the role of the mass media in the struggle against
racism, racial discrimination and apartheid with the aim of
combating prejudices which lead to racial discrimination and
of promoting understanding, tolerance and friendship among
nations and racial or ethnic groups;
(c) Measures aimed at ensuring the full and universal implemen­
tation of United Nations resolutions and decisions on racism.
racial discrimination and apartheid;
(d) Universal ratification of, or accession to the International Con­
vention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimi­
nation and other existing international instruments adopted under
the aegis of the United Nations and the specialized agencies
aimed at combating racism, racial discrimination and apartheid;
(e) Drawing up of new international measures to combat racism
and racial discrimination;
(j) Continued support and assistance to peoples and movements
struggling against racism, racial discrimination and apartheid;
and ways and means of denying support to racist regimes and
of ensuring their isolation.
Adoption of the report and final documents of the Conference.

13.

37/42.

Universal realization of the right of peoples to
self-determination

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance, for the effective guarantee

and observance of human rights, of the universal realization
of the right of peoples to self-determination enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations and embodied in the
International Covenants on Human Rights, 10 as well as in
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly res­
olution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
10

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
