United Nations

S/PV.5925

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5925th meeting
Wednesday, 25 June 2008, 11.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wolff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Delieux
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Weisleder
Mr. Vilović
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Kleib
Mr. Azzarello
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Dolgov
Ms. Qwabe
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country
(S/2008/395)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-39896 (E)

*0839896*

S/PV.5925

I invite Mr. Costa to take a seat at the Council

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
table.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in that country (S/2008/395)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Guinea-Bissau, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration of the item without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cabral
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Shola Omoregie,
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Omoregie to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
Director-General of the United Nations Office in
Vienna.
It is so decided.

2

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chair of the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Permanent Representative of Brazil.
It is so decided.
I invite Mrs. Viotti to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/395, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Shola Omoregie, Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau;
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
Director-General of the United Nations Office in
Vienna; and Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Brazil.
I give the floor to Mr. Shola Omoregie,
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Omoregie: The report before the Council,
contained in document S/2008/395, is the latest report
of the Secretary-General on developments in GuineaBissau and the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS).
The report focuses in particular on constraints at
the socio-political level and, among other things,
highlights progress in the implementation of security
sector reform, the engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission, preparations for legislative elections
08-39896

S/PV.5925

scheduled for November this year, and economic
recovery efforts.
I should like to say just a few words to update the
Council on developments since the report was
published. Although the political and economic
situation in Guinea-Bissau remains fragile, some recent
developments bring much promise. The country has
seen a slight improvement in its economic performance
indicators, evidenced by an increase in agricultural
production, including cashew nut exports, and the
setting-up of mechanisms for improved revenue
collection and the maintenance of fiscal stability.
In that connection, if economic performance
indicators continue to improve, Guinea-Bissau could,
by the end of the year, become eligible for the
International Monetary Fund’s Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Debt Initiative and for debt relief under the
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative. Those facilities, in
combination with similar debt-relief initiatives of the
World Bank and the African Development Bank, will
reduce the volume of the country’s regular debt-service
payments, allowing improved investment in the social
sectors and in economic revitalization.
However, the aforementioned positive prognosis
is threatened by structural limitations in internal
revenue generation and fiscal management. An
accounts audit of the General Directorate of Customs,
Taxes and the Treasury, sponsored by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
covering the period 2004 to 2007, concluded that a
substantial amount of duties and taxes had not been
collected and that very few companies had declared
their commercial activities.
The report makes a number of recommendations,
such as the deferment of payment of 2007 arrears; the
routing of State expenditure payments exclusively
through the treasury; the centralization of State revenue
collection through the Central Bank of West African
States; further restrictions on extra-budgetary
spending;
and
finally,
computerized
treasury
operations, including payroll management, by the end
of 2008. If implemented, those recommendations could
improve the State’s revenue collection system and
reduce its financial deficits. UNDP plans to initiate a
second-phase audit of State expenditure by the end of
June.
In addition, the limited progress on the economic
front could be jeopardized by deepening institutional

08-39896

tension between Government institutions and the main
political parties. The holding of the legislative
elections is vital to consolidating the democratic
process. However, jockeying for power threatens to
exacerbate latent political tensions among the three
political parties signatories to the Political and
Government Stability Pact of March 2007.
The Pact, which underpins the current
Government, is itself undermined by splits within the
three major signatory parties. While disagreements
between party leaders and the Prime Minister have
abated, tensions between the political factions are
likely to increase in the run-up to the African Party for
the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC)
congress and leadership contest to be held on 26 and
28 June. The leader of the PAIGC and former Prime
Minister, Mr. Carlos Gomes Jr., has already indicated
his intention to seek a review of the Political Stability
Pact. He has also expressed some mistrust and
questioned the fairness and transparency of the
electoral process, particularly with regard to the role of
the Party for Social Renewal (PRS).
Opposition political parties have also stepped up
their criticism of the Government’s performance, with
accusations ranging from corruption to apathy towards
the general deterioration of the living conditions of the
citizens. Those condemnations were intensified by a
wave of strikes in the public sector in the past four
weeks due to the inability of the Government to pay
salary arrears and spikes in the prices of food and other
consumer items. Although the Government was able to
pay two out of four months of salary arrears on
18 June, social discontent is likely to continue and be
exploited in the electoral process.
Preparations for the legislative elections
scheduled for 16 November 2008 have been
undermined by, among other things, bureaucratic
lapses and limited human and financial resources. On
5 June, Prime-Minister N’Dafa Cabi announced the
Government’s intention to conduct manual voter
registration for the elections. Subsequently, the
Secretary of State for Territorial Administration
announced that voter registration would take place
between 3 and 24 July 2008. Although the manual
voter registration exercise is scheduled to start on
3 July 2008, it was only on 23 June that UNDP
concluded a memorandum of understanding with the
National Institute of Statistics and Census to start the
recruitment and training of electoral officials and the

3

S/PV.5925

procurement of material and equipment. It is therefore
uncertain whether voter registration will take place as
scheduled or whether all logistical and civic education
activities will be conducted in a timely manner and as
efficiently as desirable for elections to be held as
scheduled and without compromising the credibility of
the whole process. I continue to encourage all
concerned to accelerate their efforts in order to avoid
delays in the electoral calendar.
At the request of the Government, UNOGBIS
will coordinate international observation, while UNDP
will continue to provide technical assistance. In that
connection, UNDP has held working-level meetings
with representatives of the National Electoral
Commission, the National Institute of Statistics, the
Technical Support Office for Elections and regional
electoral commissions. The European Union is
expected to deploy some electoral observers, as
recommended by its mission that visited Guinea-Bissau
in the first week of June.
The
engagement
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission — covering short-term, medium-term and
long-term activities — provides an important context
for deepening international assistance to the
Government.
Through
the
short-term
peace
consolidation process under the Peacebuilding Fund,
the Guinea-Bissau Peacebuilding Fund National
Steering Committee recently approved four quick-win
projects covering electoral support, youth employment,
the rehabilitation of military barracks and the
rehabilitation of prisons. With the approval of the four
projects, steps are currently being taken to finalize the
Guinea-Bissau Peacebuilding Fund priority plan.
Consultations are also ongoing to finalize the
strategic framework for peacebuilding in GuineaBissau, which will synthesize the medium- to longterm engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The strategic framework will integrate the experiences
and analyses derived from the four missions conducted
in the country by Commission’s country-specific
configuration on Guinea-Bissau and the Peacebuilding
Support Office, as well as consultations between the
United Nations and various stakeholders. The
consultations have been intense, and have included
weekly and fortnightly thematic discussions by video
link between New York Headquarters and stakeholders
in Guinea-Bissau. The consultations have focused on
priority areas identified by the Government as
peacebuilding challenges, namely, the reform of the

4

public administration, the consolidation of the rule of
law and security sector reform, technical professional
training and youth employment, and support for
vulnerable social groups. The strategic framework,
which is expected to be completed in July, will set the
context for the announcement by the Secretary-General
of a larger envelope of financial assistance for GuineaBissau. That will formalize the envisaged continuous
engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission as an
advocacy platform for resource mobilization and a
coordinating mechanism for multi-partner efforts at
peace consolidation and post-conflict reconstruction.
To strengthen national stakeholder involvement,
in particular by women’s groups, in the engagement of
the Peacebuilding Commission in Guinea-Bissau,
UNOGBIS and its partners held a round of regional
consultations throughout May, which were capped with
a three-day national workshop held from 17 to 19 June.
The activities were aimed at mainstreaming gender
issues and enhancing the participation of women in
peace consolidation, as provided for in resolution 1325
(2000). Recommendations from the national workshop
will be integrated into the strategic framework for
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.
The initiation of implementation of the security
sector reform programme, with support from the
European Union, marked an important milestone. The
ongoing deployment in Guinea-Bissau of a team of 15
civilian and military personnel from the European
Union, under the framework of the European Security
and Defence Policy, in support of security sector
reform is a major step towards the operationalization of
the national programme for security sector reform.
Another important benchmark was the armed
forces census, which was conducted in March and
revealed a total of 4,493 military personnel — almost
half earlier estimates of 9,000. That number is
expected to be reduced to 3,440 under the armed forces
rationalization and modernization plan within the
security sector reform programme. The rationalization
will be facilitated by information revealed by the
census that more than 1,000 current military personnel
would prefer voluntary demobilization. In the context
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
component within the larger security sector reform
programme, UNOGBIS and its partners are finalizing
arrangements for a pilot vocational training project in
Brazil for 30 selected senior military officers. The

08-39896

S/PV.5925

training of those senior officers will enable the start of
security sector reform.
When I last briefed members in March, I referred
to arrangements between UNOGBIS, the Department
of Political Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to organize a
security sector reform resource-mapping exercise with
partners in order to identify gaps in donor support for
security sector reform and make recommendations to
address such gaps. I am pleased to report that the
resource-mapping exercise took place in New York on
22 and 23 May. The exercise recommended focused
support for the adoption of a legal framework for the
Ministries of the Interior and Justice, including training
in criminal investigation for the various lawenforcement bodies, the provision of operational
equipment to the police, the establishment of a
financial intelligence unit, the creation and training of
a specialized police force to combat terrorism and
transnational organized crime, the ratification and
domestication of relevant international conventions,
and addressing relationship issues within the security
sector reform process.
In the follow-up to the security sector reform
resource-mapping exercise, an assessment mission led
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) is expected to visit Guinea-Bissau in the
coming weeks.
Following consultations held since last year with
national authorities, UNOGBIS, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and UNDP will
be organizing a workshop for law enforcement
institutions in August this year aimed at explaining
jurisdictions, responsibilities and competencies and
enhancing interdepartmental cooperation.
The campaign against drug trafficking and
organized crime received a boost with the signature on
16 June of the financial agreement between the
European Community and the UNODC for a
€2-million justice and security programme. The
programme will, inter alia, support the creation of a
special anti-narcotics unit within the judiciary police
and the strengthening of its operational capacities in
intelligence-gathering and information-sharing for the
detection and prosecution of offenders.
Drug trafficking cannot be combated without
subregional and international cooperation. Efforts to
address this scourge in Guinea-Bissau should be

08-39896

complemented by initiatives in neighbouring States.
Otherwise, successful regulation in one State would
lead to relocation of the criminals into another, less
regulated, national territory in the region. Criminals are
able to operate with impunity where States have little
capacity, where judicial systems are flawed and where
international cooperation mechanisms are weak, so that
they cannot, for example, be extradited. If the antinarcotics capacity of local law enforcement agencies is
strengthened to detect and apprehend drug traffickers,
they will still need improved international cooperation
in order to speedily extradite those wanted in other
countries and/or to prosecute them locally.
Realizing the importance of regional cooperation,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) will hold a regional conference on drug
trafficking in October 2008 in Cape Verde in order to
share experiences and develop a common strategic
approach. UNOGBIS, in close cooperation with the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) and
UNODC will facilitate this event.
The human rights situation in Guinea-Bissau
remains an issue of concern, especially in relation to
the absence of and weak institutional mechanisms for
the protection and promotion of human rights.
Activities in the social, economic and political fields,
including security sector reform, should be
complemented by a strong commitment to the
development of a human rights culture, which is
imperative for the sustainability of the current
international effort. I have requested the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to strengthen the human rights component of
UNOGBIS so that it can more effectively play its role
in the areas of monitoring, capacity-building and
technical cooperation.
To conclude, I would like to highlight some key
points. The second quarter of 2008 witnessed a surge in
economic activities, accompanied by growing
confidence by the Bretton Woods institutions in
Guinea-Bissau’s economic performance indicators. In
order to support and consolidate this positive trend, the
United Nations system should continue to support
reforms in both administrative and economic
governance.
Although the implementation of the security
sector reform programme has commenced, only about a
third of the proposed total budget has been pledged.

5

S/PV.5925

Additionally, there is a perception that security sector
reform is a defence-related reform, evidenced by
lopsided donor support for the defence sector. That
misperception should be addressed. A holistic approach
to security sector reform that integrates judiciary, law
enforcement and oversight mechanisms is advised,
especially given the threats posed by international
organized crime. The current security sector reform
strategy should also integrate an anti-narcotics
component linking diverse law enforcement agencies
and inter-ministerial departments.
Limited resources remain a challenge in the
efforts to combat drug trafficking in Guinea-Bissau.
During the International Conference on Drug
Trafficking in Guinea-Bissau, held in Lisbon in
December 2007, the Government presented an antinarcotics operational plan for 2007-2010. Out of a total
projected budget of $19.l million, only $6.7 million
was pledged. There is an urgent need to cover the
shortfall of $12.4 million to ensure the complete
implementation of the programme. Additionally, the
anti-narcotics efforts could benefit from more stringent
and practical preventive measures, such as the naming
and shaming of individuals involved in drug trafficking
and organized crime in Guinea-Bissau, as well as their
collaborators in foreign countries. The Prime Minister
of Guinea-Bissau today submitted evidence relating to
persons who are involved in drug trafficking to the
Prosecutor General of Guinea-Bissau for action. I think
that the Council can help the Government by taking
action to support its efforts in this direction.
Failure to hold elections as scheduled on
16 November 2008 would create a legal and
constitutional vacuum and unleash consequences that
could unravel ongoing efforts at socio-economic
recovery and political stabilization. However, this
important milestone for consolidation of democracy is
threatened by limited resources. According to the latest
figures provided by the UNDP, there is a funding gap
of $1.9 million out of the total election costs, which are
estimated at $8.56 million. This includes pledged
contributions; if the pledged contributions are
removed, the gap will be about $4.5 million. The
international community is strongly encouraged to
assist in covering this dreadful funding gap.
There is a need for improved international
assistance to the Government in establishing an
effective national human rights protection system as a
bulwark against the existing culture of abuses and

6

violations. It is hoped that the High Commissioner for
Human Rights will seize the opportunity provided
under the current initiatives to strengthen the human
rights role of UNOGBIS.
Finally, Guinea-Bissau faces key challenges and
difficulties in the following areas: reduction of social
and political tensions and overcoming difficulties in
political cohabitation among not only the organs of
State — the executive, the legislature, the judiciary and
the presidency — but also within the ranks of some of
the main political parties. Failure to sustain ongoing
efforts to address these difficulties and challenges
would undermine national programmes for political
stabilization,
socio-economic
development
and
sustainable peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Omoregie for his
briefing.
I encourage speakers to keep their statements to
no more than five minutes.
I now give the floor to Mr. Antonio Maria Costa,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and Director-General of the United
Nations Office in Vienna.
Mr. Costa: I appreciate the concern that the
Security Council continues to show for the situation in
Guinea-Bissau and am honoured to be invited to
participate in its deliberations. On today’s agenda is
not only a serious drug issue in one country, but also
the acute threat that transnational organized crime is
posing to regional security in West Africa.
The first manifestation of this threat was in Cape
Verde a few years ago; this was blocked by rapid
intervention. For a couple of years now, the threat has
metastasized to Guinea-Bissau and could soon spread
elsewhere in the region. This Security Council meeting
will reassure the people of Western Africa that the
international community has not abandoned them. This
impression of being abandoned was shared with me by
the most senior Government officials in the region
recently. Next week, in the Republic of Guinea, Mali,
Mauritania, Nigeria and Senegal — countries I intend
to visit — I hope to hear a more positive commentary
as a result of this meeting of the Security Council. And,
of course, we will be offering to deliver to them an
even greater degree of assistance.
Today’s Security Council deliberations will
motivate the entire world community to assist

08-39896

S/PV.5925

West Africa in withstanding the onslaught of drug
trafficking — the trafficking of drugs, but also of arms
and people — and associated crime, corruption and
violence. The Council had already imparted a sense of
urgency late last year, and we all have acted.
Based on decisions taken at by the Council and
subsequently by a conference on Guinea Bissau, held
in Lisbon last December, UNODC has moved quickly
to provide assistance: our project office has been
established, staff are on the ground and last week we
signed a project to disburse European Union funds, a
point to which Mr. Omoregie has already referred.
The Government of Guinea-Bissau has responded
in kind and proactively. It has strengthened the legal
basis for fighting drugs and crime by ratifying the
United Nations Conventions against Transnational
Organized Crime and against Corruption. It has put in
place management structures for the oversight and
implementation of the anti-narcotic and organized
crime emergency plan. As Guinea-Bissau is still
lacking suitable criminal and procedural codes, we
shall concentrate on those areas with immediate
intervention.
What about the future? In the near term, those
measures will enable the implementation of the
operational plan prepared by the Government of
Guinea-Bissau, with our assistance, to combat illicit
trafficking through its land, air and sea corridors and
strengthen the administration of justice and the rule of
law.
A year ago, in a similar briefing to this Council, I
reported on the state of disarray of the Guinea-Bissau
prison system. We are grateful to the Peacebuilding
Commission, particularly to Ambassador Viotti, for
dealing with the most urgent needs of the Ministry of
Justice of Guinea-Bissau. The Peacebuilding Fund has
approved an urgent project on prison rehabilitation.
Thanks to that and the support of Portugal, Germany
and the United Kingdom, the central prison in Bissau
and three provincial detention centres are being
refurbished. The reform of the penitentiary
administration through the modernization of its data
management system, proper legislation, the training of
staff and the improvement of the human rights culture
in the country, is under way.
Also under way are the training and equipping of
a special counter-narcotics task force of the judicial
police, with resources provided, through my office, by

08-39896

Italy and the European Union, in addition to bilateral
support from Brazil, Portugal and the United Kingdom.
That will help tackle the drug trafficking problem by
mainstreaming it into the wider security sector reform
process and generally into the work of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in GuineaBissau (UNOGBIS), ably led by the Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Omoregie. That is a good
example of the United Nations delivering as one.
Like anywhere else, organized crime can best be
neutralized by a strong and efficient judicial system. I
invite those present to help strengthen the capacity of
the Guinea-Bissau judicial system to prosecute
organized crime, particularly drug trafficking, with the
aim of having a core group of good and honest
prosecutors and judges.
Before closing, I would like to say a few words
about the medium term. Programmes for a more distant
future are to be planned after the new Government is in
place,
following
the
November
elections.
Representative Omoregie spoke at length about that.
With the assistance of INTERPOL, we are developing a
counter-narcotics intelligence-sharing platform for the
region and between West Africa and Europe. The model
being applied is one we have tested with excellent
results in other geographical theatres, for example in
West Asia, and for other forms of crime, modelled for
example, on the European Commission/European
Police Office regional programme against the
smuggling of migrants by organized crime groups.
In general, whether bilateral or multilateral
assistance is provided, we need to act together and
address the problems of the country and the region
together. A priority is to strengthen international legal
cooperation in the whole of West Africa through
extradition, mutual legal assistance and the
confiscation of the proceeds of crime. That is the
message we have all heard from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa, Ambassador Djinnit. His call is another alarm
bell, and it is loud and clear.
In that perspective, together with the Economic
Community of West African States and the United
Nations Office for West Africa, we are preparing for a
ministerial conference on narcotic trafficking and
organized crime in West Africa, scheduled to be held in
Praia next October. It is meant to establish a regional
platform to strengthen border controls and the judicial

7

S/PV.5925

system’s resistance to drug trafficking. It will raise the
threshold of risk for criminals, money launderers and
corrupt officials.

trafficking. The series of thematic meetings will be
completed next week when a discussion on
infrastructure, in particular energy, will be held.

In conclusion, the drug trafficking problem
through Guinea-Bissau is still relatively small by the
standards of West Asia, the Caribbean or Central
America, but it is growing exponentially and
threatening to turn the region into an epicentre of
lawlessness and instability. That is the last thing that
Africa needs. By working together now, we may still
act in a preventive mode. Any day or week lost may
have dramatic consequences for the future of the
region, adding a security crisis in a part of the world
already facing mass poverty, hunger and despair.

Meanwhile,
the
Government
and
other
stakeholders are preparing an integrated strategic
framework for peacebuilding. We will shortly launch
consultations with members of the country-specific
configuration on the basis of such a document so as to
finalize the strategy as soon as possible. It is worth
noting that the strategic framework for peacebuilding is
not an end in itself, but a means to bring about a
significant improvement in the stability of the country
and to create the conditions for it to embark on a path
of growth and development.

The President: I thank Mr. Costa for his briefing.

Without prejudging the conclusions and
recommendations to be decided upon by the GuineaBissau
configuration
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission, I would like to touch upon some of the
main challenges that need to be addressed and that
require substantial support from the international
community.

I give the floor to Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding
Commission
and
Permanent
Representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti: I would like to thank you, Sir, for
the invitation to participate in today’s meeting.
Since the end of March, when I addressed this
Council on the work of the country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission for
Guinea-Bissau, we have been able to gain a better
understanding of the situation in the country and the
main challenges for the consolidation of peace.
Last April, a Peacebuilding Commission
delegation visited Guinea-Bissau and established direct
contact with Government officials, international
partners, members of Parliament, civil society and the
private sector. It also had the opportunity to visit sites
in Bissau and in the interior of the country.
The configuration for Guinea-Bissau has been
holding thematic discussions on key areas for the
consolidation of peace. Those meetings have proved
useful in identifying gaps in ongoing programmes and
assessing the possible contribution of the Commission
through a continuous and fruitful interaction with the
Government and representatives of civil society.
The discussions have involved issues related to
the preparations for the upcoming legislative elections,
public administration reform, the reactivation of the
economy, the strengthening of the justice sector and the
consolidation of the rule of law, youth employment,
security sector reform and the fight against drug

8

One of the immediate concerns is the
organization of the parliamentary elections to be held
in November. In spite of recent contributions by
bilateral partners and the United Nations Development
Programme, there is still a considerable financial gap
to be filled. Needless to say, a successful election
process is a precondition for the maintenance of
political stability and for the consolidation of
democracy in the country. The international community
should also assist Guinea-Bissau in turning the
electoral process into an opportunity for a broad-based
dialogue on the country’s challenges and possible
solutions.
By the same token, despite the contributions
already raised after the Lisbon conference last year,
Guinea-Bissau still lacks the resources necessary to
fight drug trafficking in an effective manner. With the
support of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime — and here I want to acknowledge and appreciate
the leadership of Mr. Antonio Maria Costa — and
bilateral partners, the Government has taken important
initial steps to implement the anti-narcotics operational
plan.
However, further assistance is badly needed.
During the field trip and in our thematic discussion on
this issue, we noticed with concern the precarious
conditions of police and security forces, which lack the

08-39896

S/PV.5925

most basic means and adequate human resources. The
country needs to build capacity in order to ensure
control of its more than 80 islands, its maritime borders
and its airspace, and to strengthen its judicial and penal
systems. The efforts to address drug trafficking and
related crimes would benefit from a regional approach,
given the transnational nature of the challenges in this
area, as has been stressed by both Mr. Omoregie and
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa.
Efforts in the fight against drug trafficking must
be combined with measures to reactivate the economy.
On the one hand, it is imperative to combat illicit
activities; on the other, it is necessary to set the country
on a path to a functioning economy, in which the
creation of job opportunities and income forestall the
possibility that drug trafficking infiltrates more deeply
into society.
Security sector reform continues to be a matter of
priority for the Government of Guinea-Bissau. Recent
developments in this area, such as the conclusion of the
military census, are encouraging. The support that will
be provided by the European Security and Defence
Policy Mission, and the provision of financial and
technical assistance by various partners are crucial.
However, the reform plan remains seriously underfunded. In our discussions, the reintegration aspect of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
was emphasized. It is interesting to note that this point
was made, not only by Governmental authorities, but
also by civil society representatives. It was stressed
that previous attempts at DDR failed due to lack of
attention to reintegration. It was also felt that adequate
and careful planning for reinsertion into society of the
demobilized contingent will be a key factor in ensuring
a successful reform.
In the economic field, the Government is
committed to controlling fiscal expenditures and
promoting further reforms in public administration,
following the emergency post-conflict assistance
programme signed with the International Monetary
Fund earlier this year. However, a weak fiscal basis,
compounded by the recent difficulties resulting from
the rise in fuel and food prices, continues to hamper
the Government’s ability to pay salaries and provide
basic services to the population. In particular, the
external debt and its associated interest payments
constitute a huge burden to the Government. Creative
solutions should be considered, taking into
consideration the specific needs of Guinea-Bissau as a

08-39896

fragile country emerging from conflict, so that its
population could benefit from the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Debt Initiative with the urgency that
the situation requires.
During our field trip to Guinea-Bissau and in our
interactions with different stakeholders, we noticed the
considerable economic potential of the country. Much
can be done to add value to the main export product,
cashew nuts. Fertile lands and abundant rain can be
used for food crops, in particular rice, which the
country used to export. The current food crisis, in spite
of its worrisome consequences in the short term —
Mr. Omoregie has already referred to the social
tensions that are occurring as we speak — could be
turned into an opportunity if agricultural production
were reactivated and diversified through adequate
support.
In doing so, it is also necessary to help the
Government overcome the structural bottlenecks that
currently impede economic recovery. Such measures
include updating legal frameworks, creating an
enabling environment for the private sector,
establishing a sound banking and financial system,
including through incentives to microcredit schemes
and, last but not least, rehabilitating the infrastructure,
especially in the energy sector. As we witnessed with
our own eyes, the country today is literally in the dark.
It needs the support of the international community to
lighten up the prospects for a more promising future,
when its people will finally enjoy the dividends of
peace.
We were pleased at the approval by the steering
committee, recently established in Guinea-Bissau, of
four projects to be financed by the Peacebuilding Fund.
The resources made available will be used to reform
prisons and military barracks, invest in youth
employment and support the organization of the
elections. By doing so, the Fund starts to fulfil its
mandate of providing catalytic money to the most
urgent and needy sectors. Most important, it puts into
practice the concept of a two-track approach, in an
attempt to combine strategic long-term analysis with
short-term projects that could have a direct and
immediate impact in the country. We hope a new and
more substantial allocation of resources could be
announced soon, as the country-specific configuration
finalizes the strategic framework for peacebuilding in
Guinea-Bissau.

9

S/PV.5925

Finally, allow me to join the Secretary-General in
his recommendation concerning the United Nations
presence on the ground. The engagement of the
Commission is a time-consuming and work-intensive
enterprise and involves a stronger support from the
Organization to the country. Let me take this
opportunity to express appreciation to the United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in GuineaBissau, under the able leadership of Mr. Shola
Omoregie, and the United Nations country team,
coordinated by Ms. Giuseppina Mazza, for their
commendable work in assisting the country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission for
Guinea-Bissau. The Commission is also fortunate to
count on the Peacebuilding Support Office, whose
dedication and commitment is praiseworthy. I am
particularly grateful to Carolyn McAskie, Ejeviome
Eloho Otobo, and Philip Helminger for their
continuous and invaluable support.
The President: I thank Ambassador Viotti for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French): I
am grateful to the members of the Council for offering
me this opportunity. I would first thank the
Representative of the Secretary-General in GuineaBissau for having introduced the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2008/395) and also for the additional
information which he brought to the Council’s
attention.
Like the Secretary-General, and like most of the
citizens of Guinea-Bissau, I, too, feel that notable
progress has been made in my country. In spite of all
the difficulties we are facing, we are determined to
move forward so that peace and stability can become
reality in my country and so that we can finally focus
on much more crucial questions, such as the socioeconomic development in our country. I observe, as the
Secretary-General did in his report, that there is further
room for work; there are serious problems that persist
and the authorities in Guinea-Bissau have to make
more of an effort, so that, as a nation, we can muster
all the energy to work together in an inclusive
democracy.
However, as is recognized in the report we still
need the unwavering support of the international
community. Without that support, it will not be

10

possible, despite of our resolve, in spite of our will and
in spite our clear awareness of our prime responsibility
as citizens of Guinea-Bissau, it simply will not be
possible to meet all of the challenges we face because
they are so numerous.
Without taking too much of the Council’s time, I
would like to acknowledge that we have to solidify
democracy in our country. Mr. Omoregie indicated
earlier that everything is being done in order for the
elections to take place, as announced on 16 November.
He just explained the remaining difficulties to the
Council. I, too, would like to appeal to the
international community so that the requisite financial
support be given as soon as possible so that all of the
steps can be covered leading up to that crucial date of
16 November.
I should also like to thank Mr. Costa for his
report, and in particular for all the aid that the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has been giving
Guinea-Bissau. That support is crucial. We are facing
enormous difficulties because the challenge is
tremendous. We are a small country, the weak link in
the subregional chain, with drugs being a subregional
problem. That dimension has, fortunately, been
recognized not only by Guinea-Bissau, but by all
countries in the West African region, as well as by our
international partners.
We are making efforts. We have already made
considerable progress, but more has to be done. As I
said earlier, we are the weak link in the chain. Drug
traffickers know full well that, so long as GuineaBissau does not have the means to combat that scourge,
which, as Mr. Costa said when he referred to
metastasis, is a real cancer. It is a terrifying cancer that
has to be fought rapidly with effective means so that
drugs, which we never had in our country until 2005,
do not hinder our country’s socio-economic
development. Thus, I should like to thank Mr. Costa for
all his efforts and for all the help he has given to my
country.
Finally, I should like once again to thank our
colleague from Brazil, the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration, for her praiseworthy efforts, working
together with other members of the configuration,
because we have been able to make great progress.
Earlier, she referred to the visit to my country, thanks
to which it was possible to observe the situation there
and to make contact not only with the national

08-39896

S/PV.5925

authorities, but also with civil society and private
citizens, to take the pulse and to see exactly what is
happening in the country. That visit made it possible
not only to identify the many challenges, but also to
see that we have reason for hope in my country. We are
resolved to move forward and not to be discouraged in
our effort to create all the conditions necessary to
promote human rights and the rule of law so that our
democracy can be a truly inclusive democracy,
allowing all citizens to be involved in and to manage
our national affairs.

I should like once again to thank members of the
Council for their focused attention to my country and
above all for their willingness, through an appeal to the
international community, to provide substantial support
and assistance to my country as soon as possible.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. In accordance with the understanding reached
in the Council’s prior consultations, I should now like
to invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at noon.

08-39896

11
