S/PV.8256*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8256th meeting

Tuesday, 15 May 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Djédjé
Ms. Edjang Mangue
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

* Reissued for technical reasons 9 August 2018

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-14787* (E)
*1814787*

S/PV.8256*

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Minute of silence
The President: At the outset of the meeting, I
should like to take a moment to remember those killed
yesterday in Gaza, as well as all those — Palestinian,
Israeli and others — who have died as a result of
a conflict that has endured for far too long. I ask all
representatives to rise to observe a minute of silence in
memory of them.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Israel to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mladenov is joining us via video tele-conference
from Jerusalem.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: For the people of Gaza yesterday
was a day of tragedy. There are no other words
to describe what actually happened. There is no
justification for the killing. There is no excuse. It serves
no one. It certainly does not serve the cause of peace.
My heart weighs heavy today as I begin by expressing
my condolences to the families of those killed yesterday
and over the past six weeks of demonstrations in Gaza.
2/25

15/05/2018

Who can possibly find words to console the mother of
a child who has been killed? I call on all to join me
today in condemning in the strongest possible terms the
actions that have led to the loss of many lives in Gaza.
Israel has a responsibility to calibrate its use of force
and not to use lethal force except as a last resort under
the imminent threat of death or serious injury. It must
protect its borders, but it must do so proportionally and
investigate every incident that has led to a loss of human
life. Hamas, which has controlled Gaza for more than a
decade, must not use the protests as cover in an attempt
to place bombs at the fence and create provocations. Its
operatives must not hide among the demonstrators and
risk the lives of civilians.
Tens of thousands of people in Gaza have been
protesting for more six weeks to date — people who
live in abject poverty, who survive in prison-like
conditions and who live with no prospect for the day
after. Those people want their voices heard. They want
a future beyond mere survival. Their leaders have failed
them. The promises that they have made to them have
not been delivered on, and now the people are angry.
But their anger, if not channelled in a constructive
manner, will lead to more destruction and suffering.
Whatever we may think of their motivation, we have an
obligation to hear their plight. They have lived through
three devastating conflicts. Their lives are marked by
personal anguish, scarred by a national tragedy and
marred by daily suffering caused by leaders who use
them for their own political ends. For 10 years, they
have lived under the control of Hamas, while separated
from their families in the West Bank and isolated behind
crippling Israeli closures. The cycle of violence in Gaza
needs to end, and for if it to end it requires every single
one of us to put their best efforts into preventing an
explosion that could drag the whole region into another
deadly confrontation. The international community
must step in and prevent war. We need to move forward
quickly and effectively with regard to all the projects
that we have discussed for many months to solve the
energy, water and health crisis of the population.
We can do that only in coordination with Israel, the
Palestinian Authority and Egypt, but, before all of that,
the senseless violence needs to stop.
Yesterday an estimated 35,000 people participated
in demonstrations in Gaza, as did hundreds more in
the West Bank cities of Ramallah, Bethlehem, Hebron,
Jericho, Nablus and East Jerusalem — as part of the
Great March of Return, as well as in protest of the
18-14787

15/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

relocation of the United States Embassy from Tel Aviv
to Jerusalem. Although no fatalities were reported
in the West Bank, where limited clashes took place
between demonstrators and Israeli security forces at
several checkpoints, the situation in Gaza deteriorated
throughout the day, particularly along the perimeter
fence. According to various reports, at least 60 people
were killed throughout yesterday, including six
children, and more than 1,300 people were reportedly
injured by live ammunition and rubber bullets. One
Israeli soldier was wounded and taken to the hospital
for treatment. Since the beginning of the protests on
30 March, more than 100 people have been killed,
including 13 children, over half of whom were killed
yesterday alone. That constituted the bloodiest day in
Gaza, with the highest death and injury toll since the
2014 conflict.
Hamas and Islamic Jihad have acknowledged that
members of their organizations were among those
killed, and the Israel Defence Forces (IDF) claims that
at least 24 had links to militant activities. Under the
cover of the protests, Hamas and other militants have
also engaged in violent and provocative acts, including
the placing of improvised explosive devices (IEDs)
at the perimeter fence and other attempts to breach it
with the intent of perpetrating attacks. According to
the United Nations Department of Safety and Security,
at least one IED reportedly detonated against an IDF
vehicle during an incursion. Eighteen airs trikes and
eight shelling incidents were also carried out by the
Israeli security forces on 26 Hamas targets in retaliation
for what Israel classified as violent acts.
Against that backdrop, hospitals in Gaza report an
unfolding crisis involving essential medical supplies.
Drugs and equipment are needed to treat those who
have been injured. The United Nations Humanitarian
Coordinator, who is currently in Gaza, visited Al-Shifa
hospital yesterday, where there is a shortage of beds for
the number of wounded arriving from the protests at the
fence. He witnessed at first-hand patients being brought
in on stretchers and left in the hospital’s courtyard,
which was being used as a triage area. I appeal to Israel,
Egypt and the Palestinian authorities to facilitate the
exit of the seriously wounded from Gaza for medical
treatment, and I welcome steps reportedly taken by
Egypt to that end.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the bravery of the medical staff who continue to
put their own lives at risk, such as those working for

S/PV. 8256*

the Palestine Red Crescent Society, who have endured
casualties of their own. I am deeply saddened to note
the death of another health worker yesterday during the
demonstrations, and reiterate the inviolability of health
facilities and medical personnel under international
law. Journalists have also been among those injured in
yesterday’s demonstrations.
The dire humanitarian situation in Gaza, about
which I have reported time and again in this Chamber
over the past year, has been compounded by the fact
that the Palestinian Authority continues to withhold
the payment of salaries to some 20,000 civil service
employees in Gaza. To further complicate a dismal
picture, on 4 and 11 May, demonstrators destroyed
most of the facilities on the Gaza side of the Kerem
Shalom crossing — the main point of entry for goods
and materials into the Gaza Strip. Members of my team
conducted an initial assessment of the site, and I can
report that the damage is extensive and will hinder
deliveries of fuel and much-needed goods to Gaza for
weeks to come. As we speak, the United Nations is
working with Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
bring in life-saving assistance, despite the destruction
and extensive damage to the crossing.
Whoever orchestrated that destruction shares in
the responsibility for worsening the suffering of the
2 million people in Gaza. The Secretary-General and
I have repeatedly called on all to exercise restraint, for
all the necessary steps to be taken to avoid escalation
and for all incidents to be fully investigated. I have
engaged with all sides to that effect. Public statements
and messages by Hamas indicate the intention to use
mass protests to infiltrate into Israel and attack Israelis.
Such statements and action endanger the lives of both
Israelis and Palestinians and cannot be justified. I
wish to underline yet again that it is imperative that
civilians, particularly children, not be targeted by
anyone, used as cover for militant activity or be put at
risk or endangered in any way.
As the violence continues, technical problems have
also resurfaced in the form of a further decrease in
electricity supply, leading to approximately 22 hours
of blackouts in Gaza. That is a critical reminder of the
fragility of Gaza’s infrastructure. Starting tomorrow,
the United Nations, together with international
partners, will need to focus and redouble efforts to
implement projects that will have an immediate impact
on improving the electricity, water and health situations
as a matter of urgency.

18-147873/25

S/PV.8256*

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

15/05/2018

The developments in Gaza are an extremely
painful reminder of the devastating consequences of
the continued absence of peace between Israelis and
Palestinians. I would like to reiterate that message,
particularly as Palestinians commemorate Nakba Day,
or the day of the catastrophe, by which they remember
the displacement during the war of 1948-1949, and as
they continue to demonstrate in Gaza and the West
Bank over the coming days. We must step up our efforts
in support of a peaceful resolution to the conflict. We
must collectively call on all to refrain from unilateral
measures that only steer us away from a peace process,
and instead work to end the occupation and advance
the goal of a just and sustainable peace, culminating
ultimately in two States — Israel and Palestine, of
which Gaza is an integral part — living side by side in
peace, security and prosperity.

unarmed Palestinians and to hold those responsible
to account.

The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.

The unilateral policies, measures and actions taken
by Israel, the occupying Power, are a source of concern
as it seeks to alter the facts on the ground in the occupied
territory, notably the ongoing settlement activities and
the expansion of the existing settlements, which is
totally illegal and illegitimate and represents a gross
violation of international law and Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016).

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank you, Madam President,
for your swift response to our request to hold this
emergency meeting. I would also like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for the important briefing
he delivered today on the tragic events that recently took
place in the occupied Palestinian territories, especially
in the Gaza Strip.
We condemn in the strongest terms the massacre
perpetrated by the Israeli occupation authorities
yesterday, which led to 52 people killed and thousands
injured during the peaceful demonstrations that
started on 30 March in commemoration of the right of
return, joining the fallen martyrs since the Palestinian
tragedy began.
Such repeated Israeli violations are simply a
continuation of Israel’s violations of international
humanitarian law, international law and Security
Council resolutions, which would not have persisted if
the Security Council had taken a firm stance against
them and called on Israel to stop such practices. We
therefore express our regret that the Security Council
was unable to adopt the draft resolution that Kuwait put
forth yesterday, calling for an end to Israel’s practices
and for a transparent and independent investigation to
be conducted into the massacres perpetrated against
4/25

Given the Council’s inability to take any measures
to establish an investigative mechanism, we will act in
the General Assembly or the Human Rights Council
in order to guarantee that those perpetrating such
acts are held accountable and do not enjoy impunity.
We would also like to submit suggestions to prevent
the excessive use of force and ongoing violence by the
Israeli occupation authorities. We call for measures
that would ensure the provision of international
protection to the Palestinian people. In that regard, we
highlight the provisions of resolutions 605 (1987) and
904 (1994) — to apply the Fourth Geneva Convention,
end what is happening in the occupied Palestinian
territories and provide international protection to the
unarmed Palestinian people.

The same is true of the relocation of certain
diplomatic missions to Jerusalem, which is a blatant
violation of the relevant Council resolutions, particularly
resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980), which considered
such unilateral actions null and void, with no legal
effect. We emphasize that such steps, which constitute
violations of international law, will undermine efforts
towards peace, exacerbate tensions, flair the rage and
threaten to push the region into more violence, chaos
and instability.
The State of Kuwait supports the Palestinian call to
give impetus to existing international mechanisms, such
as the Quartet, by expanding its membership to include
other regional parties, provided that it remains under
the aegis of the United Nations peace process. We also
support all legal and peaceful steps taken by the sisterly
State of Palestine at the national and international levels
to consolidate its sovereignty with respect to Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and the occupied Palestinian territories.
We underscore that, in order to achieve the longdesired peace, we must start by putting an end to the
Israeli occupation, whose fifty-first anniversary is
coming up in a few days. That should be based on the
18-14787

15/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

resolutions of international legitimacy, the principle
of land for peace, the road map and the Arab Peace
Initiative, adopted by all Arab States at the 2002 Beirut
summit. It should also be based on the withdrawal
of Israel from all Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese
territories to the June 1967 borders. It should address
all final-status issues and thereby eventually lead to the
Palestinian people realizing all their political legitimate
rights, including their right to self-determination, and
the creation of an independent State with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
The Palestinian people appeal to the United
Nations, especially the Security Council, to fulfil
all of the pledges made towards the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that regard, we
reaffirm our unwavering solidarity with the Palestinian
people in the defence of their just cause and legitimate
rights, including their historical and principled rights
to Al-Quds Al-Sharif, guaranteed by the relevant
resolutions of international legitimacy. We call on
States to recognize the State of Palestine, with occupied
East Jerusalem as its capital.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Today’s
meeting was called to discuss the issue of violence in
the Middle East. We are all concerned about violence
in the Middle East. The United States deplores the loss
of human life. But there is a lot of violence throughout
the region, and I will note that the double standard
is all too common in the Chamber — and working
overtime today.
Last week, Iranian forces attacked Israeli positions
in the Golan Heights by launching rockets from Syria.
That was a reckless provocation and an escalation that
must be stopped. It is an example of regional violence
that should occupy our attention here in the Security
Council. Also last week, Iranian proxy forces in Yemen
launched missiles into Saudi Arabia. It was not the
first time they have done that. That too is regional
violence that should occupy our attention here in the
Security Council.
In recent days, Hamas terrorists, backed by Iran,
have incited attacks against Israeli security forces and
infrastructure. That is violence that should occupy our
attention too. The common thread in all of that is the
destabilizing conduct of the Iranian regime — a regime
that insists on promoting violence throughout the
Middle East, while depriving its own people of basic
human rights.

S/PV. 8256*

The United States welcomes a discussion on that
violence in the Middle East. We welcome discussing
the ways we can cooperate with each other to put an
end to that violence. There is far too little discussion in
the Security Council on Iran’s destabilizing presence in
Syria, its promotion of violence in Yemen, its support
for terrorism in Gaza and its dangerous and illegal
weapons build-up in Lebanon.
However, in the minds of some, today’s meeting
was not called to discuss any of those examples of
violence in the Middle East. Today’s meeting was
called to discuss the violence that some suggest was
connected with yesterday’s opening of the United States
Embassy in Jerusalem. For some people, the Embassy
opening is said to be a reason to engage in violence.
How is that justified? As our President said when he
announced the decision in December, the location of
our Embassy has no bearing on the specific boundaries
of Israeli sovereignty in Jerusalem or the resolution of
contested borders. It has no bearing on Jerusalem’s holy
sites. It does not prejudge whatever the parties might
negotiate in a peace agreement. It does not undermine
the prospects for peace in any way. And yet for some
this is supposedly a cause for violence.
But let us remember that the Hamas terrorist
organization has been inciting violence for years,
long before the United States decided to move its
Embassy. In recent days multiple news organizations
have documented the Hamas incitement in Gaza. They
have reported that Hamas maps and social media show
the fastest routes to reach Israeli communities in case
demonstrators make it through the security fence.
They have reported on Hamas messages broadcast over
loudspeakers, urging demonstrators to burst through
the fence and falsely claiming that Israeli soldiers
were fleeing when in fact they were not. The same
loudspeakers are used by Hamas to urge crowds to “get
closer, get closer to the security fence”.
Hamas has attacked the Kerem Shalom crossing,
the biggest entry point in Gaza for fuel, food and
medical supplies. That is how determined they are to
make the lives of the Palestinian people miserable. They
light Molotov cocktails attached to kites and attempt
to fly them into Israel to cause as much destruction as
possible. When asked yesterday why he put a swastika
on his burning kite, the terrorist responded, “the Jews
go crazy when you mention Hitler”. That is what is
endangering the people of Gaza. Make no mistake:
Hamas is pleased with the results from yesterday.

18-147875/25

S/PV.8256*

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I ask my colleagues here in the Security Council,
who among us would accept this type of activity on
their border? No one would. No country in the Chamber
would act with more restraint than Israel has. In fact,
the records of several countries here today suggest they
would be much less restrained. Those who suggest that
the Gaza violence has anything to do with the location
of the American Embassy are sorely mistaken. Rather,
the violence comes from those who reject the existence
of the State of Israel in any location. Such a motivation,
the destruction of a United Nations Member State, is so
illegitimate as to not be worth our time in the Security
Council other than the time it takes to denounce it.
Yesterday’s opening of the American Embassy
in Jerusalem is a cause for celebration for the
American people. Moving the United States Embassy
to Jerusalem was the right thing to do. It reflects the
will of the American people. It reflects our sovereign
right to decide the location of our Embassy, a right that
everyone in the Chamber claims for their own country.
Importantly, moving our Embassy to Jerusalem also
reflects the reality that Jerusalem is the capital of Israel.
It has served as Israel’s capital since the founding of
the State. It is the ancient capital of the Jewish people.
There is no plausible peace agreement under which
Jerusalem would no longer remain the capital of Israel.
Recognizing this reality makes peace more achievable,
not less. The United States is prepared to support peace
negotiations and a peace agreement in every way. We
want nothing more than peace, a peace in which peoples
of all faiths are free to worship in Jerusalem, and a
peace in which the rights of all people are respected
and the future prospects of all people are bright. That
peace will only be achieved if it is rooted in the realities
that too many choose to deny. The United States action
yesterday promoted the reality and the desire for peace.
It is our sincere wish that the nations of the world
will join us in this pursuit of credible, realistic and
enduring peace.
In conclusion, I want to take a moment to mark the
seventieth anniversary of Israel’s independence. Here
in the Security Council, on behalf of the American
people, I congratulate our friends in Israel on the
remarkable achievement of 70 years of independence.
From humble and desperate beginnings, a proud people
have realized the prophet Isaiah’s vision of a light unto
the nations. May the next 70 years be ones of strength,
of hope and of peace.
6/25

15/05/2018

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Mladenov
for his sobering briefing. I would like to thank him
and his staff for everything they are doing to try to
calm down the violence. I also echo his tribute to the
medical staff on the ground, as well as his appeal for
facilitatiting the evacuation of the wounded.
We have seen a concatenation of loss of life,
casualties and volume of live fire in Gaza yesterday,
and this has been shocking and appalling to most of
us. It is a depressingly familiar pattern that we have
seen over recent weeks, and it includes the deaths of
the children. At a highly sensitive time in the region,
we call for calm and restraint. The further escalation of
violence serves no one’s interests. It is only destructive
to peace efforts and to wider regional security.
We understand that 60 people were killed yesterday
in Gaza, six of whom were children. Around 2,771
people were reported injured, and that included over
1,300 injured by live ammunition. The death toll on
Monday means that 90 Palestinians have been killed
in the past six weeks for approaching the fence that has
been placed around Gaza. There is an urgent need to
establish the facts around yesterday’s events, including
why such a volume of live fire continues to be deemed
justified. The Palestinian right to peaceful protest is
undeniable. At the same time, we are deeply concerned
that peaceful protests in Gaza have been exploited by
extremist elements. For example, we have seen troops
belonging to the Israeli Defence Forces targeted by
improvised explosive devices, and we have seen the use
of Molotov cocktails. That is not acceptable.
Palestinians have a right to peaceful protest, and
Israel has an undeniable right to protect its borders
from Hamas and other terrorist groups and threats. The
United Kingdom remains strongly supportive of Israel’s
right to defend itself. We recognize today is a sensitive
anniversary for the Palestinians. We implore Israel to
act with restraint in accordance with international law
and, more than anything, to ensure that its security
forces do not resort to the use of excessive force.
The volume of live fire used in Gaza yesterday and
the consequent number of deaths is destressing and
cannot be ignored by the Council. I want to reiterate
the United Kingdom’s support for independent and
transparent investigations into the events that have
taken place in recent weeks, including the extent to
which the rules of engagement of the Israeli security
forces are in line with international law. The death
18-14787

15/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

toll alone warrants such a comprehensive inquiry. We
continue to urge that the findings of the investigations
be made public and, if wrongdoing is found, that those
responsible be held to account.
Our position on the status of Jerusalem and the
move of the American Embassy is well known. Our
position is clear and long-standing. It is that the status
of Jerusalem should be determined in a negotiated
settlement between the Israelis and the Palestinians,
and that Jerusalem should ultimately be the shared
capital of the Israeli and Palestinian States. We need
to look forward, and we need to work urgently towards
a resolution of the long-standing issues between Israel
and the Palestinian people. Like the Council, the United
Kingdom is committed to a two-State solution, with
Jerusalem as a shared capital, and to achieving peace
and stability in the wider region. We see negotiations
towards a two-State solution as the best way to end the
occupation and to meet the national aspirations of the
Jewish and the Palestinian peoples. But, now more than
ever, we need a political process that delivers a two-State
solution. We agree with the Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General that the situation in Gaza is
desperate and deteriorating and that the international
community must step up its efforts. To that end, I would
like to conclude by requesting that the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and his Office bring forward proposals to address
the situation in Gaza. They should include easing
restrictions on access and movement and international
support for urgent infrastructure and economic
development projects. We also reiterate our support for
the Egyptian-led reconciliation process and the return
of the Palestinian Authority to the full administration
of the Gaza Strip.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to thank
you, Madam President, for convening today’s meeting,
and the delegation of Kuwait for requesting it.
Eight-month-old Laila Anwar Al-Ghandour,
14-year-old Ezz Eldin Alsamaak, 15-year-old Wisaal
Fadl Ezzat Alsheikh Khalil, 16-year-old Ahmed Adel
Musa Alshaer, 16-year-old Saeed Mohamed Abu
Alkheir, 18-year-old Ibrahim Ahmed Alzarqa, 19-yearold Eman Ali Sadiq Alsheikh, 19-year-old Zayid
Mohamed Hassan Omar, 20-year-old Motassem Fawzy
Abu Louley and 21-year-old Anas Hamdan Salim Qadee
were the first 10 people murdered by the security forces
of the occupying Power yesterday in Gaza. Today we

S/PV. 8256*

observed a minute of silence in memory of the victims.
However, I also believe that minute of silence served to
remind us that the Security Council is ineffective.
The Security Council — not only now or in
recent years, but over the past decades — has failed
the Palestinian people. Therefore, as a member of the
Security Council, and through my brother, the observer
of Palestine, who is here with us today, I would like
to apologize to the 6 million Palestinian refugees
who have lost their homes and now live in camps far
from the land on which they were born. I apologize
for the promise to establish a Palestinian State that
has not been kept for more than 70 years. I apologize
for the more than 50 years of occupation and for the
ongoing construction of Israeli settlements on occupied
Palestinian territory. The international community
has failed them. I apologize for the 10-year inhumane
blockade in Gaza and for the construction of a shameful
wall along the West Bank. The international community
has failed them.
I apologize for the Israeli checkpoints, through
which they must pass daily on their way to work. The
international community has failed them. I would
like to apologize to the more than 97 Palestinians,
12 of whom were children, who lost their lives in
the past six weeks since the Great March of Return
began. The international community — the Security
Council — has failed them. I would like to apologize
to the more than 12,000 Palestinians — men, women,
the elderly and children — who have been injured as
a result of the Israeli aggression. More than 3,500 of
them have suffered injuries of varying intensity caused
by live ammunition that will leave them permanently
maimed. The international community has failed them.
I apologize to the more than 300 Palestinian boys and
girls detained in Israeli prisons or detention centres.
Some are tried in military tribunals, others are simply
held in administrative detention. The international
community — the Security Council — has failed them.
I would like to apologize to the 169 health workers
who were injured while providing emergency assistance
to Palestinians along the barrier that separates Israel
and Gaza. The international community has also failed
them. I apologize for the 18 ambulances that were
damaged in recent weeks and for the hospitals and
health centres in Gaza that have collapsed because
of inadequate supplies of gas, water and electricity. I
would like to apologize for the four hours of electricity

18-147877/25

S/PV.8256*

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

provided to them every day. The international
community has failed them.
I believe it is necessary to clarify that although there
are two parties to this ill-named conflict — because it is
not a conflict; we are dealing with an illegal occupation,
an occupying Power and an occupied territory — they
are not on equal footing. Israel is the occupying Power
and Palestine is under occupation. A historic and blatant
inequality exists. One party continues to use force to
occupy the territory of the other. One party forcibly
displaces civilians, confiscates land, demolishes
homes and continues to move settlers into illegally
built settlements. One party has imposed a blockade
on Gaza, which has led to dreadful humanitarian
consequences. As Mr. Mladenov so eloquently stated,
Gaza has become a sort of prison.
In addition, the unilateral decision taken by the
Government of the United States of America to set
up its Embassy in the occupied city of Jerusalem
only heightens tensions. Bolivia reiterates its firmest
condemnation of that decision, as it violates Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions. The United
States, as a supporter of the occupying Power, has
become an obstacle to peace. It is part of the problem,
not of the solution.
After witnessing recent events, Bolivia believes that
the relevant International Criminal Court mechanisms
should be employed to conduct an investigation and
determine those responsible for the crimes committed
during the Great March of Return so that they can be
held accountable. Given the current landscape, we
firmly commit to taking part in all international efforts
to bring about a peaceable solution to the situation. In
that regard, we support initiatives such as the Quartet
road map, the Madrid Principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative, among others, that would ensure fair and
lasting peace and enable the two sides to live in safe,
recognized borders. We reiterate our belief that the only
long-term solution is the two-State solution, in which at
last a free, sovereign and independent Palestinian State is
established within pre-1967 international borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
In conclusion, we have heard much talk about Iran,
Iran, Iran. We have heard much talk about Hamas, Hamas,
Hamas. But we have heard nothing about the real reason
for the current situation, which is the occupation, the
occupation, the occupation. When the occupation ends,
8/25

15/05/2018

we can discuss whether or not there is compliance with
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
Bolivia will never justify terrorism. At the same
time, we will not fall into the trap of claiming that the
problem lies with Hamas when the underlying issue is
that a State recognized by the Organization is illegally
occupying the territory of another and subjecting a
people to sub-human conditions. This is a systematic
violation of the Charter of the United Nations. Only
when the occupation comes to an end will we be able to
say that we have done our duty.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his very sobering briefing this morning.
As we held an open debate on this issue some two weeks
ago (see S/PV.8244), I will focus my remarks today on
the immediate situation in Gaza.
We are appalled by the violence that we have
witnessed in Gaza since 30 March, in particular the
sharp escalation yesterday. Every life lost is a tragedy,
but the number of people killed was the highest in a
single day since the beginning of the protests. Indeed,
it was the bloodiest day since the last conflict in Gaza,
in 2014.
Yesterday at least 60 Palestinians were killed by
the Israeli security forces and more than 2,000 were
wounded. Yet again the Israeli security forces used
live ammunition, including when shooting at children.
There are reports that several children under the age
of 18 were among those killed yesterday, in addition to
the seven children killed in the preceding weeks. We
condemn the killings, and we express our condolences
in connection with the tragic loss of life.
As we have stated repeatedly, Israel has a right to
protect itself and the people within its borders. That
said, Israel, as the occupying Power, has a responsibility
to protect Palestinian civilians and must fully respect
the right to peaceful protest; protect civilians; and
ensure that the use of force and other measures taken
are strictly proportional. The lethal use of force should
be exercised with maximum restraint, and only as a last
resort. These incidents raise serious concerns as to their
compatibility with international law, and there must be
an independent and transparent investigation, as called
for by the Secretary-General, among many others.
We urge all parties to act with the utmost restraint
to avoid any further loss of life and to protect civilians,
particularly children. This means never making children
the target of violence as well as not putting children
18-14787

15/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in harm’s way or encouraging them to participate
in violence. We urge the Israeli security forces to
refrain from the use of force against unarmed civilian
protesters and representatives of the media. We also call
on Hamas and those organizing the demonstrations to
avoid any provocations and ensure that protests remain
non-violent and peaceful.
In addition, we must not forget that the people of
Gaza have lived in intolerable conditions for far too long,
in a humanitarian situation that is now deteriorating
even further. To tackle this situation and to enable
Gaza to recover, movement and access restrictions
must be eased. We support the proposal just made by
the representative of the United Kingdom on the need
to come forward with concrete ideas in this regard.
At this time, Israelis and Palestinians are
commemorating defining moments in their history that
serve as important reference points for both peoples.
The position of Sweden and of the whole European
Union on the status of Jerusalem as a final-status
issue is clear and will not change. All three Abrahamic
religions — Judaism, Islam and Christianity — have
strong bonds to Jerusalem that must be preserved. A
way must be found through negotiations to resolve the
status of Jerusalem as the future capital of both States,
in line with the relevant United Nations resolutions.
In line with the long-standing policy of the European
Union, we will continue to respect the international
consensus on the status of Jerusalem embodied in, inter
alia, Security Council resolution 478 (1980), including
on the location of diplomatic representation, until the
final status of Jerusalem is resolved.
As was stated in December last year, we regret the
United States’ decision to recognize Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel and to move its embassy from Tel Aviv
to Jerusalem. This runs counter to international law
and the Council’s resolutions.
Our immediate priority must now be to defuse the
current tensions on the ground, as more demonstrations
are expected today and in the coming days. The lethal
violence cannot be allowed to continue. All parties
must take immediate steps to de-escalate, and the
Council has a responsibility to actively promote such
efforts. We regret that the press statement proposed by
Kuwait yesterday could not be adopted, and we hope
that a way forward on an appropriate public expression
can be found without further delay. There is unanimity
around this table, I believe, in calls for restraint and

S/PV. 8256*

de-escalation to break the cycle of violence, relieving
the dire situation in Gaza, and for resumed serious
negotiations towards peace.
Increased regional instability must not contribute
to a marginalization of the Israeli-Palestinian question.
We must more than ever urgently engage to bring the
parties back to negotiations so as to advance the twoState solution. Intra-Palestinian reconciliation and the
Palestinian Authority’s re-establishment in Gaza are
also needed. A halt to settlements and an end to the
ongoing Israeli occupation are fundamental. It is time
for a relaunch of the Middle East peace process.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this emergency meeting, and Mr. Mladenov
for his comprehensive and concerning briefing.
Peru is appalled at the situation in Gaza, where at
least 60 Palestinians died only yesterday, in addition
to the dozens of people killed and thousands of
others wounded in recent days and weeks. We note
with particular sorrow that many of the victims were
minors. These unacceptable actions run counter to
minimum standards of coexistence, international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights, and
they increase instability in the Middle East.
Peru believes that the acts of violence that took
place yesterday and in recent weeks, because of their
scope and repercussions in terms of human lives,
should be the subject of an exhaustive, transparent
and independent investigation that will make it
possible to assign responsibility. It will be necessary
to specifically determine the degree of compliance by
the Israeli authorities and troops with the principles of
proportionality, precaution and legality, given that they
maintain that they are acting in legitimate self-defence.
It will also have to be determined if the Palestinians
committed acts of violence and incitement beyond the
exercise of their rights and the freedoms of association
and expression, putting the lives of children and young
people at risk.
We agree with Secretary-General António Guterres
on the need for Israel to calibrate the use of force and
minimize the use of live ammunition. Lethal force should
be used only as a last resort, under the imminent threat
of death or severe injury. Likewise, also in line with
what was stated by the Secretary-General, we believe
that Hamas and the leaders of the Gaza demonstrations
should keep the demonstrators away from the Israeli

18-147879/25

S/PV.8256*

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

15/05/2018

fence and refrain from all violent actions, provocations
and attempts to breach the fence. We stress once again
that in the context of any assessment of the violence
in Gaza, due attention must be paid to its root causes,
particularly the tragic humanitarian situation of its
population. Failing that, the consistent scarcity of goods
and basic services, as well as the shutting in of millions
of Palestinians, will continue to create an ideal scenario
for those who promote violence and extremism.

Estimates put the number of lives lost at more than 50,
including those of children, and the number of injured
Palestinians at more than 2,500, 1,300 of them shot
by Israeli Defence Forces troops. Taken together with
the death and damage wrought since the Great March
of Return began, in late March, jeopardizes hopes for
peace, security and stability in Gaza. My delegation
regrets this situation and these deaths, and we urge the
international community to remedy the situation.

Peru believes that the deplorable events that
bring us together are yet further proof of the deep
and progressive deterioration of the political and
humanitarian conditions underlying the Palestinian
question as well as the lack of prospects for a definitive
solution. We note with concern that in this fragile
environment, unilateral decisions and actions taken
with respect to the city of Jerusalem could lead to an
even greater escalation of violence. We should recall
that the final status of Jerusalem must be negotiated
directly between the parties.

As we said in the previous emergency meeting (see
S/PV.8219), on 30 March, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea calls on the parties to refrain from any act that
could lead to violence. Acts of violence must cease
immediately and definitively, and both parties must
comply with international law as set out in the various
resolutions of the United Nations.

We call once again on political, religious and social
authorities and leaders, on both the Palestinian and
Israeli sides, to act with moderation and promote the
resumption of a high-level dialogue that will enable
their respective peoples and the Middle East as a whole
to move towards a sustainable peace. We reiterate our
call on the parties to resume direct negotiations, with
a view to reaching a definitive solution to the conflict
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
with two States living in peace, side by side, within
mutually and internationally recognized borders.
In conclusion, it is urgent that the Council act
with unity on this issue, not only with respect to
the resolutions adopted and the responsibility for
international peace and security assigned to it by the
Charter, but also because of the moral obligation to
defend life above all else.
Ms. Edjang Mangue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, my delegation would like to
thank Kuwait for calling this emergency meeting on the
Middle East, specifically due to the gravity of recent
events on the border between Israel and the Gaza Strip.
We also thank you, Madam President, for the swift
convocation of the Council. We also thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov for his succinct, clear, exhaustive and very
alarming presentation.
We all witnessed yesterday’s bloody events in
the Gaza Strip, shared by media the world over.
10/25

These incidents not only increase existing tensions
on the Palestinian question, but also exacerbate the longstanding socioeconomic and humanitarian instability
beseting the population of Gaza. This is clear from the
request for emergency medical aid from neighbouring
Egypt and the possible transfer of the wounded.
Equatorial Guinea views the historic claims of the
Palestinians to be just, in accordance with the numerous
statements of the African Union on the matter. We also
believe that Israel has the right to live in peace and
security. Israel must recognize that, just as its right to
exist cannot be denied, neither can that of Palestine.
Only in this way can two independent States coexist
with Jerusalem as their shared capital. Both of the
parties must therefore comply with international law as
expressed in the various relevant resolutions.
In addressing the Palestinian question, we cannot
ignore the important role of countries with political
influence in the Middle East, which can, and should, play
a prominent mediating role between the belligerents,
promoting, among other things, the implementation of
resolutions emanating from the Organization in which
we have all invested our trust with regard to preventing
and resolving the world’s conflicts.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
for his detailed and informative briefing and his
dispassionate approach to a particularly troubling
situation, the developments about which he has
consistently alerted us.
18-14787

15/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Yesterday and today mark the culmination of
a month and a half of violence and repression by the
Israeli forces against Palestinian protesters in Gaza. The
repeated warnings to the Council, including by France,
since late March have gone unheeded. The situation
on the ground continued its relentless escalation,
yesterday reaching the shocking total of more than
60 demonstrators killed in a single day, which brings
the number of Palestinian demonstrators killed by the
Israeli forces over the past month and a half to nearly
100. These tragic numbers speak for themselves.
First, the ongoing situation in Gaza is a tragic new
illustration of the human consequences of the stalemate
in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and a result of a
total absence of political hope. We have been saying
this for years: the prevailing situation in Gaza is not
sustainable. The ongoing violence is itself rooted in a
decade of Israeli blockades, aggravated by the stalemate
in the process of reconciliation and its humanitarian
consequences. The Hamas-backed protests of recent
weeks are fuelled by this situation, together with the
absence of any prospects for hope in the peace process
with Israel or on inter-Palestinian reconciliation; the
absence of any prospects for economic improvement,
due to the land, air and sea blockade maintaining one of
the highest unemployment rates in the world, at around
40 per cent, and per capita income lower than 25 years
ago; and a very youthful population, more than half of
them aged under 18, for whom, in this context, hope for
peace has given way to the feeling of having nothing
to lose.
The unfolding tragedy cannot be separated from the
desperation of the people of Gaza. That is why, beyond
de-escalation — which is an immediate imperative — and
beyond meeting emergency humanitarian needs, it
is essential to work towards sustainable solutions for
Gaza in the broader context of the two-State solution.
This is why we urge Mr. Mladenov to engage in-depth
in that regard in the Gaza Strip.
Secondly, the record of repression of the weekly
demonstrations, which have been taking place since
30 March, is shocking. A new line was crossed
yesterday, which risks heralding a point of no return
and triggering a cycle of uncontrollable violence. Since
30 March, 99 Palestinians, including 12 minors, have
been killed while demonstrating along the separation
line in Gaza. This very heavy toll is directly related
to the inadequate and disproportionate response of the
Israeli security forces. Yesterday President Macron

S/PV. 8256*

clearly condemned the violence of the Israeli armed
forces. These serious incidents must be fully explained,
and we recall in that regard the request of the SecretaryGeneral for an independent and transparent inquiry.
In the immediate term, two fundamental
requirements must be met to put an end to this
cycle that threatens to continue this very day with
demonstrations related to the commemoration of the
seventieth anniversary of Palestinian exile in 1948: on
the one hand, respect for international humanitarian
law, which is fully applicable in the Gaza Strip, in
particular the imperative to protect civilians; and, on
the other hand, respect for human rights, in particular
the right to peaceful demonstration. Any steps Israel
takes to safeguard its security, which is a legitimate
concern that we share, must be taken within this
context. We therefore call on the Israeli authorities to
demonstrate careful judgement, the utmost restraint
and to avoid the disproportionate use of force. Israel is
a State governed by the rule of law and must, as such,
apply rules of engagement that respect international
standards of law and order, in accordance with its
international commitments.
We condemn indiscriminate fire against protesters,
which has been systematic in recent weeks, in particular
yesterday. Nothing can justify that. Lethal weapons
must not be used against unarmed demonstrators
who pose no serious or imminent threat. This is the
message of numerous non-governmental organizations,
including Israeli and Palestinian ones. They underscore
the extreme seriousness of the gunshot wounds
inflicted on demonstrators without any justification in
terms of security and that the Gaza health system is
overwhelmed and approaching breaking point.
At the same time, we call on the protesters to refrain
from any acts of provocation or violence, and we warn
those, principally Hamas, who would seek to hijack the
demonstrations or use them to threaten Israel’s security
along the barrier. As members know, France will never
undermine the security of Israel.
Not only in the Gaza Strip but also in the West Bank
and Jerusalem, the risk of the situation deteriorating
and escalating out of control is extremely high in an
increasingly tense regional context, especially on the
northern border of Israel. Everyone must therefore
show restraint and a spirit of responsibility, in
particular the Palestinian and Israeli officials in their
respective statements.

18-1478711/25

S/PV.8256*

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It is also up to the Security Council to speak with
a strong voice in order to help to prevent the ongoing
escalation. That is a key point. The silence observed
by the Council since the beginning of the crisis is less
and less understandable. Since yesterday, it has left
a dangerous void. That silence must be replaced by
a clear public statement without delay. To that end,
France is ready to work in a constructive spirit with
its partners. The Security Council cannot be prevented
from speaking on such a serious matter. Otherwise, its
very calling, if not its raison d’être, are at stake.
I come to my last point. In the tense context that
I have just described, our collective responsibility
is to preserve the parameters that alone will in due
course resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The
question of Jerusalem is at the heart of such parameters
because it is a precondition for peace between Israelis
and Palestinians and, beyond that, regional stability.
The question of Jerusalem concerns the entire
international community.
Jerusalem has been the subject of several Security
Council resolutions. In that context, the status of
Jerusalem should be considered by the parties in their
discussions with a view to a peace agreement. In line
with the consensus that has prevailed for 70 years in the
international community, France does not recognize
any sovereignty over Jerusalem without agreement.
Following the June 1967 conflict, we therefore did not
recognize the annexation of East Jerusalem, which is
part of the occupied territories under international law.
Similarly, in 1980, we did not recognize Israel’s
unilateral acts with regard to Jerusalem. The Security
Council adopted resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980),
which provide for two principles in particular. First,
any decision or action to alter the status or character
of Jerusalem is considered null and void and must be
rescinded. Secondly, all States Members of the United
Nations that have established diplomatic missions in
Jerusalem must withdraw them from the city. That
is what happened as a result of resolution 478 (1980)
without exception.
Jerusalem should become the capital of two
States — Israel and Palestine — in line with modalities
that must be defined through negotiation. No unilateral
decision can replace that. France condemned the
decision that was taken by the United States in
December and implemented yesterday.
12/25

15/05/2018

As we all know, there is no solution other than the
two-State solution. However, there will be no twoState solution without agreement between the parties
on Jerusalem, and no possible agreement on Jerusalem
outside the internationally recognized parameters.
Abandoning that framework will fuel tensions and
violence because of the symbolic, historical and religious
importance of Jerusalem to both the Palestinians and
the Israelis. It would also create a space that will be
rapidly filled by all kinds of extremists in the region
who have an interest in the political conflict becoming
a religious conflict.
France cannot allow itself to again see Jerusalem
and the Palestinian territories, starting with the
Gaza Strip, descend into chaos. Yesterday President
Macron met the King of Jordan, the Custodian of the
Holy Sites in Jerusalem, as well as President Abbas.
Today he will speak to the Israeli Prime Minister,
Benjamin Netanyahu.
In the symbolic and historical context of these
commemorative days, which are essential to both
the Palestinians and the Israelis, we call on everyone
to exercise restraint, ensure calm and prevent any
escalation. We call for a resumption of dialogue and
negotiations, in which the international community
should shoulder its full responsibility in order to
support the parties and to ensure results.
Because it is a friend of both the Israelis and the
Palestinians, France intends to continue its efforts with
unwavering resolve. We call on the Council to fully
play its role in that regard.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
supports Kuwait’s request for today’s emergency open
meeting on the Middle East. I would also like to thank
Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing to the Security Council.
Recently, there have been protests and
demonstrations in Gaza. In that regard, Israel used force,
which has caused heavy casualties among Palestinian
civilians, including many women and children. We
express our serious concern over that development.
We condemn any violent actions against civilians
and call on both Israel and Palestine, in particular the
Israeli side, to exercise restraint in order to prevent
further escalation of the tense situation. We convey our
condolences and sincere sympathy to the victims and
their families. We call for an objective and impartial
investigation in order to clarify the events.
18-14787

15/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

China has consistently advocated that the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict be settled through peaceful
negotiations. China condemns any measure that
exacerbates tension and causes casualties among
innocent civilians. We urge the parties concerned to stop
the violence, the abusive use of force and, in particular,
actions against civilians. The use of violence and force
will not bring about security for anyone. We urge the
parties concerned to create enabling conditions, resume
contact and dialogue as soon as possible and seek to
return to the right track of the political negotiations.
The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip is
serious. That does not help regional stability. We hope
that the parties concerned will earnestly implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions, fully lift
the blockade on Gaza as soon as possible and provide
the people in Gaza with a normal and dignified space
for their survival and development. We call on the
international community to step up its assistance and
support to the Palestinian people.
The question of Palestine is at the heart of the
Middle East issue. It is fundamental to peace in the
region. In that regard, the status of Jerusalem is a
highly complex and sensitive issue. It represents the
basis for the settlement of the Palestinian issue. Several
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
include provisions pertaining to that issue. Under the
current circumstances, we call on all parties to bear
in mind peace and calm in the region, to exercise
restraint, to avoid any words and deeds that may
escalate the situation and to work together to facilitate
the de-escalation of the situation. All parties should
respect the historical differences, uphold fairness and
justice, implement international consensus and strive
for peaceful coexistence. In accordance with such
principles and the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the final status of Jerusalem should be settled through
negotiations so as to reach a solution that accommodates
the interests of all parties.
The two-State solution is the right way to resolve
the question of Palestine. It is also an important guide
for action. The international community should uphold
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the principle
of land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative and
resolve differences through negotiations in order to
achieve a comprehensive, lasting and just solutuion to
the Palestinian question as soon as possible.

S/PV. 8256*

China remains committed to supporting and
facilitating the Middle East peace process. We have
always stood in solidarity with the Palestinian people in
the pursuit of their just cause to restore their legitimate
national rights and supported the establishment of
a fully sovereign and independent Palestinian State
on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. China will continue to tirelessly strive
to achieve peace in accordance with the four-point
proposal put forward by Chinese President Xi Jinping
and to promote the political settlement of the question
of Palestine.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation is
grateful to the Kuwaiti Permanent Mission for initiating
this emergency briefing on the unfolding situation
in Gaza. We also express our appreciation to Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his comprehensive and
objective update.
We were alarmed by the situation in that part of
the Middle East. We are extremely concerned about
the increase in the death toll caused by violence on
the border between the Gaza Strip and Israel. My
delegation expresses deep grief following the tragic loss
of Palestinian civilians during protests. We consider
that to be an irredeemable loss of life. Kazakhstan fully
supports the right of the Palestinian people to selfexpression and peaceful demonstrations. While tensions
on the ground are high, Kazakhstan calls on all actors
to show responsibility to prevent further tension and to
avoid the instigation of violence. We believe it could be
a dangerous development in the situation in the Middle
East region as a whole. In that regard, Kazakhstan calls
on both sides of the conflict to exercise restraint.
The Republic of Kazakhstan calls on the
international community to take exhaustive measures
to immediately end the violence. After several weeks
of violence and in the face of the growing number
of Palestinian victims in the Gaza Strip still today,
Kazakhstan condemns the indiscriminate use of live
ammunition against civilians and urges the Israeli
authorities to exercise restraint. Investigations should
be conducted on all of those cases. We reiterate that
Israeli security forces must calibrate the use of force.
We recall the common duty of United Nations States
Members to protect civilians, especially minors.
We join the position of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation concerning the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
We endorse the outcomes of the Dhaka declaration

18-1478713/25

S/PV.8256*

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

adopted at the forty-fifth session of the Council of
Foreign Ministers of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation in Bangladesh on 6 May. Specifically,
we reiterate that Jerusalem is the common homeland
of different ethnicities and religions. All parties must
avoid taking actions that might further escalate the
situation, while both Palestine and Israel must respect
each other’s right to existence. International law is
unambiguous about the status of Jerusalem. Any
unilateral action to change the status of the city runs
counter to the letter and spirit of international law and
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,
and fuel violence and instability in the region. The
status of Jerusalem will have to be determined in the
framework of negotiations to come in the context of
internationally agreed parameters in order to reach a
just and lasting solution — namely two States, living
side by side in peace and security.
Kazakhstan considers it important to continue
efforts to consolidate the Palestinian ranks on the
Palestine Liberation Organization political platform
as a necessary condition to practically realize the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people for the
creation of their own independent State.
We note that the parties must find a solution for
the difficult humanitarian situation of Gaza. That
requires economic confidence-building measures and
strong support from the international community. With
regard to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
Kazakhstan reiterates the need to support that important
mechanism. In that regard, Kazakhstan endorses the
concern expressed earlier by the Special Coordinator
over the funding of UNRWA this year. A significant
reduction in its regular budget has already increased
the anxiety level of the 5.3 million Palestine refugees,
who have already suffered the longest-protracted
refugee crisis.
Lastly, while reaffirming its commitment to the
decisions and resolutions of the Security Council and
the General Assembly, the Republic of Kazakhstan
has consistently supported the early, complete and
comprehensive settlement of the situation in the
Middle East within the framework of peaceful political
progress. We believe it is urgent to recreate the necessary
conditions for the search for a political solution in a
regional context already marked by strong tensions. We
call upon the leaders of Israel and Palestine and other
parties to take concrete steps to preserve the possibility
14/25

15/05/2018

of peaceful coexistence and the two-State solution, to
strengthen the prospects for peace by remaining calm
and exercising the maximum restraint in order to avoid
actions that can erode and derail peaceful efforts and
further escalate tensions between the Palestinians
and Israelis. It should be based, as we always say at
the Council, on the inalienable rights of Palestinians
to statehood and Israel’s to security. In the very near
future, we must begin negotiations on each existing
problem, aimed at reaching agreement on pending
issues and giving them a final status. We believe
that only a political solution and confidence-building
measures in different dimensions can help the parties
to resolve the contradictions.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. We have
been following the escalation of violence in the
occupied Palestinian territory and the high number of
Palestinians killed and injured in the Gaza protests. Let
me join others in expressing our deepest sorrow and
sympathy for the loss of lives. We wish the injured a
speedy recovery.
I would like to echo what the Secretary-General
said yesterday through his spokesperson:
“Israel security forces must exercise maximum
restraint in the use of live fire. Hamas and the leaders
of the demonstrations have a responsibility to prevent
all violent actions and provocations.”
We are also holding this meeting against the
backdrop of ongoing discontent from Palestinians and
the region over the latest development surrounding the
issue of the city of Jerusalem. We have expressed our
position on this issue unequivocally, which is in line
with the African Union position reiterated yesterday
by Chairperson Moussa Faki. We believe the Jerusalem
issue is a final-status issue that must be resolved through
direct negotiations between the two parties on the basis
of the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, while taking into account the legitimate
concerns of both the Palestinian and Israeli sides.
It is self-evident that, unless the peace process is
advanced and the underlying problems are resolved
peacefully, the current tragedy would only happen again
and again, eventually reaching the point of no return.
That is where we seem to be headed. The situation
is that grave. Much greater violence is becoming
increasingly imminent, as a natural consequence of the
current circumstances.
18-14787

15/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

That is why preserving the possibility of reaching
a two-State solution is absolutely critical and cannot be
avoided. There is no other viable option. All arguments
to the contrary are unrealistic and are not consistent
with the firm commitment to seek a just and democratic
resolution of the problem.
That is why it is so critical that ways and means
be found to limit the damage that would be caused and
to try, no matter how difficult, to continue the peace
process and save the two-State formula, which is a longheld position of the United Nations and the international
community. But there is no denying the fact that the
formula may soon become unviable — a situation from
which no one would benefit, jeopardizing the aims
of achieving greater security or promoting national
aspirations. The basic elements required for reliable
and sustainable peace between the Palestinians and
Israel are two, that is, dependable security for Israel,
on the one hand, and the realization of the national
aspiration of Palestinians, on the other. Any attempt to
run away from this reality or to ignore it can lead only
to the tension, violence and bloodletting we have been
witnessing. Whether done openly and without qualms
or in a less transparent manner and far from public gaze,
the attempt to make the Palestinian quest for justice and
fairness a footnote to other issues that the region has in
abundance would no doubt lead to perpetual turmoil
with unimaginable consequences for all.
The writing is on the wall, and the trajectory is by
no means unfathomable. Nevertheless, it is the parties
that should show flexibility to engage in direct and
meaningful negotiation to reach a final settlement on all
issues. However, the international community — and
particularly the Security Council — should discharge
its responsibility in helping and encouraging the two
sides to do so.
It is also in that context that we support initiatives
that have been under way to facilitate negotiation
between the Israelis and the Palestinians with a view to
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting resolution.
The efforts of the Middle East Quartet, the Quarter’s
road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the work of
countries within and outside the Council are very much
appreciated and should be encouraged to continue.
I want to conclude by expressing profound
appreciation to Mr. Mladenov for the very honourable
way he has been discharging his responsibilities. We
realize how heavy that responsibility is.

S/PV. 8256*

Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Kuwait for the initiative of holding
this emergency meeting on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. I congratulate
Mr. Mladenov for the quality of his briefing.
Côte d’Ivoire remains particularly concerned about
the serious events on the border between Israel and
the Gaza Strip in the context of the March of Return.
The violence, which began on 30 March, culminated
yesterday, 14 May, with the transfer of the American
Embassy to Jerusalem. In the face of this new outbreak
of violence, which has reportedly caused the deaths of
nearly a 100 Palestinians and injured nearly 8,000 since
30 March, my country calls on the parties to exercise
restraint and refrain from unilateral actions that could
exacerbate the situation and defer the prospects for a
peaceful settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian crisis to a
for a long time to come.
Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced that there is no
alternative to the search for peace other than through
dialogue. It therefore urges the parties to return to the
negotiating table and engage in constructive dialogue
on the basis of the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions. In that regard, my
country reaffirms its principled position in favour of
a negotiated settlement leading to the solution of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security.
As for the final status of the city of Jerusalem,
Côte d’Ivoire believes that it must be negotiated
within the framework of a concerted solution between
the two parties, as stipulated in the relevant United
Nations resolutions. My country therefore calls for the
resumption, without delay, of talks between Israelis and
Palestinians with a view to ending the political impasse
in the peace process.
My delegation unreservedly supports the objective
of comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
and reiterates its readiness to work with all Council
members towards a peaceful solution to the IsraeliPalestinian crisis.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I join others
in thanking Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his sobering
briefing. We deplore the loss of lives and the number of
people wounded, as he described.
As I said last month in the Security Council, we
cannot afford to put the peace process on the back

18-1478715/25

S/PV.8256*

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

burner (see S/PV.8244). The gap between the two
sides is growing fast, as is illustrated by yesterday’s
events. Those events serve to underline that the current
trajectory leads to loss of lives, confrontation and
despair, and it results in growing divisions between
Israelis and Palestinians.
I will focus on the three points: first, the
demonstration in Gaza; secondly, the issue of Jerusalem;
and, thirdly, the importance of the peace process and
the role of the Security Council.
As to my first point, on the demonstrations in
Gaza, we are alarmed by the new levels of violence.
As Mr. Mladenov said, 59 people have been killed
and more than 2,600 people have been wounded, 770
of whom were injured by live ammunition. That is the
highest number of people killed in Gaza in one day
since the conflict of 2014.
The numbers suggest that almost one in 40 people
was hit by live ammunition and that one in 16 was
wounded in that manner. That raises serious questions
about the proportionality of the Israeli response. We are
particularly worried by the killing of children and other
minors and the high number of health-care workers
hurt. That underlines again the need for restraint as well
as the need for an independent, transparent and prompt
investigation into all incidents that led to casualties.
We take note of the fact-finding assessment
mechanism established by the Israeli Defence Forces
(IDF) to review IDF actions and specific incidents
that have taken place on the Israeli-Gaza border since
30 March.
While recognizing Israel’s legitimate security
concerns, we repeat our call upon that State to ensure
that its responses are necessary and proportionate at all
times, in line with its obligations under international law.
The use of live ammunition should be a measure of last
resort only, as stated in the Basic Principles on the Use
of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials.
We strongly urge all Palestinian parties to ensure
the peaceful character of protests and not resort to
violence. Calls to storm Israel or for the use of violence
are unacceptable. Peaceful demonstrations should not
be used as a cover for violence.
The demolition of the Palestinian side of the Kerem
Abu Salem crossing only harms Palestinian interests.
We call upon the de facto authorities in Gaza to ensure
the safety of that crossing, which is the only crossing
16/25

15/05/2018

for the entry and exit of food and medical supplies
and other goods. It should be protected. We call upon
the Palestinian Authority and the de facto authorities
in Gaza to repair the damage as soon as possible. We
welcome Israel’s decision to resume and ensure the
normal functioning of the crossing today, despite the
challenging environment.
These developments show that a structural solution
for Gaza is needed now more than ever. At the same
time, the humanitarian crisis has to be addressed. We
would like to ask Mr. Mladenov to present his ideas and
proposals on what can be done in that regard.
My second point concerns Jerusalem. The future
status of Jerusalem is perhaps the most sensitive and
complex of all final-status issues. Jerusalem is a holy
city for Jews, Muslims and Christians. The ties of the
Jewish people to Jerusalem are irrefutable and must
not be denied. The ties of the Palestinian people to
Jerusalem are irrefutable and must not be denied. This
calls for wisdom; this calls for prudence.
Unilateral steps with regard to the future status of
Jerusalem are not only unwise and counterproductive,
they are above all in contradiction to international law.
But they cannot be used as an excuse for violence. We
will continue to respect the international consensus on
Jerusalem, as embodied in resolution 478 (1980), among
other things, including on the location of diplomatic
representations, until the final status of Jerusalem is
resolved through negotiations.
My third point concerns the peace process and what
the Council can and should do. First, looking at the
whole picture, what we need in the current situation is
de-escalation. That applies to Jerusalem and Gaza and
to Israeli-Palestinian relations generally. All parties
should focus on defusing tensions and enabling efforts
towards a better future for the region. While wisdom
and courage are needed to return to negotiations for a
political solution, both sides are taking steps that are
incompatible with resolution 2334 (2016). Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas’s speech on 30 April
contained unacceptable remarks about the origins of
the Holocaust and Israel’s legitimacy. Such rhetoric
will only play into the hands of those who do not want
a two-State solution. Israeli political leaders who
advocate for annexing parts of the West Bank only play
into the hands of those who do not want a two-State
solution. We call on both sides to take steps that create
18-14787

15/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

mutual trust and help to preserve the possibility of such
a solution.
The current tensions should not be used as an
argument against action. On the contrary, they
demonstrate the urgency of more resolute action now.
Realistically, only a two-State solution will enable
both sides to fulfil their aspirations, put an end to the
conflict and achieve the just and lasting peace that
Israelis and Palestinians long for and deserve. We call
on the members of the Quartet to convene to address
the negative spiral. The situation in Gaza is worsening
with each passing week and we therefore believe that a
united reaction from the Council is urgently needed to
help de-escalate the situation.
In conclusion, we are willing to engage with
the other members of the Council to formulate an
appropriate public expression that addresses the recent
events and all the unhelpful steps taken on both sides.
We are convinced that this can be done in a balanced
manner, which will enable the Council to contribute to
de-escalating the current situation.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to begin by expressing my
condolences to the families of the Palestinians who
were killed in the Gaza Strip and wishing a speedy
recovery to the wounded. We mourn together with the
Palestinian people.
We are grateful to Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his substantive briefing.
Moscow is deeply concerned about the escalation
of tension in the occupied Palestinian territories, which
reached a dangerous level against the background of
the ceremony marking the beginning of the transfer
of the American Embassy from Tel Aviv, which
coincided with Palestinians’ commemoration of their
day of catastrophe or Nakba. The number of victims is
seriously worrying and we share the feelings expressed
by our Security Council colleagues about it.
Security Council resolutions state unambiguously
that all issues related to a definitive settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian situation can be resolved only
through a direct dialogue between the leadership of
Israel and Palestine. We believe that this also applies
to Jerusalem, a city that should remain open to all
representatives of the three monotheistic religions.
Unilateral actions revising agreements affirmed
decisions of the international community have become

S/PV. 8256*

alarmingly frequent. It is obvious to us that they cannot
contribute to achieving a just and lasting peace or,
where a settlement in the Middle East is concerned,
to realizing the national aspirations of the Palestinians
and ensuring Israel’s security. Unfortunately, those
who undertake such actions are not only demonstrating
that they are unwilling to see reason and stop, they are
actively trying to provoke yet more States, increasing
the risk of involving them in the destructive conflict in
the Middle East.
We reaffirm the right to peaceful protest and
firmly condemn the indiscriminate use of force
against civilians. We urge the parties to refrain from
steps that could make the situation worse. The current
events have once again shown that in the continuing
political vacuum of the past four years or so, the calls
for violent solutions and the revision of previously
reached agreements are reverberating with an evermore destructive resonance. They are exacting a real
price, expressed in human lives, tears, ruined lives
and dashed hopes. However, that does not stop the
irresponsible politicians. The result is a vicious cycle of
violence that begets violence.
In these explosive circumstances, we see the
urgency of mobilizing the efforts of the international
community to relaunch the political process between
Palestinians and Israelis on the international legal basis
that we are all familiar with, including the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the principles
of the Arab Peace Initiative, which should enable the
establishment of a two-State formula and the creation
of an independent and a sovereign Palestinian State
with East Jerusalem as its capital. For our part, we will
continue to consistently work to promote an IsraeliPalestinian settlement based on a two-State format
approved by the international community. Russia has
proposed its services as a mediator several times and
has offered to host a summit between the leaders of
Palestine and Israel in order to start a direct dialogue.
The offer still stands.
As recent events have shown, a vacuum in
constructive international efforts is extremely
dangerous. In particular, we think it is the right time
to reactivate the engagement of the Middle East
Quartet of international mediators, which, whatever
anyone may say, remains a unique universal mediation
format supported by Security Council resolutions. We
welcome and support the inclusion in a Middle East

18-1478717/25

S/PV.8256*

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

settlement of constructively minded regional players,
especially Egypt.
We underscore the importance of the work being
done by the United Nations and its specialized agencies
in the occupied Palestinian territories and refugee
camps. The support provided to hundreds of thousands
of Palestinians by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
continues to be indispensable.
To sum up, we would like to note the following.
Despite some international actors’ ambitious plans
and grandiose projects, neither the world generally nor
the Middle East in particular has become any safer in
recent years. There have been many unilateral actions
that have flown in the face of international law and have
only worsened the trends towards destabilization. The
current situation in the Palestinian territories is a clear
example of the fact that the situation is going in the
wrong direction. In the past few days, unfortunately,
our feeling that those who are taking these steps have no
intention of changing their direction has strengthened.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.
At the outset, I would like to thank Special Coordinator
Nikolay Mladenov for his very comprehensive but
unfortunately profoundly alarming briefing.
We express our great concern about the tragic loss
of human life in the Gaza Strip. During protests near
the Gaza fence, a large number of people have been
killed and injured, unfortunately including children.
As we might face more tension in the coming days, we
call on everyone to show the utmost restraint to avoid
any further escalation of violence leading to the loss
of life. We condemn all acts of terrorism, as well as
incitement to violence, and we expect all to ensure
that civilians, particularly children, are not put in any
danger. We call for an independent and transparent
investigation into those incidents and furthermore
call for respect for international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, including with regard
to the protection of civilians.
Although we recognize Israel’s right to protect its
borders, we strongly underline that the use of force
must be proportionate. In that context, let me stress that
Israel must exercise maximum restraint in the use of live
fire. With regard to demonstrations, we emphasize that
Israel must respect the right to peaceful protests, while
18/25

15/05/2018

Hamas and those who are leading the demonstrations
in Gaza must ensure that they remain peaceful, strictly
non-violent and without any provocations.
We call upon all parties to strictly comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and human rights law. Given the number of casualties
among civilians in the recent escalation in the Gaza
Strip, it is our imperative to protect them at all levels.
Therefore, we encourage all efforts to enhance the
protection of civilians and respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights law by the parties
to the conflict.
The current situation in Gaza could have significant
consequences for regional and international peace and
security. The last three conflicts in Gaza over the past
decade were a clear example of that. Therefore, the
Security Council should contribute to de-escalation
efforts, including through appropriate public expression.
While talking more broaldly about the latest
developments, we would like once again to reiterate
our firm commitment to the two-State solution and,
in that context, underline our position on Jerusalem,
which remains unchanged. We strongly believe that the
aspirations of both parties concerning Jerusalem must
be fulfilled, and a way to resolve the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of both States must be found
through negotiations. The status of Jerusalem should
also assume mutual recognition of historical relations
and national rights of both parties to the city. We will
continue to respect the international consensus on
Jerusalem embodied in, inter alia, resolution 478 (1980),
including the location of diplomatic representations
until the final status of Jerusalem is resolved.
Let me once again underline that reaching a peace
agreement will be possible only through peace talks
based on international law and the principles governing
peaceful relations among States. A key element in that
context would also be a meaningful dialogue among the
three main monotheistic religions.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, I thank Poland, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council, for holding this emergency meeting.
We also express our gratitude for the sympathy and
18-14787

15/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

condolences expressed by all members of the Security
Council during the minute of silence honouring our
martyrs. We thank Council members for having felt the
urgent need to discuss the grave, deteriorating situation
in occupied Palestinian territory, in particular in the
Gaza Strip, owing to the heinous and deliberate crimes
committed by Israel against unarmed Palestinian
civilians. In addition, we thank the fraternal State of
Kuwait for its current efforts as the only Arab member
of the Security Council. We also thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing.
We are meeting today at a tragic and painful
moment for the Palestinian people, with great sorrow
and bitterness. We convey our sincerest condolences to
the families of the martyrs. May they rest in peace. We
also wish a speedy recovery to all those who have been
wounded as a result of the brutal Israeli attack on the
Palestinian people who expressed their resistance in the
besieged Gaza Strip on the first evening of the sacred
month of Ramadan. We condemn in the strongest terms
the odious massacre committed by Israel in the Gaza
Strip. We call for an immediate halt to the military
aggression against our people and for a transparent,
independent and internationally led investigation.
The occupation is the main source of violence in
our region. Attempts by some to deny that fact are
undermined by the reality on the ground. We ask of
those who maintain diverging narratives why they
have often blocked any transparent, independent and
internationally led investigation. We have said in the
Council that we would accept the outcome of such an
investigation beforehand. The Secretary-General, as
well as Mr. Mladenov and 14 members of the Security
Council, have agreed to such an investigation on many
occasions. I reiterate that we will accept the outcome,
whatever it may be, of such an investigation. The
question is whether the other parties are willing to
accept such an investigation themselves.
Why do some block the will of the majority of the
Council? If what is happening on the ground is not clear,
an internationally led investigation should be carried
out for us to find out. As we said, we will preliminarily
accept its outcome. Are the other parties predisposed to
an independent, impartial and transparent investigation
to be conducted under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral, so that matters do not continue in an
environment of accusations and mutual suspicion? Let
us conduct such an investigation.

S/PV. 8256*

Israel has chosen to intensify its brutal attacks
against unarmed Palestinian civilians in the Gaza
Strip. Israel has decided to target them in cold blood,
in flagrant violation of international law, including
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
the relevant resolutions on the protection of civilians.
That amounts to a war crime and a crime against
humanity under the Rome Statute, which established
the International Criminal Court.
We have come to the Security Council many times
to ask for immediate action to stop Israeli aggression
against our unarmed people, who are crushed under the
odious Israeli occupation and have been suffering from
forced displacement for more than seventy years.
We have sent hundreds of letters describing
the current brutal Israeli occupation of our people’s
territory. We have sent numerous appeals asking for
implementation of the provisions of international law,
international humanitarian law, human rights law
and the relevant United Nations resolutions. We have
sounded the alarm about the crushing occupation of
an entire people and the various forms of abuse and
oppression to which they are subjected. We have warned
the Council not to turn a blind eye to the disaster in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, and the continuing deterioration in the
conditions there thanks to the racist Israeli practices,
which have increased and escalated with the illegitimate
and provocative decision of the United States regarding
Jerusalem. We have warned the Council about the
ongoing impunity that Israel enjoys. We have asked for
the exceptional immunity that enables Israel to act as if
it were above the law to be removed. We have urged that
Israel be held responsible for its actions and for justice
for its innocent victims.
In the past, and specifically over the past two months,
we have not ceased to beg the Council to prevent another
massacre at the hands of Israel, the occupying Power.
We knew that the occupied Palestinian people — our
young people, men, women and elderly — would bear
the burden of such a massacre, carried out deliberately
and indiscriminately. What was the response to all of
those calls? Can it be that the Council did not hear
them or take all those warnings seriously? Can it be
that just one member of the Council can prevent it from
responding to its most elementary responsibility by
blocking three attempts to release press statements?
Those statements asked for just one thing, a transparent
and impartial investigation to determine the facts on

18-1478719/25

S/PV.8256*

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

15/05/2018

the ground. Why is there such disregard for the lives of
innocent Palestinians? How many Palestinians have to
die before the Council takes action?

hours, wielding heavy weaponry. They are in trenches a
kilometre away from the peaceful demonstrations and
they have more weaponry than they need.

If a massacre happened in a Council member’s
country, and in the space of 24 hours 61 people,
including eight children, died and more than 3,000
were injured, what would they do? Would they accept
paralysis in the Security Council? Would they accept
seeing it do nothing in the face of crimes committed
by a cowardly occupying Power that hides in hills a
kilometre from Gaza targeting it with air strikes,
rockets and committing other heinous acts? The
occupiers are armed and target unarmed people in
Gaza. Would the members of the Council accept that
on their own territory? Would they accept the Security
Council remaining silent in the face of a massacre that
continued for more than 24 hours?

Today, yet again and with a heavy heart, our
beloved Gaza Strip is burying more children and young
people who had simply been peacefully demonstrating
to protest the miserable living conditions unfairly
imposed on them by the Israeli occupation, to reject
the humiliation, oppression and servitude they are
subjected to and to call for their rights, including the
right to self-determination and the right of return.
Israel, the occupying Power, killed 61 civilians in just
24 hours, including eight children. Israel injured more
than 2,771 people, many of them severely, in that same
24 hours.

The world has early-warning mechanisms, means
to mediate and resolve conflicts, even accountability
mechanisms. Despite all of that, none of it was applied
in the case of Palestine. Council members can see
what is happening right now on the ground. Why did
all of those Palestinians have to die? Why are they
not enjoying life this morning with their families?
Did they deserve to die? Did those children deserve
to die? Did they deserve to be taken away from their
parents? The international community has passed laws
and encouraged the protection of the rights of every
human being. Why are Palestinians the exception? Why
should we be the exception? Why do those massacres
happen while the Security Council does nothing? Why
are we the exception? Why is the Council paralysed?
Throughout the past six weeks, while we have been
targeted, the Council has been paralysed. Why are we
the exception? When is the Council going to act? How
long is it going to followthis double standard, especially
when it comes to those who want to teach us a lesson?
Why do they have a double standard when they want
to control the Council? It is so terrible that we have to
keep asking it again and again.
Israel has historically tried to deprive us of our
humanity and our natural right to life, and to justify its
crimes by using its own security as a pretext, as if the
occupying Power has a right to enjoy security while it
denies the same right to the people being crushed by its
occupation. They have the right to security but we do
not. Once again, we are the exception. They have the
right to fire live ammunition at us in order to kill more
than 61 unarmed people and injure more than 3,000 in 24
20/25

That brings the number of victims since the
beginning of the Great March of Return on 30 March to
110 martyrs, including no fewer than 12,000 civilians
injured, with at least 250 of them children. Many of
those victims’ injuries are severe because of the Israeli
occupying Power’s barbarous use of live ammunition.
Israel deliberately uses lethal ammunition on Palestinian
civilians, or the kind that delivers the greatest possible
physical injury, leaving victims permanently disabled.
According to reports from international organizations,
many of the victims have suffered severe bone and
tissue injuries. I call on the Council to invite those
organizations — such as Médecins Sans Frontières, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, Human Rights Watch and
B’Tselem — here to listen to them. They can tell the
Council about the kind of weapons that were used,
inflicting lasting, lifelong physical disabilities. Their
limbs are amputated. They are crippled. Those are
barbarous acts that show the Israeli army’s lack of
humanity where civilians are concerned. That is the
real definition of terrorism. A similar situation in any
other country would have caused an uproar. We will not
be the exception. We are the Palestinian people.
Israel targets our children in order to inflict the
cruellest of punishments on us and thereby extinguish
the fire of life within us, because Israel understands
that our children are invaluable. We live for our
children. They represent our best future, the future that
we wish for.
Civilians have the right to peacefully assemble and
demonstrate. That is an enshrined right for everyone.
The insinuations that Palestinians are responsible
18-14787

15/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for their own deaths because they are protesting the
illegitimate occupation are provocative and racist.
In other countries the participation of young people,
women and families in demonstrations is proudly held
up as proof of a vibrant democracy, and it is protected
under the right to freedom of speech and peaceful
demonstration. Half a million people demonstrated in
Washington, D.C., against the use of guns in schools.
Families and schools participated. That is permitted
in other countries, but when Palestinians do the same
thing in Gaza and occupied Palestinian territory, they
are accused of using children as human shields. We
reject that racist narrative, which turns us into people
excluded from humanity.
We have the right to demonstrate with all of
our family members against the occupation and its
arrogance. We have the right to exercise our rights. Our
men, our older people, our women and our children have
that right. It is natural, civilized and accepted in ever
country that is a member of the Council. Why is it not
accepted in ours? Why are we being accused in a racist,
fallacious way for simply exercising the same rights as
anyone else, in spite of living under occupation and in a
much more difficult situation?
Like the rest of humankind, we wish to teach our
children about love of country and about collective
participation in civilized human actions. Why are
such accusations being directed at us? Those activities
are not scorned in other countries. They do not say
that civilians are being used as human shields. We
categorically reject such descriptions of peaceful
Palestinian demonstrations. We also reject the use
of such claims to exonerate Israel, the occupying
Power, of its responsibility in using live ammunition
against Palestinian civilians, and of its responsibility
for deliberately causing their deaths, mutilations
and injuries. Those actions add to the despair of the
Palestinian people and lessen their hopes for justice
and peace.
Our call for international protection of the
Palestinian people goes hand in hand with international
humanitarian law and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, which call for the protection of
civilians in times of armed conflict, including the
protection of children, women and humanitarian
workers, especially journalists. We call for the
implementation of those standards and principles in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including the besieged
and occupied Gaza Strip. No matter what version of

S/PV. 8256*

events Israeli puts forward, the Gaza Strip cannot be
excluded from the implementation of international
standards for the protection of civilians. Ensuring
international protection is now urgent, especially since
Israel, the occupying Power, has violated international
law. It has clearly failed to shoulder its responsibilities
under international law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, to ensure the security and prosperity
of Palestinian civilians under occupation. That
responsibility therefore now falls to the international
community, in accordance with the Geneva Convention
and with the resolutions and commitments of the
Security Council itself.
The document sent by the Secretary-General a
year and a half ago, during the Spanish presidency
of the Council, on the various experiences and forms
of international protection for civilians, should not
remain simply words on paper. The Council should
consider it in depth and should determine how to ensure
international protection for the Palestinian people now
that the occupying Power has failed to shoulder the
responsibility that it bears under international law. That
is why it is now the Council’s responsibility to ensure
international protection for the Palestinian people until
the end of the intolerable occupation of our country and
until Palestinian independence has been achieved.
I should also mention the illegitimate and
provocative decision by the United States Administration
concerning Jerusalem, which flies in the face of
international consensus and violates the relevant
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolutions
478 (1980) and 2334 (2016). That Administration has
chosen to support Israel, which has increased and
exacerbated tensions and sensitivities and led to this
trail of blood. While no one is questioning the sovereign
right of a State to choose the location of its Embassy, if
that right runs counter to international law and Security
Council resolutions, it is no longer a sovereign right. No
country has the right to imperil our territory and place
an Embassy in a territory under occupation. Jerusalem’s
status has been well known to the entire Council since
the adoption of General Assembly resolution 181 (II),
which determined Jerusalem’s special status, and of all
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), as well as the agreements
concluded between us and the occupying Power.
According to those documents, the status of Jerusalem
is to be determined in final status negotiations.

18-1478721/25

S/PV.8256*

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

No one, under the pretext of sovereignty or for any
other reason, has the right to act in flagrant violation of
international law and Security Council resolutions. If
we were talking about transferring the Embassy from
Tel Aviv to Haifa or Ashdod, that would be fine, and
the United States would be free do so. But transferring
the embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem is not up to the
United States. That is an issue of international law and
the international community.
The Trump Administration refuses to listen to what
the world is saying. It refuses to listen to what is stated
in United Nations resolutions, in particular those of the
Security Council, or to what is laid down in international
law and international standards. It refuses to listen. The
United States is a super-Power that should be defending
international law first and foremost. It is a super-Power
that should be defending the resolutions of the Security
Council and of the United Nations before anyone else,
because of its position as a permanent member of the
Council. As a super-Power, it should be the first to
abide by international law, not flout it or close its eyes
to the situation on the ground. The whole world can see
the provocation. The United States should review its
position and its flagrant violation of international law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Furthermore, the United States Administration
did not just ignore the specificity and sensitivity
around the status of the city and its central role in
peace; it also decided to transfer the embassy from Tel
Aviv to Jerusalem while the Palestinian people were
commemorating the seventieth anniversary of the
Nakba, their day of catastrophe. It is another provocative
decision by the United States Administration that
completely ignores the feelings and legitimate rights
of Palestinians and the political concerns and religious
sentiments of Christians and Muslims all over the
world. It is a provocation for millions of Palestinians,
Muslims and Christians. The United States took that
decision in complete disregard of everyone, including
the Palestinian people.
As a super-Power, the United States should have
put pressure on Israel to end its violations against the
Palestinian people, compel it to respect international
law and create an environment conducive to breaking
the political deadlock and achieving peace, security,
prosperity and dignity for everyone. Regrettably,
it decided to do the opposite. It decided to bolster
Israel’s intransigence and impunity and protect it
from international condemnation, accountability
22/25

15/05/2018

and any measure that might rectify a situation that is
unfair to Palestinians and to their right to freedom and
independence. The most recent decision taken with
regard to Jerusalem has inspired the right-wing Israeli
Government to implement its illegitimate policies and
practices, including the murder of innocent civilians
in broad daylight, without fear of consequences, since
Israel has always enjoyed impunity. That has fuelled
its aspirations to gain forcible control over Palestinian
territory, including through the illegitimate and illegal
annexation of East Jerusalem.
We must acknowledge that the absence of
accountability and the protection of Israel from sanctions
has enabled Israel to go ever further in its settlement
building and racist policies towards the Palestinian
people. It has a green light permitting it to commit
increasingly serious crimes against innocent people,
kill larger numbers of people, imprison Palestinians,
confiscate greater stretches of land, destroy more
houses and displace more people. That has provoked
the current developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. That impunity has
enabled Israel to continue its illegitimate and inhumane
blockade of the Gaza Strip for more than 10 years. The
blockade has witnessed three devastating wars, during
which Israel has targeted infrastructure on the Gaza
Strip, exacerbating the situation for approximately
2 million Palestinians. Israel has decided to impose
collective punishment, which constitutes a war crime.
Israel deprives Palestinians of protection. Urgent
action is therefore required to rectify this very difficult
humanitarian situation.
We have repeatedly called on the Council to lift the
illegitimate Israeli blockade of Gaza and provide the
humanitarian assistance we need to ease our people’s
suffering. Regrettably, that request has not been granted
so far. We are making that request again today. Here
we would like to recall resolution 1860 (2009) and the
Council’s demands on this issue. We ask that serious
measures be taken to exert pressure on the occupying
Power to end the blockade and open crossing points to
enable the free movement of people and goods, in line
with international humanitarian law. We also call for
the support of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which,
in spite of the financial crisis imposed on it, continues
to implement its mandate and provide assistance to
refugees. It also continues to play an important role in
18-14787

15/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

easing the suffering of the people of the Gaza Strip and
meeting their most urgent needs.
We call on the Security Council to act without
delay to find an immediate solution to this sensitive
issue, which threatens international peace and
security. The Council must take immediate action
to stop the massacre of our people, especially in
Gaza. It cannot remain silent. It must demand that
its resolutions be respected and it should guarantee
their implementation. We call on all countries to work
collectively or individually on the issue, in line with
their legal commitments and in support of international
law. That should include condemning the illegitimate
and brutal attitude of Israel to the Palestinian people
under occupation. Israeli settlements in our territories,
including in East Jerusalem, should not be recognized.
Any attempts by countries to support that illegal
situation should be denounced. Measures should be
taken to ensure accountability and justice. We must also
take urgent action to save the lives of innocent civilians
and prevent the situation from deteriorating in order to
have a chance, however small, to achieve a just peace.
That is why international protection must be provided
to the Palestinian people in line with international
humanitarian law.
Seventy years after the tragedy, injustice and
shock of the Nakba, the Palestinian people, along with
the international community and the members of the
Security Council, continue to believe that international
law is the way to justice, given that it is the surest path
towards peace. States should translate words into action.
It is time for serious and immediate action to be taken to
ensure the primacy of international law, resume efforts
to put an end to the Israeli occupation and achieve a
just and lasting peace so that the Palestinian people can
live in dignity and peace and exercise their inalienable
rights, including the right to self-determination and
freedom in an independent Palestinian State and the
right of return. Our people have waited a long time. We
have suffered for a long time. We can wait no longer for
an end to this grave injustice. I request that the Council
not dash our hopes and aspirations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): I will begin today by sharing
the facts. For the past month, Israel has faced violent
riots at the security fence with the Gaza Strip. They
were not demonstrations or protests. They were violent

S/PV. 8256*

riots. Rioters have thrown Molotov cocktails, planted
explosive devices and rolled burning tires. They
have sent flaming materials over the fence, igniting
widespread fires on Israel’s southern agricultural lands.
They have repeatedly attempted to forcibly breach the
fence and infiltrate Israeli territory, with the explicit
goal of killing Israelis.
Hamas, the internationally recognized terrorist
organization, has taken the people of Gaza hostage.
This past Friday, a Hamas-led mob set fire to the
Kerem Shalom border-crossing terminal and destroyed
large parts of it. That crossing is a major entry point
for outside goods to enter Gaza. The damage set gas
lines and electricity infrastructure on fire and will cost
millions of dollars to repair. But Hamas does not care.
It values destruction over prosperity and death over
peace. Israel has known that for a long time. We were
reminded of it just last week, when the Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) found and destroyed the ninth Hamas
terror tunnel since last October. The tunnel started in
Gaza, running alongside the Erez pedestrian crossing
and ending just metres from a village inside Israel. Its
goal was terror — killing and kidnapping Jews in the
surrounding Israeli towns.
Hamas lives on death, but not just the death of
Israeli civilians. As we have reported time and again,
Hamas is guilty of exploiting the innocent people of
Gaza as human shields. Hamas terrorists hide behind
innocent young children and place them directly in
the line of fire. The facts and the footage do not lie.
Hamas is committing grave violations of international
law. Its terrorists continue to hide behind innocent
children to ensure its own survival, while its leaders
incite the people of Gaza to violence. Yahya al-Sinwar,
the head of Hamas in Gaza, recently said to a group of
Palestinian youth:
“We favor assassination over natural death and are
always willing to sacrifice our lives”.
A few days ago, a Hamas member who was captured
after attempting to cross into Israel provided critical
insight into Hamas’s plot. I will reveal some of what we
have learned.
First, Hamas is instructing its activists to cut the
fence and steal Israel’s security cameras in order to
sabotage and topple the fence and disrupt IDF activity.
Secondly, Hamas wants the riots that it is instigating to
be seen in the international media as a popular uprising,
not as a violent action led by its militants. And thirdly,

18-1478723/25

S/PV.8256*

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and most importantly, Hamas terrorists are hiding
behind civilians during the riots. However, if the fence
is breached, heavily armed Hamas terrorists will enter
Israeli territory under cover of the mob to carry out
attacks on Israeli civilians. Those are the facts.
When it comes to the mob rushing to the fence,
too many in the international community never miss
an opportunity to legitimize the Palestinian voice of
violence. But when it comes to the safety of the Israeli
public, too often the world is silent. This is one of the
leadership’s most cherished tactics. Their cycle of death
works as follows: they incite people to violence; they
place as many civilians as possible, including women
and children, in the line of fire so as to maximize
civilian casualties; they blame Israel; and then they
come here to complain to the United Nations. That is
the deadly game the Palestinians play, and they play it
at the expense of innocent children.
Once again, the Palestinian leadership is using
every ounce of its energy to attack us and to attempt to
destroy us. One of the players in this game was sitting
right across the room: the Palestinian representative,
who left the Chamber, like Abbas, who came here,
spoke and left; it is a routine. Mr. Mansour and his
friends are guilty of placing young Palestinian children
in harm’s way. They are killing their own people; they
are guilty of exploiting them for their disgraceful
public-relations game.
We predicted this situation many months ago,
because the Palestinians always employ the same
strategy of manipulation. Every time the Palestinians
have an opportunity to change the course of history — to
partner with us on the path of peace — they always
choose violence. They never fail to miss that golden
opportunity to build a better future for their children
and for ours.
But the Palestinian leaders are not the only
participants in this scheme. Some in the international
community are playing into their hands. They are
falling into the trap, giving the Palestinians the
attention they seek and legitimizing Palestinian lies
and violence. Israel has witnessed this pattern over and
over again, since our earliest days. Even in 1947, we
watched the Palestinians miss their first opportunity.
The United Nations had proposed the creation of both
a Jewish State and an Arab State in the land of Israel.
The Jews were given just a portion of our historical
homeland, yet we accepted it. But the Arabs said no.
24/25

15/05/2018

The Palestinians could not bear the thought of sharing
what had been our land to begin with, so they launched
a war against us.
Israel ultimately won that battle, but the Palestinians
continued with their lies and relentless violence, and
too many in the international community let them
get away with it. They falsely equated Zionism with
racism. They saluted the Palestinian cause as Israelis
were murdered, kidnapped and forgotten. They sided
with Palestinian killers, often with no questions asked.
Fast-forward to 2005; you forgot about this. Israel
disengaged from Gaza. We left completely. No Jewish
communities — you call them settlements — or
occupation. We took the entire Jewish community out
of Gaza. We even took out the people who had been
buried in Gaza. No IDF, no checkpoints, no civilians,
nothing; we left. Prime Minister Sharon decided to
try. We left Gaza in 2005. Gaza could have become
a Palestinian success story, maybe the Singapore of
the Middle East. It had the potential, but it could not
reach it because Hamas took over in 2006. Instead of
investing in education, infrastructure and the economy,
Hamas lives and breathes death and destruction. Hamas
spends all of its energy and resources terrorizing Israel
and exploits the population of Gaza to meet that end.
Let me be very clear today: when the Palestinians
say “days of rage”, they mean “days of terrorism”.
When the Palestinians say “right of return”, they mean
“destruction of Israel”. And when the Palestinians say
“peaceful protest”, they mean “incitement and violence”.
The common denominator throughout our history
has been the following: the international community,
with a few brave exceptions, does nothing to stop the
Palestinians from trying to terrorize Israel on the
world stage. But the fact is that whoever supports
the Palestinian ploy becomes a player in the cycle of
death. Only by breaking this cycle of orchestrated
riots, planned casualties and pleas for United Nations
sympathy will justice truly be served.
Israel is marking two major milestones: we are
celebrating 70 years since our people re-established our
sovereignty and independence by founding the State
of Israel in the land of Israel, and we are welcoming
with gratitude President Trump’s decision to move the
United States embassy to Jerusalem, our ancient and
eternal capital. This was a step towards peace, because
in any peace agreement Jerusalem will be Israel’s
capital. Everyone who claims that the decision to move
18-14787

15/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the United States embassy is a reason or a justification
for Palestinian violence should take another look at
history. This is an excuse, not a reason for violence
against Israel.
If this body truly seeks to uphold security, justice
and truth, then it will stop right here and now, condemn
this terror and reaffirm Israel’s right to defend itself.
The Security Council must set the standard of
behaviour. It must tell Hamas that violence is not
the answer. Members must ask themselves what they

S/PV. 8256*

would do — what each one would do — if a violent
mob of tens of thousands was threatening to cross their
sovereign borders to attack their people? What would
they do if their people were faced with terror attacks
day in and day out? The Council must not give in to
the cycle of death that the Palestinians have created; it
must call out lies when it sees them, condemn Hamas’s
violence and place itself on the side of truth and the
right side of history.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

18-1478725/25
