S/2021/300

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 March 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 25 March 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I am writing pursuant to paragraph 64 of Security Council resolution 2531
(2020), by which the Council requested me to develop a long-term road map to assess
the continued challenges to peace and security in Mali, envisaging a phased,
coordinated and deliberate transition of the security responsibilities of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
without jeopardizing the stability of Mali and the region, an d with a view to opening
the way for a possible exit strategy for the Mission (see annex). As requested by the
Council, the road map was developed in coordination with the United Nations country
team and in consultation with relevant partners, including th e Government of Mali
and the Instance de Coordination au Mali.
The road map is organized around two phases: the first focuses on the key
objectives to be achieved during the current political transition in Mali, which is
expected to culminate in national elections; the second includes an outline of the
major remaining challenges to be addressed following the completion of the political
transition period, to allow MINUSMA to begin planning for a transition of security
responsibilities and the progressive transfer of mandated responsibilities to the
country team and national stakeholders, on the basis of a capacity mapping. At
present, a third phase is also envisaged for the road map, which will be developed at
a later stage and will consist of an exit strategy for the Mission that envisages a phased
and coordinated transition of residual security responsibilities to national authorities.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

21-03784 (E)

310321

*2103784*

S/2021/300

Annex
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali: road map for mandate implementation

I. Background and approach
1.
Following the coup d’état in Mali in August 2020, the Security Council, in its
15 October 2020 presidential statement, 1 requested the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to support
the political transition in Mali and the holding of inclusive, free, fair and credible
elections. Taking into account the changed circumstances, the Mission has adopted a
phased approach for the development of the road map. As I indicated in my letter to
the Security Council dated 23 December 2020, 2 the first phase of the road map focuses
on key objectives to be achieved during the political transition, which is expected to
culminate in national elections. The second phase includes an outline of the major
remaining challenges to be addressed following the completion of the political
transition period, to allow MINUSMA to begin planning for a transition of security
responsibilities and the progressive transfer of mandated responsibilities to the United
Nations country team and national stakeholders, on the basis of a capacity mapping.
The third phase will be developed at a later stage and will consist of an exit strategy
for the Mission that envisages a phased and coordinated transition of residual security
responsibilities to national authorities.

II. Guiding principles
2.
In the implementation of its mandate, the Mission and its key partners will seek
increased leadership and national ownership of the peace process by the Malian
parties and other key stakeholders, as well as increased engagement of the
Government and relevant local and community representative s. In keeping with the
Action for Peacekeeping framework, specific focus shall be placed on facilitating
inclusive political solutions, enhancing the protection and participation of women and
improving the performance and safety and security of peacekeeper s, while leveraging
partnerships. A conditions-based approach and the principle of non-substitution will
guide the provision of operational and logistics support by the Mission and the
country team to the national authorities, the Malian Defence and Securi ty Forces and
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, including through the application
of the human rights due diligence policy, as applicable.

III. Phase I: political transition
3.
The political situation remains fraught as a result of cohesion challenges and a
measure of distrust between the country’s military leadership and the civilian political
class. That situation is illustrated by growing public criticism over the perceived lack
of inclusivity of the National Transition Council, th e Parliament of the transition.
Women’s representation remains significantly under the minimum legal quota of
30 per cent. The pace of the political transition has been slow, indicating that there
may be delays in the implementation of the Government’s transition plan. The overall
political situation is fragile and the Mission’s good offices role will remain paramount
to facilitating continued progress in the political and peace processes.
__________________
1
2

2/12

S/PRST/2020/10.
S/2020/1282.
21-03784

S/2021/300

4.
Renewed emphasis will be put on the implementation of the Agreeme nt on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, building on the 18 December 2020 national road map for
its implementation. On several occasions, the country’s leadership has confirmed its
adherence to the Agreement and its commitment to advancing its implementatio n. For
the first time since the signing in 2015 of the Agreement, the signatory movements
are represented in the Government and women are formally included in the
Agreement Monitoring Committee. This presents an opportunity for enhanced
collaboration and pragmatic solutions to advance the implementation of the
Agreement in the interests of the country.
5.
On 22 February, the National Transition Council adopted the Government’s
action plan for the transition period, which outlines a broad agenda of priority actions.
Noting the Government’s priorities as articulated in its road map and the action plan,
MINUSMA and the country team have established an integrated approach to develop
and implement focused, rapid actions in support of the core requirements for the
political transition. This approach has developed an end state for 2022, with
corresponding benchmarks and sectoral priorities, as outlined below.

IV. Phase I end state and benchmarks
6.
By the end of the nationally determined period for political tr ansition,
constitutional order will have been restored, with a peaceful transfer of national
governing authority to democratically elected authorities, in which women’s
representation and participation are increased. The national elections will be seen by
the general public to have been credible overall, and the outcome broadly respected.
Security will have been maintained, with advances in some areas resulting from
increased trust between the parties, local peace initiatives, a more robust response by
the national security and defence forces and the dismantlement of some militias in
central Mali. The presence of the Malian State in northern and central Mali will not
have decreased and will have advanced in population centres, permitting the
coordinated deployment of State authorities. The Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali will remain the accepted framework for longer-term peace
consolidation in Mali by all parties, including the new national Government, with its
road map renewed and under active implementation.

Benchmarks
7.
Benchmark A. Constitutional review is completed in accordance with the
outcome of the national inclusive dialogue and reforms envisioned under the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, also taking into account the
recommendations of the 2018 review commission.
8.
Benchmark B. Electoral reforms have been completed in such a way that
credible national elections, as prescribed by the Transition Charter of Mali and in line
with regional and international standards, are held in 2022, including in the newly
created regions of Ménaka and Taoudenni, and result in a new, democratically elected
President and Parliament, with increased participation and representation of women.
9.
Benchmark C. The Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali will remain
valid and has increased confidence among its signatories, with its revised road map
under active implementation, leading to its renewed endorsement by the newly
elected Government in 2022.
10. Benchmark D. All integrated elements that had completed the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process have been redeployed to
21-03784

3/12

S/2021/300

northern Mali, on the basis of agreements between the signatory parties on the
composition of the reconstituted units of the Malian Defence and Security Forces,
and are engaged in concrete security roles. In addition, 2,000 members of the
signatory armed groups have been vetted, trained and integrated into the Malian
Defence and Security Forces.
11. Benchmark E. The restoration and extension of State civilian authority has
been advanced sustainably in key population centres (Mopti, Sevare, Gao, Ansongo,
Timbuktu, Taoudenni, Kidal and Ménaka) with the deployment of civil administrators
(prefets) and judicial authorities (magistrates), in coordination with and supported by
deployments to those regions of the Malian Defence and Security Forces.
12. Benchmark F. The legal framework for the regional territorial police has been
completed and recruitment has begun, including the integration of a significant
number of former members of the signatory groups.
13. Benchmark G. The operationalization of the Northern Development Zone has
advanced, including through the establishment of the Interregional Advisory Council
and the implementation of pilot projects in each of the five regions in northern Mali,
and reflecting the effective transfer of State deconcentrated technical services to the
subnational level.
14. Benchmark H. Civil society participation in the transition and peace proce sses,
particularly for women and young people, has been broadened and a women’s
observatory has been established.
15. Benchmark I. The fight against impunity for serious crimes that risk
destabilizing the peace process – including terrorism, transnational organized crime,
violations and abuses of international human rights law and violations of international
humanitarian law – has been advanced, by bringing to justice the individuals accused
and by holding the corresponding trials.

V. Phase I priorities
A.

Political transition, peace process and elections
16. The national action plan endorsed by the National Transition Council outlines a
broad and ambitious agenda of six priority areas, with 275 specific actions proposed
across 23 objectives. Considering the fragile and fragmented political situation and
the need for inclusive and nationally owned political solutions, the prioritization of
core tasks will be important within that broader agenda. With 12 months remaining
in the political transition, many of the objectives proposed may not be achievable. In
that regard, the Mission’s continued good offices will be essential to enable a more
focused, inclusive and prioritized transition and to mitigate disagreements.
17. MINUSMA should maintain its focus on the following priority political
objectives in supporting accelerated implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, the Mission’s primary strategic objective, with particular
attention to the national road map of 18 December 2020, which includes support to
institutional reforms:
(a) Continued support to the implementation of the Agreement by the
signatory parties will require progress in key political, defence and security
provisions of the Agreement. The deployment and operationa lization of the
reconstituted units to northern Mali, the establishment of the territorial police and the
implementation of projects for the Northern Development Zone remain critical
priorities in the coming months. The Mission should use its good offices to help

4/12

21-03784

S/2021/300

bridge the differences among the signatories, which will need to be addressed to
ensure implementation in these areas;
(b) Electoral reforms are needed to ensure credible elections, most notably the
establishment of a credible electoral management structure, independent from the
Government, and awareness-raising on the eligibility of political parties to present
candidates in local or national elections, as well as updates to the voter list. The
completion of the territorial restructuring, including in the newly operationalized
regions as well as electoral constituencies, will require a consensus approach based
on inclusive, country-wide consultations;
(c) The basic documents necessary for the revision of the Constitution, as per
the findings of the 2018 review commission and the 2019 national dialogue, are
available to support progress on reforms. MINUSMA should focus on using its good
offices and technical support on helping the transitional authorities deliver on its
remaining timeline and ensuring consensus across the political arena;
(d) A key challenge in ensuring successful reforms and credible elections will
continue to be advancing inclusivity, public communication, transparency and social
dialogue for a consultative transition process. Inclusive solutions will require the
increased participation of civil society, women and young people into the political
and institutional reform processes, and progress towards the minimum 30 per cent
quota target for women’s representation. Focus will also be put on the monitoring of
civic and democratic space ahead of elections to ensure a conducive environment for
open debates and to build the population’s trust in the electoral process.

B.

Protection, security support and extension of State authority
18. The overall security situation in Mali will remain complex and could deteriorate
further. In northern Mali, terrorist activity has increased in the Gao and Ménaka
regions, and the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad is asserting its control and
providing security in the wider areas of the Timbuktu and Kidal regions, against a
backdrop of limited State presence and the fracturing of the coalition with Plateforme.
Terrorist groups are also exploiting the institutional void to expand their influence
southward. The control of major trafficking routes remains the main incentive to take
up arms. Economic drivers of conflict remain difficult to address because the motives
of the groups are concealed by idealistic, political or religious rheto ric.
19. In central Mali, violence across community lines continues to claim lives and is
exploited by extremist groups, with the Bandiagara, Bankass and Koro cercles most
affected. Terrorist groups have proliferated and asserted their presence in several
areas in the centre. The areas affected have reported lower levels of violence and
intercommunity clashes, as the infiltrated communities are mostly homogenous. The
threat of improvised explosive devices remains high in the centre and in particular
along the Kona-Gao axis, and the presence of terrorist groups restricts the freedom of
movement for the national defence and security forces and international forces, who
remain the main targets of improvised explosive device attacks, with the civilian
population also suffering significant casualties. An effective response by the Mission
in central Mali will require clarity of vision by the transitional government on how to
address those challenges in this most vulnerable part of the country, as well as close
coordination with all national, regional and international stakeholders.
20. Terrorism and asymmetric threats, as well as intercommunal violence, will have
a negative impact on nationally led political processes and the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, as well as regional and local
reconciliation initiatives. Those security challenges also continue to pose a significant
threat to MINUSMA personnel, initiatives and operations in support of the protection

21-03784

5/12

S/2021/300

of civilians, and to the freedom of movement of national and international
stakeholders.
21. In that regard, the full operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel remains a necessary and key step in stabilizing the security situation in
central and northern Mali and therefore paving the way for the return and extension
of State authority across those areas, including through its defence and security forces
as well as its civilian administrative services. Pending a sustainable solution regarding
the support to the Joint Force, as proposed by the Secretary-General in his 2017 report
(S/2017/811), MINUSMA should continue to provide logistical support to the Joint
Force, in line with Security Council resolution 2531 (2020).
22.

The following priority objectives should be pursued:

(a) In northern Mali, MINUSMA should continue to protect key population
centres, create space for the peace process to unfold and prepare the ground for and
facilitate the return of State authority. The completion of the accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, the integration of former combatants of the
signatory movements into the Malian Defence and Security Forces, and the
redeployment of reconstituted units to northern Mali, including through operational,
logistical and transportation support, will be key areas of focus for the Mission, as
well as the establishment of the territorial police;
(b) MINUSMA, together with the country team, should support the
establishment of a conducive security environment for the holding of credible
elections in northern and central Mali, the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons and the provision of basic social services to the population;
(c) MINUSMA should continue to support the Malian authorities in
articulating the vision and implementation of a politically led stabilization strategy
for the centre. Added focus will be put on supporting the national and local conflict
response and reconciliation efforts in the centre. That approach will also entail more
frequent coordinated and integrated operations in support of physical protection and
to ensure humanitarian access, in coordination as relevant with t he country team, and
increased use of early warning and rapid response mechanisms. Emphasis on support
to the Cadre politique pour la gestion de la crise du centre and the regional Cadres de
concertation in the centre will remain a priority for conflict pr evention and
reconciliation processes;
(d) MINUSMA should continue to support the implementation of the
nationally led community rehabilitation programme aimed at dismantling self defence groups in the centre. Moreover, the Mission will continue to advanc e
community violence reduction programming to prevent the recruitment of young
people into armed groups, build community resilience and mitigate local violence.
Those efforts will serve to reduce the influence and impact of armed groups in the
centre with political and reconciliation processes;
(e) In areas of limited State presence, MINUSMA should continue to take
active steps to anticipate, deter and effectively respond to threats to the civilian
population, notably in the north and centre of Mali, through a comprehensive and
integrated approach, while also mitigating the risk to civilians before, during and after
any military or police operation. To that end, the Mission will continue to implement
its adaptation plan, with a view to integrating all mission components and increasing
its protected mobility, agility and flexibility. The Mission should also support the
redeployment of the national army in the centre and the development of community
policing capacities in national security and police forces.

6/12

21-03784

S/2021/300

C.

Rule of law, human rights and the fight against impunity
23. Pervasive impunity related to serious human rights violations and abuses,
corruption, terrorism and transnational organized crime remains a major concern in
Mali. The role of MINUSMA in promoting and protecting human rights, the rule of
law and the fight against impunity will remain vital. The criminal justice system of
Mali remains ill-equipped to deal with the complexity and high volume of crimes,
including terrorism trials as well as transnational organized crimes and corruption
cases. In addition, support to military justice may encounter delays and hurdles owing
to its sensitivity and the current legal framework. In 2020, the Truth, Justice and
Reconciliation Commission initiated public hearings to investigate all gross human
rights violations committed in Mali between 1960 and 2013 and their root causes, but
these were delayed owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID -19) pandemic. The
adoption of the national reconciliation charter and the gender-sensitive national
reparations policy is included in the Government’s action plan.
24. Widespread discontent about impunity has fed community grievances against
the State, whether in relation to unchecked human rights abuses by terrorist armed
groups, including sexual and gender-based violence, abuses stemming from
intercommunal violence, or violations by Malian security forces in retaliation for
perceived support for or affiliation with terrorist groups. The promotion and
protection of human rights will remain an essential prevention tool to the efforts of
the United Nations, with MINUSMA investigating allegations and reporting on
human rights violations. Notable attention should be paid to the adoption and
strengthening of mechanisms and initiatives to prevent and address serious crimes,
including human rights violations and abuses, with particular attention given to grave
violations against children and conflict-related sexual violence; and to continuing to
strengthen the capacity of national institutions, civil society and human rights
defenders with regard to promoting and protecting human rights.
25.

Accordingly, the following priority objectives should be pursued:

(a) Support from MINUSMA to promote and protect human rights should
continue to be essential, with prioritized efforts to monitor, document and report on
violations and abuses of human rights and international humanitarian law and to
contribute to efforts to prevent such violations and abuses, including violations by the
Malian Defence and Security Forces;
(b) In parallel, MINUSMA should continue its support to judicial reform,
including criminal law reform, military justice reform, land reform and reform in
favour of a constructive complementarity between formal and tradi tional justice, in
coordination with efforts to deploy and strengthen judicial and prison capacities. It
will also be important to enhance the independence of the judiciary and complete the
separation of the constitutional court from the judiciary system, which was one of the
triggers of the current political crisis;
(c) MINUSMA should also continue to support the Malian transitional justice
mechanism, ensuring that its processes are strengthened and operate in accordance
with human rights standards and other international obligations;
(d) Therefore, the ongoing work on strengthening law enforcement, judicial
and corrections institutions, such as the specialized judicial unit on terrorism and
transnational organized crime, as well as on developing a nation al prosecutorial
strategy for crimes that risk destabilizing the peace process and on updating relevant
codes of conduct for justice actors to prevent and fight corruption will continue to be
priorities during the political transition. MINUSMA should also further assist Malian
parties to follow up on the recommendations of a national platform to promote judicial

21-03784

7/12

S/2021/300

integrity and the adhesion of the International Commission of Enquiry on Mali to the
Global Judicial Integrity Network.

D.

Social protection and basic social services
26. During the transition period, MINUSMA and the country team should, with
reference to the delineation of responsibilities and comparative advantages as set out
in the integrated strategic framework, the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework and the humanitarian response plan, continue to support the
delivery of basic services to vulnerable populations in key regions, in line with the
national priorities set in the Government’s road map for the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali and with the objectives laid out in the strategic framework for
economic recovery and sustainable development (Cadre stratégique pour la relance
économique et le développement durable) for the period 2019–2023.
27. The interventions of the country team and MINUSMA should aim to strengthen
social protection and provide equitable access to quality basic social services, with a
particular focus on vulnerable groups, including women, children and young people.
An equal, inclusive, gender-sensitive and gender-responsive approach will be at the
forefront in the implementation of socioeconomic programmes. Through a
coordinated country team approach, emphasis will be placed on the following three
main objectives:
(a) Support the implementation of the development provisions of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and the national stabilization strategy
for the centre. MINUSMA and the country team should also support the Government’s
efforts for the operationalization of the Northern Development Zone and the
sustainable development fund. Furthermore, initiatives will be taken to enhance
economic generation through agriculture and farming to strengthen economic
resilience;
(b) Strengthen social sector systems at the national and subnational levels for
community resilience and inclusive, gender-sensitive and sustainable socioeconomic
development. Emphasis will be placed on extending the social protection coverage
and services so that essential services are available to all. As such, the country team
should support, among other things, the registration of additional households under
the unified social registry, to support the most vulnerable households;
(c) Provide continued support to strengthen equitable access to quality basic
social services for women and children and other vulnerable groups at risk of being
left behind, based on their specific needs by age and gender. The country team should
support the delivery and enhancement of health care, including immun ization
programmes for children, as well as the provision and improvement of education
programmes, family planning facilities and Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for All
programmes. As part of those initiatives, school feeding programmes for boys and
girls and cash transfer packages to some 100,000 additional vulnerable households
will be carried out.

VI. Roadmap phase II: major remaining challenges to be
addressed following the completion of the political
transition period
28. MINUSMA does not expect progress to be linear during the first phase of
political transition. While progress towards constitutional and electoral reforms is
essential for credible elections, the transitional government is unlikely to complete
8/12

21-03784

S/2021/300

the full reform agenda outlined in the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
notably on territorial restructuring – a politically sensitive process – and security and
defence measures. Political processes and increased restoration of State authorities
are expected to have advanced stabilization prospects in the centre, while asymmetric
and terrorist threats will nevertheless have increased – despite continued national and
international efforts to fight terrorism. Continued terrorist activity will continue to
pose significant challenges to MINUSMA and national authorities.
29. Phase II of the MINUSMA road map should thus focus on identifying and
addressing the major remaining challenges, following the end of the political
transition period, that would affect the Mission’s plans for a phas ed and coordinated
withdrawal of security support to national authorities and the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel, as well as the transfer of non -security responsibilities to the
country team and other national stakeholders according to their capacities.

VII. Phase II challenges
A.

Longer-term governance reform processes
30. The political protests in Mali, which culminated in the coup d’état of August
2020, brought again to the forefront the need for extensive political reforms to tackle
the underlying structural causes for political and social tensions, conflict and violence
in Mali. In the light of the ambitious reform agenda of the transitional government
and the short time frame of the transition, it is unlikely that all institu tional reforms
outlined in the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali will be tackled. Any
newly elected Government will be required to pursue a broad reform agenda and to
take up and implement any outstanding issues.
31. The 18 December road map presents an ambitious series of actions, some of
which may extend beyond the transition period, as the national authorities have stated.
The full, equal, effective and meaningful participation of women in the political
processes in Mali in accordance with national law 2015-052 will remain a challenge
at the national and local levels, although progress is likely to have been achieved at
the level of the Agreement Monitoring Committee.
32. Following key political reforms at the national level, the Malian author ities can
move to enhancing the decentralization of governance, including the full and effective
functioning of the Haut conseil des collectivités, by ensuring representation of
traditional authorities, women and young people in that consultation mechanism . An
effective decentralization process will need to ensure greater representation for and
participation by the northern populations, as envisaged in the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, but should be pursued in coordination with country -wide
popular consultations to ensure that all regions feel adequately represented and to
avoid the creation of new grievances. The effective functioning of national and local
State institutions in terms of human, technical and financial resources will remain a
major cause of concern.
33. For the northern regions, the continued implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and their increased political inclusion will remain a
key issue. To increase northern representation in State bodies, civilian officials of the
signatory armed movements need to be adequately integrated into the public
administration and local public service functions. The signatory armed movements
could also explore different ways of actively participating in politics, be it through
having members of their movements run as independent candidates in elections or by
transforming their movements into political parties. For the effective implementation
of the Agreement, the following reforms will be crucial to help restore the trust of the

21-03784

9/12

S/2021/300

population in State institutions: (a) a regulatory framework to guide fiscal
decentralization, including the transfer of centralized deconcentrated State services
to the local government level (article 16); (b) the operationalization of the N orthern
Development Zone (article 33); (c) the transfer of 30 per cent of national budgetary
income to territorial collectivities (article 14); and (d) the allocation of a percentage
of the revenues from exploitation of natural resources (article 15).

B.

Terrorism and transnational crime
34. On the security front, Mali will continue to face significant security challenges
following the national elections in 2022. The relative political stability that will be
brought about by elected institutions will not translate immediately into improved
security in the central and northern regions of the country.
35. In the northern regions, signatory armed groups, notably the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad, will continue to act as security providers, while terrorist
armed groups’ activities will continue unabated. Asymmetric attacks, including
improvised explosive devices, targeting national and international forces deployed in
the north, will likely dominate the security environment in spite of national and
international efforts to combat terrorism, as it will take more time for the Malian
Defence and Security Forces to strengthen their capacity to plan and conduct effective
operations and hold the ground thereafter. The effectiveness of Malian Defence and
Security Forces actions will also depend to a large extent on: (a) tangible progress in
the implementation of the security and development provisions of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali; (b) reinforcement of the capacity of the criminal
justice chain (police, courts and prisons) in the north and centre as regards arrests,
detention and prosecution of terrorist suspects; and (d) the upholding of human rights.
36. On the issue of dialogue, especially with some terrorist organizations, progress
will be contingent on political will, broad support from across the political spectrum
and the general population and the involvement of the country’s neighbouring
countries and bilateral partners. In addition, the security outlook in the north could
improve if: (a) French forces maintain a sufficient deterrent presence along with the
full deployment of the European Takuba Task Force; (b) effective on -the-ground
European Union Training Mission mentoring support for national units in northern
and central Mali; and (c) a more autonomous and operational Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel.
37. In the centre, the activities of militias and terrorist armed groups will continue
to fuel, aggravate and manipulate pre-existing ethnic and community tensions,
resulting in increasing cycles of intercommunity and intracommunity violence. These
variations in violence along ethnic and community lines will remain a serious
challenge to stability and security, unless and until a comprehensive Government -led
strategy is implemented to address the political, security and development root causes
of the crisis. A noticeable reduction in the level of violence could occur if the
Government were to implement its community rehabilitation programme targeting the
dismantling of militia groups as part of such a larger strategy to address the situation in
the centre. To be sustainable, such a programme would require a strong buy -in from the
Government, the security apparatus, the local population and international partners.
Moreover, efforts should be complemented by community-based initiatives aimed at
preventing the recruitment of young at-risk people and building community resilience.
38. As regards the activities of extremist groups that are likely to persist in the post electoral period, a combination of dialogue, development projects and military action
will be needed. Sustained support for the political dialogue will be critical to maintain

10/12

21-03784

S/2021/300

the political momentum and ensure engagement, public participation and acceptance
of the processes.
39. The issue of transnational organized crime and its interconnections with
extremist groups and local power structures in the north and the centre will demand
concerted and coordinated action from the Government of Mali and regional and
international partners. Moreover, support needs to continue for the implementation of
the Government’s national strategy and action plan for the prevention of
radicalization and violent extremism, including in prison settings.
40. With respect to the extension of State authority, the deployment of
administrative, security, judicial and social services will remain a daunting challenge
for the Government. The role of MINUSMA in supporting the deployment of the
reconstituted Malian Defence and Security Forces units to the north and the extension
of the State apparatus in the centre will largely depend on political will from the
Government and signatory armed groups, as well as the availability of national funds
and financial support from donors. Furthermore, pr ogress in the extension of State
authority will be affected by whether the new Government opts for a linear process
(i.e. from security to local administration to social service delivery) or dynamic one,
involving simultaneous and complementary interventio ns in the areas of security,
governance and provision of basic social services. A dynamic approach to the
extension of State authority, with a strong involvement and coordination of all
concerned stakeholders, including a fully operational Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel, may offer better prospects of sustainable results. It is anticipated that,
for its part, MINUSMA will continue to implement integrated security, reconciliation
and stabilization responses to local conflicts deemed ripe for r esolution, working
closely with the regional reconciliation support groups and local authorities.

C.

Human rights violations, rule of law and impunity
41. In the sphere of human rights and rule of law, outstanding challenges in phase II
will likely include: (a) the political will to tackle impunity, especially accountability
for violations and abuses of human rights; (b) violations of international humanitarian
law, as well as other destabilizing crimes (e.g., terrorism and transnational organ ized
crime); (c) State capacity to challenge the same, including through judicial reform
and reinforcement of its capacity to respect international human rights norms and
standards, in particular with regard to women’s rights; and (d) progress on the fight
against corruption, including in justice and security sectors and on a meaningful
reconciliation process. Access to justice for large parts of the population will remain
a major challenge, in particular for women, owing to traditional gender inequalities
and discriminatory laws.
42. Specifically, in relation to human rights and serious crimes, it is unclear whether
during phase I the transitional government will be in a position to hold perpetrators
of human rights violations to account. Major challenges a lso lie in the difficulty for
justice actors to gain access to the zones where attacks take place and where the
communities in need of justice services live. Moreover, justice actors have difficulty
in deploying to the zones where attacks against peacekeep ers take place and remain
dependent on MINUSMA for access to investigation sites and evidence, including
witnesses and witness protection. The Malian population’s lack of confidence in the
justice system, including for reasons related to alleged corruption and economic and
financial crimes, may constitute another remaining challenge to address.

21-03784

11/12

S/2021/300

D.

Lack of development and limited basic services in northern Mali
43. The following key challenges to development and contributors to the
deteriorating humanitarian situation will persist beyond the political transition period:
(a) food insecurity; (b) access to basic social services, including social protection;
(c) gender-based violence; (d) assistance to internally displaced people, host
communities and refugees towards durable solutions; and (e) adapting to climate
change. Addressing the root causes of conflict will require inclusive and sustainable
socioeconomic development as well as the provision of appropriate responses to
address the needs of vulnerable communities, including young people, women and
children, but will be heavily affected by the political and security context. The
provision of government services, including in relation to education, health or other
public services, including through the physical presence of the different departments
at the community, cercle and regional levels, as well as the creation of peace
dividends, is crucial for the peacebuilding process as it will contribute to building
trust between the national Government and citizens.
44. It will also be essential to strengthen, in an integrated manner, the capacities of
the authorities at the national, regional and local levels to adequately protect the most
vulnerable populations in the country, given the current multidimensiona l poverty rate
of 78 per cent. A prioritization of economic activities that help to consolidate stability,
provide tangible results and enhance income generation will be crucial. Food security
in the country, where 53 per cent of the population resides in rural areas, remains a
priority. To that end, the country team, in line with national government strategic
frameworks, will continue to promote a sustainable, innovative and competitive
agricultural sector and the development of a competitive industry.
45. COVID-19 and other epidemics have slowed down the progress made in the
health sector since 2015, deepening difficulties for people to gain access to health care services. More than 50 per cent of the already limited workforce in health
facilities has been mobilized towards the response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which
has had a damaging effect on other areas of health care. Over 4 million people still
do not have access to an improved water source, and more than 12 million people lack
access to basic sanitation, representing 69 per cent of the population, with rural areas
being the most affected.

VIII. Conclusion and next steps
46. Considering the challenges identified above, the conditions for a phased,
coordinated and deliberate transition of the Mission security responsibilities without
jeopardizing the stability of Mali and the region will not be in place by the end of the
political transition. It would therefore be premature to envisage any drawdown or
transition of security responsibilities from MINUSMA to national defence and
security forces in the period immediately following the elections. Efforts should
rather focus on addressing the challenges, with a view to improving the political and
security conditions required for a gradual withdrawal of MINUSMA security support
forces, with an emphasis on Government-led initiatives and heightened regional
cooperation. The asymmetric threat in the centre will continue to have significant
negative impacts on the ability of the national and international sta keholders to
implement their activities. Given the resources and capacities of MINUSMA and the
increased threat environment, a reassessment of the roles and responsibilities of
national, regional and international security stakeholders, as well as a capaci ty
mapping of the country team, will be imperative before embarking on the
development of an exit strategy.

12/12

21-03784
