United Nations

332nd

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MElTING
(CLOSING MBETIN6)

Monday, 5 NtOvemb.,r 1951, at!J PJR,.

FIFTH SESSION

Palais de Ch,ailfot, Paris

OlJicial Records

CONTENTS
Page

Final meeting of the fifth session

.

747

Examination of credentials

747

Question of the representation of China in the United :.'Jations

747

Closing of the fifth session of the General Assembly

749

P'Yosident: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEzAM (Iran).

Final meeting of the fifth session
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): As
you know, the General Assembly has been. convened in
plenary meeting for the purpose of closmg the fifth
session.
2. On behalf of the President of the Assembly, the
Secretary-General addressed to ~he heads of ~e1~ga­
tions accredited to the fifth seSSIOn a commUnICatIOn,
dated 11 October 1951, in which he asked for their
opinion on the recommendations prepared by the Secretary-General and myself with regard to the place and
date of the closing meeting of the present session.
3. Thirty-six Member States replied to that communication, and all have agreed that the meeting should
be held in Paris.

Question of the repres~ntation of China in the
Unlted Nations
6. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): One
of the items on the agenda of the fifth session on which
the General Assembly has not yet reached a decision is
the report of the Special Committee on the representation of China.
7. After the committee's last meeting, on 16 October
1951, its chairman informed me of the committee~5
decision. The committee's report to the General Assembly has been issued in document A/1923. As the 'committee has made no recommendation to the General
Assembly, I propose that the Assembly should merely
take note of the report.
S. I call upon the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics to speak on this subject.

Examination of credentials
4. The PRESIDENT (translated. from French):
After consulting each of the members of the committee the Chairman of the Credentials Committee has
ini~rmed me that the governments which had not
transmitted credentials {or their representatives by the
time the last report of the Credentials Committee was
issued have since forwarded those credentials to the
Secretary-General. Consequently, all the representatives
accredited to the fifth session now have the necessary
credentials. The letter from the Chairman of the Credentials Committee is reproduced in document A/1936.
5. As this matter does not call for any other decision
by the General Assembly, I propose that the Assembly
should take note of the report of the Chairman of the
Credentials Committee.
It was so decided.

9. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republies) (translated from Russian): The importance of
the question of the representation of China in the
United Nations is well known. Consideration of this
question has been inadmissibly delayed, and the Special
Committee on the representation of China, established
at the beginning of the fifth session of the General
Assembly [resolution 490 (V)], has made no concrete
recommendations. One cannot but express surprise at
the fact that, by the end of the fifth session of the General Assembly, which incidentally has been an excessively long one, the committee has not found it possible
to submit recommendations on such an important
international problem.
10. In considering this question, it is essential to bear
in mind that it is high time to put an end to the unjust
attitude adopted by the United Nations towards the
great Chinese people" an attitude which is the result of

747

A/PV.332·

748

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

hostile manreuvres on the part of certain States towards
China and the Chinese people. The Chinese nation, 475
:mmion strong, must have its lawful representatives in
the United Nations, and for such representation it has
every legal justification.
11. The question, as worded by the committee, is
being treated at today's meeting as if it were to be
regarded as already dispr:>sed of. However, representatives will be well aware that the problem cannot be
disposed of until the legal representatives of the
Chinese people, the representatives of the only lawful
government in China-the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China-participate
here in the work of the United Nations, of the General
Assembly and of other Unit,ed Nations bodies.
12. For this reason the delegation of the Soviet Union
is submitting a proposal that the question should be
referred to the sixth session of the General Assembly
. for consideration.
13. In view of the short time available for discussing
the substance of the problem at today's meeting> and in
view of its international importance, the deiegation of
the Soviet Un10n submits the following draft resolution:
uW'hereas the Special Committee on the representation of China in the United Nations has not
adopted any recommendations regarding the representation of l..nina in the United Natiofis,
uThe General Assembly
uResolves to refer consideration of the question of
the representation of China in the United Nations to
the sixth session of the General Assembly."
14. In submitting this draft resolution, the USSR
delegation hopes that those delegations wh~ch cherish
international justice and the imple:"Hentation of the
elementary principles of international law, those which
desire to streng'~hen the United Nations and not to
weaken it, and those which genuinely desire. international peace and friendship, will support this proposal, so that the sixth session of the General
A5sembiy may immediCl:tely consider the question of the
representation of China in the United Nations.
15. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
You have heard the purport of the: USSR representative's proposal. I do not have the text, but the meaning
of the proposal is clear enough, and we can therefore
discuss it.
16. Mr. TSIANG (China): The question raised by
the repres~ntative of the Soviet Union has been raised
here a number of times. There is nothing new in what
he said to us a moment ago. The Chinese communist
regime is the result of thirtj years of intrigue, infiltration and intervention by international communism.
There is nothing Chinese about this communist regime;
it is not Chinese in origin; it is not Chinese in character; and certainly, most important of all, it is not
Chinese in its purpose. If the Soviet Union finds it
necessary to add more "Votes to the Soviet bloc, it would
be more in conformity with the facts if the UIDted
Nations 'wer~ to admit the Republic of Georgia or the
Republic of l{azakhstan. The purpose of his remarks
would be more hqnest if that had been his motion.

17. This great Organization of ours was established
first of all to promote the cause of world pee-,ce. The
proposal made by the representative of the Soviet
Union is calculated not to promote peace but to defeat
the purpose of peace. The regime whose admission here
he proposes hHS bee!' pronounced summarily by the
Assembly to be aggressive. The Uilited NaHons was
founded also to protect human rights. The present
regime in China, like all communist regimes, ha& no
regard for human rights. In regard to that part of this
problem, I shall have more to say when we take up the
general debate.
18. The proposal of the Soviet Union is not in conformity with the purposes of the United Nations. If
c:i.rried, it will only serve to defeat the great purposes
ror which we have come to meet in Paris.
19. Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): The General
Assembly has before it a ':"~port of the Special Committee on the representation of China. It is a unique
committee and its report is unique among all those
which have ever been submitted to the United Nations.
The committee, as the repo.t't points out, and as many
of you may remember, although it was established on 19
September 1950 [277th plent-.wy meeting], waited three
months before meeting on 15 December, knowing very
well that the main part of the Assembly was going to
adjourn. After that meeting, which was very brief and
which did not contribute anything new towards the
solution of the problem, the committee adjourned practically sine die, because it m~t again only nine months
afterwards to bring before us a report which did not
solve anything. The committee did not study anything
and it did not submit any proposals. The committee was
appointed for the purpose of studying the problem of
the representation of China.
20. Reading the history of· the committee, one must
admit that the majority of the committee did everything in mJer that no serious study of this problem,
which has so greatly disturbed the activities of the
United Nations in the past year, should ever be undertaken. The committee did this in the face of its obvious
duty. It refused to solve the problem which was so
urgent and so essential for the work of thi~ Organi?rl ~
tion. China is still not represented in this Organizatio~Jl
and, although during the past year we have been involved in many problems concerning Asia and the Far
East, the most important nation in the Far East could
not present its opinion and could not speak for the
475 million of its citizens.

21. It would seem that the committee of seven appointed over a year ago has had enough time to take up
the question. Therefore to take note of such a report is
a most unheard-of procedure. What does it mean when
it says that we should take note of the fact that the
matter is unsolved although the General Assembly has
entrusted the matter to a group of seven people, of
seven States, with the request that the matter should
be studied and proposals brought forward? Since the
matter has not been settled, then the fifth session of the
General Assembly must now try to transfer the matter
to the sixth session of the General Assembly and to
recommend that a most serious study should be made
of the problem. It is imIlossible to leave the question
suspended in air because neither the Assembly nor the

332n,d meeting-5 November 1951
committee have gone into the substance of the matter
and therefore this chapter cannot be closed. The committee became a convenient excuse and escape whenever
the question was raised before other organs of the
United Nations. When the question of the representation of China was raised in &.~Y other organ l many members suddenly recalled the e,dstence of the committee
of the General Assembly and advised or recommended
that the organs should wait nntil recommendations had
been submitted. Now we havt.' the recommendation and
it states clearly that the committee has been unable to
make any recommendation.
2;2. The gentleman who spol.<:e before me and who
t.laims to represent China, although he represents a
bankrupt group which has nothing to say in China,
us(~d slander on this rostrum to continue ,his propaganda
her~, to upset international relations and to make any
settlement of the problem d.\fficult. It is time that the
Gem'ral Assembly, instead 11f permitting those who
have been expelled by the Clinese people to continue
their propaganda, of hatred and war, should undertake
a serious i3tudy of the matkr because, as I said, the
matter deser\'es the most s~ious eonsideration. A solution of this problem and the appointment of a proper
renresentative oil Chin~ here, the introduction of those
who really represent China to their rightful place, will
help the Assembly to solve many important ·questions.
My ddegation therefore supports the proposal submitted by the representative of the USSR and calls
upon this Assembly to recommend to the next session
to undertake a study of this question.
23. Mr. TAUBER (Czechoslovakia) (translated from
French): The Czechoslovak delegation has always, in
the various organs of the United Nations, supported
all proposals for the admission of the only legitimate
government of China to membership of the Organization. That is why it cannot accept the conclusions set
forth in the report of the Special Committee on the
representation of China.
24. The Czechoslovak delegation supports the USSR
delegation's proposal unreserv.edly.
25. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Since there are no more speakers, the discussion on
this proposal is closed. M-r. Cordier will read the draft
resolution now before us.
Mr. Cordier (Executive Assistant to the SecretaryGeneral) read the USSR draft resolution.
26. The PRESIDENT (translated from F",ench) : I
now put to the vote the draft resolution presented by
the delegation of the Soviet Union.
The USSR draft resolution was rejected by 20 votes
to 11, with 11 abstentions.
'
27. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The Soviet Union
delegation reserves the right to revert to this question
at the sixth session of the General Assembly and to
submit an appropriate proposal.
28. Sir Gladwyn JEBB (United Kingdom): My
delegation abstained in the vote on the draft resolution
of th.e USSR because, while we clid not feel that it
mattered very greatly if it were passed, we definitely
feit that it was otiose. Actually, whether we here at
this last m~ting of the fifth session of the General

749

Assembly pass such a resolutionQr not, the fact remains that the matter is, practically speaking, bound
to come up at tomm'row's first meeting of the sixth
session and I suggest therefore that all delegations
should be prepared to explain their views on this admittedly most itnportant problem.
29. The PRESIDENT (tra1tslated from French):
Since the draft resolution of the Soviet Union has been
rejected, I retU1.'n to my suggestion, which is simply
that the Assembly shoul! 1 take note of the report.
30. Mr. MALIK (Ur :ion of Soviet Socialist Republies) : I request a vote.
31. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): A
vote on what? On the report submitted by the Special
Committee on the representation of China? But I have
already explained that it seems to me rather difficult
to put to the vote a report which contains no recommendation. If, however, I am urged to put to the vote a
report with nothing in it, I am prepared to do so. On
this last day of the fifth session, I am more than ever
disposed to give satisfaction to all delegations.
32. If you have no objections, and since the Assembly
canscar.cely approve a report which does not contain
any recommendation, I shall put to the vote my own
suggestion that the Assembly should merely take cnote
of the Special Committee's report.
The Assembly decided to take note of the Special
Committee'sreport by 36 votes to 5, with 2 abstentions.
33. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Since the General Assembly has no other report before
it, th~ consideration of the agenda of the fifth session
is completed.
Closing of the fifth session of the General Assembly .

34. Mr. 1VIUNIZ (Brazil) (translated from French) :
The Brazilian delegation is confident that it expresses
the general feeling of the Assembly in thanking and
congratulating its President, Mr. Entezam, on the remarkable way in which he has conducted the difficult
proceedings of the Assembly's fifth session.
35. Our President has brought to the fulfilment of his
task the results of 'his lengthy experience of international affairs; for a long time, indeed, he took part
in the work vf the League of Nations. He has also displayed a profound knowledge of modern problems, incomparable tact, and perfect courtesy. It is not too
much to say that a g.. eat part of the results we have
obtained are due to his personal contribution and to
t~~ manner in which he has succeeded in facing the
inn roerable difficulties encountered ~n the course of
our work. For that we owe him our gratitude; he
might well be called the good genius of the fifth session
of the General Assembly.
36. Sir Gladwyn JEBB (United Kingdom) : I should
like, if I may, to join with my Brazilian colleague in
offering the President our sincerest congratulations on
his brilliant handling of our business in this Assembly
during the last year. At a time when, as we all know,
the government which I represent has been forced to
ventilate in tb..e United Nations a serious ~ifierence of
opinion with the Iranian Government, I find it a matter .
of particular satisfaction that I 'can place on record its . ~
deep appreciation of Mr. Entezam's personal qualities
j

1
750

I

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

both as President of the Assembly and as representative of Iran. His period of office coincided with a great
crisis in the life of the United Nations, a crisis which
I believe has now been successfully surmounted. Mr.
Entezam himself assumed great responsibilities as a
member of the Good Offices Committee set up by the
Assembly in connexion with Korea [resolution 498
(V) ], and this in itself was a proof of the confidence
which we all place in his abilities aild his judgment.
Perhaps the greatest tribute that call be paid to him is
that in all the period of this session of the Assembly,
and it has been the longest on record, there has been
no breath of criticism as to his great courtesy, his
firmness, his impartiality, and in a word, his statesmCLllship.
37. Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America) : It is
a g.. .eat privilege, historically and currently, to have a
meeting of the fifth session of the General Assembly in
"la belle France". ThIs is th~ second time that we have
been entertained with such cordiality and hospitality
as only the wonderful people of France are capable of
extending. As a member of the delegation from the
United States of America, it is especially signifi-:ant
to us that we are among the people who produced
those great exponp.nts of liberty and equality, some of
whom came to our shores and there established a
connexion between the New World and the Old World
which has persisted through all the years since then.
La Fayette, Rochambeau, De Grasse - what names to
arouse the gratitude of the citizens of the great country
that I come {rom! So we come to you with many
feelings, and we want to say "thank you" for all that
you have done foJ' us already, and for all that we" know
you intend to do fo.r us in the future.
38. This fifth session of the General Assembly has
been a remarkable one. It has accomplished under' a
unique leadership great milestones in history, in the
progress towards the establishment of conditions for
security and peace in the world. I must admit that we
have had many differences among us in making these
milestones of progress, but I believe that, in spite of
the disunity that may have existed at times over the
great controversial questions with which we have' . .0
deal in a General Assembly, I may safely assume Lhat
in one respect the fifth session of the General Assembly
is united, and that is in praise of the leadership that it
has had through the President, President Entezam.
"'le all recognize the superiority of his knowledge of
parliamentary law. We have all appreciated greatly
his sense of justice, and his wit, facility ~md ease, and
I must say his most beautiful, complimentary manner
of jealing with us in ruling against us. It was like
handing out a rose when he ruled against us. So, on
the part of the delegation of the United States, I wish
to thank the President, and I wish him good health
and long life and still great~r opportunities to serve
mankind.
39. Genenl ROMULO (Philippines) : We are bringing to a close in an unprecedented manner a regular
session of the General Assembly that is itself without
~r~~,=d~nt in the history of our Organization. For the
first time, the General As~embly has been technically
in session for one whole year, actually, by the calendar,
for a period of thirteen and a aalf months. Ivlore cu~'ious
si:i11 is the fact that the session which opened in New

York is coming to a close today in Paris: But this
break with all precedents is merely the measure of the
difficult problems with which the General Assembly
has had to cope. The continuance of the United Nations action to repel aggression in Korea, and the
parallel negotiations for a cessation of hostilities in
that area, made it necessary that the General Assembly
should remain in session, or at least close at hand, to
meet any eventualities that might arise.
40. In this unprecedented aituation, the General Assembly has had the good fortune to have as its President a man of exemplary gentleness and tact, whose
quiet ways and wisdom enabled him to make considerably more smooth the rough road which the fifth
session of the General Assembly has had to travel.
Under his presidency, the General Assembly took the
first concrete steps towards the establishment of a
United Nations system of collective security, a task
which, we trust, will be carried much further forward
during the next session, which begins tomorrow. This
collective security system, solidly based on the United
Nations experience in Korea, will long stand as the
outstanding achievement of the fifth session of the
General Assembly.
41. I know my fellow representatives would wish..
with me, ,to extend to the President, Mr. Entezam, our
heart-felt appreciation for the tact and skill with which
he has presided over our deliberations during the past
year in the face of the most difficult and delicate problems mat have ever arisen in the United Nations.
42. Mr. CHAUVEL (France) (translated from
French) : The Frc'lch ddegation does not propose to
refer today to the problems which the Assembly will
take up tomorrow. It would, however, be inconceivable
that on this last day of the fifth session of the Assembly,
at Paris, the French delegation should fail to associate
itself with the praise just expressed by several of our
colleagues for the outstanding qualities displayed by
the President in the course of his long term of office.
The French delegation yields to no one in its appreciation of his great competence, his perfect courtesy, and
even the firmness which he has had no occasion to display, because everyone knew that it was the strong
support of his impartiality and of that same courtesy
to which all have always willingly deferred.
43. Sir Benegal RAU (India): It gives me great
pleasure to associate myself whole-heartedly with all
the tributes which have been paid to the outstanding
ability and distinction with which the President has
discharged his great responsibilities during a year of
much stress and strain. I had occasion to work with
him very closely in the Group on Cease-Fire in Korea,
and I theI :efore had more opportunities than most of
the representatives here to appreciate the resourceful
statesmanship which he brought to bear in guiding the
work of that group.
44. As the representative of a neighbouring country,
my delegation ha.s particular pleasure in felicitating the
President on the very able and successful discharge of
his duties as the Presid~nt of the fifth session of the
General Assembly. In Mr. Entezam, this Assembly
has had one of its most distinguished presidents. He
has been able to guide the deliberations of the Assembly
with great tact and firmness, and his great courtesy

J

751

332nd meeth'.:::,-S Novembel" 1951
and friendliness have endeared him to all who are
represented in this hall.
45. I shall conclude by offering the President our
warmest congratulations) and I wish him many years
of distinguished service in the work of the United
Nations.
46. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republies) (translated from Russian) : While paying tribute
to Mr. Entezam, the President of the fifth session of
the General Assembly, I wish to touch on the following
question.
47. It would be incorrect and unobjective to take at
their face value and to accept in silence the statements
which have been made by two of the preceding speakers
when they referred to the so-called success of the work
of the fifth session of the General Assembly. I believe
that the delegations to the sixth session of the General
Assembly will have an opportunity of making a full
appraisal of the work of the fifth session, which has
dragged out for an inordinately long time in violation
of all hitherto adopted rules and accepted practice.
48. The prolongation of the work of the General
Assembly, as well as the adoption of a number of illegal
resolutions, reflects the violation of the Charter committed by one of the great Powers which is trying to
transform the United Nations and one of its principal
bodies, the General Assembly, into an instrument of its
own policy. I imagine that delegations will express
their views on all these matters at the sixth session of
the General Assembly.
49. In view of the above, to talk of the success of the
work of the fifth session of the General Assembly
would be incorrect and unobjective and would not
correspond to the facts.
ADDRESS BY THE PRESIDENT

50. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Gentlemen - or, may I say, my dear colleagues - as
the sixth session of the General Assembly will open
in less than twenty-four hours, there is no need for me
to make a closing speech. Let me therefore merely discharge my debts of gratitude.
51. I have been deeply touched by the kind words
and unmerited praises which many delegations have
addressed to me. First and foremost I wish to thatLk
you for your whole-hearted support during this long
and arduous session. You will remember that at the
time I was elected I made a promise and also an appeal.
I promised that I would preside over your debates with
complete impartiality. It is for you to judge whether
I have kept that promise. Then, I asked for your full
support, and, on that point, I can assure you that not
only have you responded to my appeal) but you have
gone even further than I had hoped. Not once, even
at th~ most critical moment, did you hesitate to support
the decisions that, as President, I had to take. I shall
always remember this mark of your confidence in me.
52. I should like, next, on your behalf and mine, to
thank the Secretary-General and his distinguished colleagues. Every president has expressed the pleasure
Printed in U.S.A.

he has felt in co-operating with the Secretary-General.
Personally, I can say that our co-operation could not
have been more sincere or more cordial. The reason
why Mr.. Lie and I understand each other so well is
that we both know that we have only one aim in view,
to serve the cause of the United Nations.
.
53. I turn now to my neighbour on my left. My predecessors, one and all, have so overwhelmed Mr. Cordier
with praise that it is hard for me to find a fresh compliment. I have known Mr. Cordier since 1945 and,
having worked constantly in close touch with him, I
thought I knew all his many merits. But one has to
occupy this chair to realize the immense burden he
bears and to appreciate all he can and has to do during
a session. As an eye-witness to his great devotion, may
I offer Mr. Cordier my warmest congratulations and
express the admiration I feel for him.
54. In conclusion, I should like to convey my sincere
thanks to all the members of the Secretariat and also
to the representatives of the international Press who,
by their devotion, sincerity and co-operation, have
greatly facilitated my task.
ADDRESS BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL

55. The SECRETARY-GENERAL (translated from
French): Now that the fifth session of the General
Assembly is drawing to a close, I have the pleasant
duty, on behalf of the Secretariat and myself; of paying
tribute to your President, who is our President as well,
and thanking him for the kind words in which he has
referred to Mr. Cordier, his assistants and myself.
56. No General Assembly in the short history of the
United Nations has remained in being for so long a
stretch of time or been faced with such complicated
tasks. I can say, in all truth, and basing myself on our
almost daily contact, that the President has stood the
test witil smiling energy. Everyone was aware of the
high qualities of Mr. Entezam as a diplomat and a
stateman, but it was not generally known that he
possessed the science and art Glf chairmanship in such
high measure. His deep knowledge of 0 the General
Assembly's rules of procedure, his mastery and impartiality in the application of those rules, have won
for him - and I say it with pleasure - the respectful
admiration of all members of the Secretariat.
57. Now that he is relinquishing his duties, I wish to
offer him, as a slight testimony of our gratitude and as
a momento, the gavel which he has so happily wielded
while presiding over the discussions of the fifth session .
of the General Assembly.
58. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Before declaring the fifth session of the General Assembly closed I will ask all members to observe a minute's silence of prayer or meditation.
The representatives stood in silence.
59. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
declare the fifth session of the General Ass~bly of the
United Nations closed.

The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.
A-40464-December 1951-3,600
