A/60/PV.79

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixtieth session

79

th plenary meeting
Monday, 8 May 2006, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Eliasson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: This afternoon, the General
Assembly will first consider the reports of the Fifth
Committee on agenda items 122, 124, 125, 127, 130,
132, 122 together with 124, 128, 129 and 136, and 122.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth
Committee which are before the Assembly today.

(Sweden)

vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance. This means that where
recorded or separate votes were taken, we will do the
same. I should also hope that we may proceed to adopt
without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Fifth Committee.

It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance with
General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of

Agenda item 122 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/609/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it one
draft resolution, recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/254).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 122.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

06-34359 (E)

*0634359*

A/60/PV.79

Agenda item 124 (continued)
Proposed programme budget for biennium 2006-2007
Reports of the Fifth Committee
(A/60/608/Add.1 and Add.2)
The President: The Assembly will take up the
two reports of the Fifth Committee on this item.
The delegation of the United States has asked to
speak in explanation of vote before the vote.
Mr. Wallace (United States of America): The
United States appreciates and supports the work of the
Secretariat on the Capital Master Plan, in particular the
efforts of Assistant-Secretary-General Fritz Reuter in
the Capital Master Plan Office, to implement a costeffective project. We support the Capital Master Plan
and the very strongly needed renovations to make the
United Nations facilities safe and secure. We look
forward to continuing to work with other Member
States to reach a final decision on a project strategy.
We look forward to working with all Members to reach
decisions on a successful basis. This is an urgent
project to ensure all United Nations employees work in
a safe and secure environment.
A General Assembly decision on a strategy is
critical. To ensure continued progress on the project,
we endorse a $23.5 million appropriation for the
continuation of pre-construction activities, and we
expect, based upon the firm assurances of the
Secretariat, that the United Nations will not need to
utilize the $77 million in commitment authority before
the second resumed session of the Fifth Committee. We
hope by the second resumed session Member States
will be prepared to reach a final decision on the Capital
Master Plan strategy. We pledge to work constructively
and cooperatively to resolve all outstanding issues. At
this time, without a decision on project strategy, the
United States disassociates itself from consensus on
this resolution.
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report in A/60/608/Add.1.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Special subjects relating to the
programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007”. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

2

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/255).
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report in A/60/608/Add.2.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Capital master plan”. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/256).
The President: The delegation of the Syrian Arab
Republic has asked to speak in explanation of vote
after the vote.
Mr. Al-Nuqari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation joined in the consensus on the
draft resolution recommended in A/60/608/Add.1,
entitled “Special subjects relating to the programme
budget for the biennium 2006-2007”, particularly part
I, regarding the financing of special political missions.
Before explaining our agreement with the
consensus, I would like to express our thanks for the
efforts of Secretary-General Kofi Annan as part of his
functions under the Charter. I would also like to say
that our joining in the consensus goes hand in hand
with the flexibility shown by our delegation and speaks
of our respect for this Organization and its role and
functions.
When my country objected to the mandate with
regard to Syria, we based ourselves on the need to
respect the Charter as well as to respect the fact that
the budget proposals have to be in line with resolution
55/231. I would like to stress that the fact that we are
going along with this resolution is based on respect for
the following principle, i.e., that the mandate of the
resolution is clear. Syria has implemented everything
with regard to this mandate, as recognized by the
Security Council.
Secondly, the first and second performance
indicators — regarding the establishment of the border
and the establishment of diplomatic relations — that
are contained in the report of the Secretary-General are
in contradiction with the above-mentioned mandate.
The establishment of diplomatic relations and the
drawing of the border between two countries are two
matters within the jurisdiction of the Member States

06-34359

A/60/PV.79

involved, and United Nations bodies should not
intervene — not even the Security Council or the
Secretariat. This is in conformity with paragraph 7 of
Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
states, “Nothing contained in the present Charter shall
authorize the United Nations to intervene in matters
which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction
of any state …”.
There is also the need to scrupulously respect
paragraphs 9 and 10 of part I of the resolution when the
mandate of the special envoy is being studied with
regard to the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1550 (2004).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 124.
Agenda item 125
Programme planning
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/747)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/257).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 125.
Agenda item 127 (continued)
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/601/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 5 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

06-34359

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/236 B).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 127.
Agenda item 130
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/748)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/258).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 130.
Agenda item 132 (continued)
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/604/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/259).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 132.
Agenda items 122, 124, 128 and 129 (continued)
and 136
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations

3

A/60/PV.79

Proposed programme budget for the biennium
2006-2007
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Human resources management
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/831)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 9 of its report.
I shall now give the floor to the representative of
Japan, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote
before the voting.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): My delegation supports the
commitment of the Secretary-General to reform the
Organization so that it can better respond to current
needs and make the Organization a more effective,
efficiency and accountable one. We have actively and
constructively participated in the discussion on his
report entitled “Investing in the United Nations: for a
stronger Organization worldwide”, and we will
continue to be actively engaged in future discussions.
My delegation believes also that many of the
proposals contained in the Secretary-General’s report
do not require legislative action at this juncture, as
rightly pointed out by the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions in its report
(A/60/735). My delegation therefore urges the
Secretary-General to implement those measures with
which he can proceed without legislative action.
In the Fifth Committee on 17 April, my
delegation made a humble request to the promoters of
draft resolution A/C.5/60/L.37/Rev.1, before the vote
in the Fifth Committee, not to seek action. It was a plea
not to breach the longstanding practice of working by
consensus in the Fifth Committee and to continue
negotiations in good faith.
The Secretary-General, for his part, made a
sincere effort to preserve the well-established and
valuable practice of consensus by making his
suggestions and proposals 20 and 21. My delegation

4

appreciated the Secretary-General’s efforts in that
regard. We appreciated also the last-minute efforts
made by the Group of 77 and the European Union. We
were disappointed at the failure to reach agreement in
those efforts.
Our position throughout on this question has been
that it would have been far preferable for the Fifth
Committee to report back to the plenary areas of
agreement and disagreement faithfully and accurately
so that it could consider the way forward. It is
regrettable that that has not been the case. We regret
that, despite all the efforts made, a vote had to be taken
in the Fifth Committee.
Mr. President, in the last few days, you yourself
made efforts to avert a vote in plenary under certain
conditions. Again, we regret that your efforts failed to
bear fruit. My delegation is disappointed that we had to
vote on draft resolution A/C.5/60/L.37/Rev.1, which
clearly did not enjoy a consensus. Voting in the Fifth
Committee was in breach of the Committee’s
longstanding consensus practice.
We regret that today we have to vote once again
in plenary on this matter. My delegation, for the
reasons I have just cited, will have no choice but to
cast a negative vote. The outcome of the vote would
send a strong message — more negative than positive.
There would be no winners in this vote, and, if there
are any losers, it will be reforms of the Organization. If
the draft resolution is adopted, it will be likely to be
interpreted as, at best, rejection or deferral of the
necessary reforms. We therefore ask those delegations
that feel uneasy about sending such a message to vote
against or to abstain in the voting.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution entitled “Investing in
the United Nations: for a stronger Organization
worldwide”.
We shall now proceed to a recorded vote, as was
done in the Fifth Committee.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,

06-34359

A/60/PV.79

Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Norway, Uganda.
The draft resolution was adopted by 121 votes to
50, with 2 abstentions (resolution 60/260).

06-34359

[Subsequently, the delegation of Armenia
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
abstain.]
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
representatives wishing to make statements in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I should like to
make a general statement on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
The Group of 77 and China hopes that, with the
adoption of this resolution, we will all move ahead and
deal with the reform of the United Nations. There are
many issues that await our collective decision, and it is
time we focused on the future and helped to strengthen
the Organization. On many occasions, we have gone on
record to say that we welcome the proposals submitted
to us by the Secretary-General that will help strengthen
the Organization’s ability to implement its mandates
more effectively and enable it to serve the interests of
the entire membership.
The Group of 77 and China has been supportive
of a number of major reforms. We supported the
approval of the resources needed for the Human Rights
Council, which will be voted on tomorrow. It was the
Group of 77 and China that fought to have a
Peacebuilding Support Office be funded from
predictable new resources and not from within existing
budget levels or through the establishment of
temporary posts.
It is the Group of 77 and China that wants to
ensure that we deal with development challenges in
more concrete and tangible ways. As of today, we are
still waiting for our negotiating partners to join in a
consensus that will build on the Global Partnership for
Development, which was confirmed by the September
summit.
We of the Group of 77 and China were
instrumental in the approval of the amount of
$100 million that the Secretary-General urgently
needed to proceed with the capital master plan. It was
the developing countries that have always insisted that
the Secretary-General should receive adequate and
predictable resources to undertake effectively the
numerous tasks of the Organization. It was also the
Group of 77 and China that supported the budget level
requested by the Secretary-General in 2004, as opposed
to the spending cap.

5

A/60/PV.79

Since the adoption of the outcome document last
September, the Group of 77 and China has supported
the creation of an Ethics Office, the finalization of a
whistleblower policy and an increase in the
investigation and auditing capacity of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services.
Clearly, the suggestion that the Group of 77 and
China is somehow blocking or delaying reform is at
best misleading and, at worst, absolutely untrue.
We want to reassure all Member States that the
resolution we have just adopted does not in any way
delay or prevent the reform of the United Nations. In
fact, a careful reading of the resolution will show that
many of the proposals in it are meant to take this
Organization further and make it even better. A large
part of the resolution captures areas in which there is
general agreement among Member States about their
importance and necessity. The exceptions are those
proposals that would amend the oversight of the
Member States through the General Assembly.
In addition to the governance issues, the elements
of the resolution on which we differed with our
negotiating partners were on the enforcement of gender
targets in the Secretariat; ensuring equitable
geographic representation in the recruitment of the
Secretariat, in particular at senior levels; and
increasing procurement opportunities for developing
countries. Those elements are important to developing
countries, and to suggest that fighting for them would
detract from the reform initiatives of the SecretaryGeneral is indeed misleading.
Everyone in this Assembly Hall knows that this
Organization does not reflect the international
character of its membership, in particular at senior
levels that seem to be monopolized by nationals from a
few countries. That is so despite repeated calls on that
matter by the General Assembly. The suggestion that
nationals from developing countries are somehow less
qualified and not able to meet the standards that we
have set for our international civil servants in the
Charter of the United Nations is also untrue.
The Secretariat must stop paying more than just
lip service to the calls to ensure a greater gender
balance and equitable geographical representation in
the recruitment and promotion of its staff. Our
resolution merely asks for proposals on gender targets
and geographical distribution to be included in the
September 2006 report. To suggest that those requests

6

will delay the proposals of the Secretary-General or
halt the reform exercise is false.
The June report on procurement will, inter alia,
elaborate on the Secretary-General’s proposal to move
towards a lead agency concept, where provisions of
General Assembly resolutions may not apply. Our
resolution simply requests that an assessment of the
internal controls of those organizations be undertaken
to ensure effective oversight. The Group of 77 and
China are therefore not delaying reform by asking that
Member States receive assurances that the provisions
of General Assembly resolutions will be respected and
that effective internal controls will be in place.
In conclusion, the Group of 77 and China support
the Secretary-General as chief administrative officer of
the United Nations. The Secretary-General is elected
by the Member States and therefore we believe that he
is accountable to the General Assembly. For that
reason, we did not understand or even accept the idea
that, if the Secretary-General is to carry out his duties,
that must be accompanied by denying the majority of
Member States the right to pronounce on the
administration of the United Nations. The Group of 77
and China have continued to maintain that for a socalled small but representative group of Member States
to replace the role of all Member States in carrying out
the oversight responsibilities of the General Assembly
is an attempt to deny every Member of the United
Nations the role due to it.
Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): On behalf of the
European Union, I would like to stress that
management reform is vital to strengthening the United
Nations. We welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral, entitled “Investing in the United Nations”,
and encourage him to continue his reform efforts. We
would like to see a more detailed elaboration of those
proposals, and we ask the Secretary-General to take
action in those areas where no legislative mandate is
needed.
The European Union could not agree to the
adoption of the present resolution, as it does not reflect
crucial concerns of its members and other countries.
We are of the firm belief that, at this early stage,
pending more detailed information and without a
request for action, proposals should not be selectively
rejected, amended or convoluted with conditions.
The European Union, as all here know, made
every possible effort to reach a consensus on the

06-34359

A/60/PV.79

resolution. Those efforts have failed. The request for
action on a non-consensus resolution has resulted in a
vote. That is regrettable. Decisions on sensitive
political matters need the support of all Member States.
During the developments leading up to the
adoption of the resolution, we experienced a collapse
of the consensus principle in the Fifth Committee,
which should be a matter of serious concern to all of
us. All efforts need to be made to restore the longstanding working methods of the Committee.
It is now time to take a forward-looking
approach. We need to re-establish a climate of trust and
cooperation. We need to engage in consensus-based
decision-making. We all need to work together to make
the United Nations stronger.
Ms. Banks (New Zealand): On behalf of Canada,
Australia and New Zealand, I wish briefly to explain
our vote against resolution 60/260.
We set out our concerns over both procedure and
substance when action was taken in the Fifth
Committee on 28 April. I do not intend to repeat those
concerns, though our objections remain unchanged,
and we would repeat our hope, expressed then, that the
Secretary-General will proceed with the mandates he
already has.
We were deeply disappointed that, despite efforts
to avoid that, the submission of a draft resolution on
which there was clearly no consensus went ahead in
the Fifth Committee, leaving Canada, Australia and
New Zealand no option but to vote against it. We
strongly believe, looking ahead, that the practice of
consensus decision-making in the Fifth Committee
should be restored and the climate of trust renewed.
On that positive note, it is heartening that, over
the past few days, so many have spoken of the need to
look ahead, to look forward and to direct our efforts to
producing as much progress as we can over the coming
weeks. Ambassador Kumalo, on behalf of the Group of
77 and China, has just now reaffirmed that
commitment and we welcome his words. To renew our
efforts is indeed the challenge for all of us. Canada,
Australia and New Zealand will continue to work with
the Secretary-General and all Member States on
management reform.
Mr. Bolton (United States of America): The
United States, on 28 April, gave a statement in the
Fifth Committee explaining its vote on this item. That

06-34359

position still stands. Since others have taken the floor
on the occasion of today’s vote, I would like to make
several additional points.
The United States strongly supports a United
Nations that is sharply focused on addressing the
challenges of today’s world in efficient and effective
ways. The Fifth Committee’s consideration of the
Secretary-General’s report on United Nations
management reforms was supposed to have been an
important part of a process leading to a more efficient
and effective Organization — a process that our leaders
started last year with their historic consensus
agreement on the world summit outcome document.
Unfortunately, the vote on management reforms
in the Fifth Committee, as well as the vote called for
today in the General Assembly, raise deep concerns
about the breach of the consensus decision-making
principle that has been the practice of the Fifth
Committee for nearly two decades. Let me just review
for a minute how that practice developed.
From the perspective of the United States, it
developed because, in the mid-1980s, the United States
was repeatedly and overwhelmingly outvoted in the
Fifth Committee on important budget questions. The
consequence was that the United States Congress
withheld substantial appropriations from the United
States assessed contribution, so the practice of
consensus-based decision-making in this Organization
on budgetary matters was intended to reflect clearly the
opinions of all United Nations Members.
During the past 20 years, as early as the late
1980s and early 1990s, there were doubts whether the
consensus budgeting approach was working to fulfil
the intentions that had led to its creation in the first
place. In fact, the current situation, as reflected in
today’s vote, raises that question again. The result of
consensus-based decision-making in the Fifth
Committee is often the same, in fact, as today’s vote,
so when we are asked, whether in Congress or
elsewhere, “What is the real distribution of opinion in
the United Nations on budget questions?”, we can
fairly say that it is reflected in today’s vote.
So, one might well then ask what is gained by the
consensus process. We believe that many comfortable
elements of the governance of this Organization now
need to come under scrutiny, as the Secretary-General
and others have suggested. We maintain our view on
consensus decision-making on budget matters, but we

7

A/60/PV.79

are carefully evaluating how it actually works — as is
appropriate after 20 years.

ensure that the reform process takes into account the
opinions and aspirations of all Member States.

Mr. Arias Cárdenas (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes
to make a general statement. We support the statement
made by the representative of South Africa on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China.

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 122, 124, 128, 129 and 136. I shall make a
concluding statement when we have completed our
work on the next item.

My nation believes in, and practices, constructive
dialogue. Dialogue is an essential tool in reaching
agreement; in this forum it is indispensable if we are to
bring about a more efficient, trustworthy Organization,
where mechanisms of accountability enable Member
States to exercise the authority granted them under the
Charter and under the Assembly’s rules of procedure.
We recognize that consensus is the best way to reach
agreements, because the quest for the collective good
should take precedence over individual interests.
It is the prerogative of Member States, through
the General Assembly, to take decisions relating to the
administration and the budget of the Organization. The
Secretariat should focus its efforts on ensuring and
facilitating the competencies of Member States, taking
into account the principle of the sovereign equality of
Member States, which is established in Article 2 of the
Charter.
The draft resolution just adopted reflects the
greatest possible degree of agreement on the matters
before the Assembly. But we want to make it clear that
this agreement was not reached through consensus, but
through the also democratic procedure of a vote
because of the inclusion of a few proposals intended to
undermine the role of the General Assembly and which
would have jeopardized the intergovernmental nature
of the Organization.
The process of Secretariat reform should be a
multilateral one. It must be transparent and
participatory and must play a central role; it should not
favour the particular interests of certain Member States
or groups of Member States. My country cannot permit
its sovereignty to be delegated to other countries.
Because of our historical tradition, we do not accept
negotiating mechanisms that exclude any Member
State and cannot accept them in the future. Such
practices — which we witnessed recently at the 2005
world summit and during the adoption of the budget in
December — weaken the outcome of negotiations. In
that regard, my delegation commits itself to continuing
its constructive participation in future negotiations to

8

Agenda item 122 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/609/Add.2)
The President: The General Assembly has before
it a draft decision, recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 5 of its report. We shall now
take a decision on the draft decision, entitled
“Questions deferred for future consideration”. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 122 and
of all the reports of the Fifth Committee before it.
Statement by the President
The President: The General Assembly has just
concluded its consideration of several reports of the
Fifth Committee and has adopted the recommendations
contained therein. The draft resolution entitled
“Investing in the United Nations: for a stronger
Organization worldwide” (A/60/831, para. 9) was, as
we know, adopted by a recorded vote, following the
pattern of the Fifth Committee. While a vote could be
viewed as a normal procedure by the General
Assembly, we all know that draft resolutions
recommended by vote are not the normal practice of
the Fifth Committee.
This action today should therefore be regarded as
a deviation from a long-standing practice of the Fifth
Committee. For nearly two decades, draft resolutions
emanating from the Fifth Committee have been
adopted without a vote. The consensus mechanism is
the hallmark of the work of the work of that
Committee. This tradition of consensus for decisions

06-34359

A/60/PV.79

on budgetary and administrative matters has been
generally accepted and welcomed, as we all know. It
serves to safeguard the long-term interests of the
United Nations as well as those of all Member States,
large or small, rich or poor.
Against this background, like the SecretaryGeneral, I regret that it was not possible for the
General Assembly to reach consensus on the resolution
just adopted, in spite of all the efforts made to reach a
negotiated agreement in the Fifth Committee. I want to
take this opportunity to thank all members for their
tireless work, day and night, to come up with creative
ideas to reach consensus during the last few weeks.
However — and this has been underlined by
several speakers today — we must not let this lead us
to inaction and a pointless discussion of why we failed
to agree or what went wrong. Instead, we must look
forward and join forces in fulfilling the tasks our
leaders entrusted us with at the 2005 world summit. It
is essential that we restore the consensus mode of
decision-making in the Fifth Committee. We must
continue to work for the broadest possible agreement
on all the reform issues before us.
So far, we can be proud of our achievements.
Ambassador Kumalo mentioned some of them.
Through open, transparent and inclusive negotiations,
at its sixtieth session the General Assembly has
established the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Human Rights Council. Later this afternoon, I hope the
General Assembly will take a decision on a draft
resolution on the election of seven members of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission. By that, we will take a further step
forward towards making peacebuilding a reality in the
field, which we have been waiting for for so long.
Tomorrow, we proceed to the historic first
election of the 47 members of the Human Rights
Council. Negotiations on the crucial issues of the
reform and development of the Economic and Social
Council are, hopefully, in their concluding stages.
Important consultations on the environment and the
revitalization of the General Assembly have also been
initiated. Later this week, informal consultations on the
elaboration of a counter-terrorism strategy will start.
Thus, the reform process is continuing in several of its
aspects.
In order to effectively comply with the principles
and objectives of the Charter, our leaders at the 2005

06-34359

world summit recognized that we need an efficient,
effective and accountable Secretariat. In the coming
months, our efforts will increasingly focus on those
issues. It is imperative that we move forward and
address Secretariat and management reform in a
positive spirit, as has been underlined by several
representatives today. It is also important that all
Member States be involved and fully engaged in the
work. It is a common task for all of us.
It is my strong belief that genuine progress can be
achieved on the following three tracks.
First, during the next few weeks, the SecretaryGeneral will prepare detailed reports on various issues
in pursuance of the resolution just adopted. Those will
be submitted in different phases. The first phase, due in
a few days, will address accountability, information
and communication technology, reporting mechanisms,
and budgetary and financial management. In the
second phase, in June, the Secretary-General will
report on procurement, monitoring and evaluation
issues. The third phase, in September, will focus on
reforms in human resources management.
In accordance with established procedures, the
reports will first be taken up by the Advisory
Committee on Budgetary and Administrative Questions
and then considered by the Fifth Committee. The
reports will provide Member States with essential
background information for substantive decisions on
important aspects of Secretariat and management
reform.
I strongly urge all delegations to actively and
constructively engage in the work of the Fifth
Committee on those issues, as well as on several
important administrative, financial and human
resources management issues that the Fifth Committee
will be taking up during the course of 2006.
Secondly, under the skilful leadership of the two
co-Chairs, Ambassador Akram of Pakistan and
Ambassador Rock of Canada, the informal
consultations on the Secretary-General’s report entitled
“Mandating
and
delivering:
Analysis
and
recommendations to facilitate the review of mandates”
is proceeding well and according to schedule. The
Presidents of the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council have already initiated procedures to
conduct the review of mandates in their respective
areas. I have requested that, to the extent possible, they
harmonize their respective programmes of work with

9

A/60/PV.79

that of the plenary and the meeting we had with the
Presidents of the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council last month.
A programme of work through the month of June
has been presented by the Co-Chairs. It is my
expectation that some initial results on the mandate
review could be achieved in this period, with Members’
help. I appeal to all Member States to continue their
close cooperation with the co-Chairs in that process.
Thirdly, the ongoing review on governance and
oversight structures in the United Nations aims to
enhancing the ability of the Organization to function
well and to live up to the high expectations of Member
States. The review will build on progress made in
strengthening oversight functions, including the
development of the independent Audit Advisory
Committee to assist the General Assembly in
discharging its oversight responsibility.
I firmly believe that we can achieve results on
those three tracks in the near future. Recent experience
shows that reform is possible. That was demonstrated
by the decisions of the General Assembly not only on
the issues that I mentioned earlier — the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Human Rights Council and so on —
but also to create, at the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral, an Ethics Office, which is of course now in
operation.
In addition, the Secretary-General has already
undertaken a number of reforms under his own
authority, such as the protection of staff against
retaliation for reporting misconduct. Those are indeed
positive achievements and, as our leaders stated in the
2005 World Summit Outcome document,
“We commend the Secretary-General’s
previous and ongoing efforts to enhance the
effective management of the United Nations and
his commitment to update the Organization”
(resolution 60/1, para. 163).
I have said this many times: We are facing a test
of multilateralism. We need to make the United
Nations stronger and better equipped to deal with the
urgent problems and needs in the world around us. To
achieve that, we must work together. Working together
is much more powerful than working alone. We must
deepen the dialogue between delegations and different
groups at the United Nations. We must listen to each
other, we must gain a better understanding of each

10

other’s positions, and we must move from polarization
to cooperation. A climate of trust and confidence must
be established and must guide our endeavours. It is in
our common interest and in the interest of the United
Nations and the peoples of the United Nations.
Therefore, I encourage each and every
representative to reach out to his or her colleagues and
to start a constructive and forward-looking discussion
of what we must do to make this Organization — our
United Nations — work better for the benefit of our
peoples. If we do that in a positive spirit and create the
right conditions for fruitful negotiations in good faith, I
am hopeful that we will see concrete results in
Secretariat and management reform during the coming
months. To put it very simply, let us go to work.
The meeting was suspended at 4.20 p.m. and
resumed at 4.35 p.m.
Agenda item 112
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(f) Election of seven members of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission
Draft resolution A/60/L.52
Statement by the President
The President: On 20 December 2005, the
General Assembly made history. By creating the
Peacebuilding Commission the Assembly decided to
take an important step to strengthen the capacity of the
United Nations to maintain sustainable peace and
security. The Peacebuilding Commission is an
innovative body that is to assist countries on the
arduous road from violent conflict to recovery,
reconstruction and development.
The
composition
of
the
Organizational
Committee of the Commission is clearly spelled out in
resolution 60/180. In the outcome document of the
High-level Plenary Meeting (resolution 60/1), our
leaders had already decided on the different categories
of members of the Organizational Committee. As
members will recall, during those negotiations some
voiced strong concern that the Committee lacked in
legitimacy because many would not have the
possibility of being elected or selected.

06-34359

A/60/PV.79

We all took that argument seriously and made the
very difficult decision to open up the agreed text of the
World Summit Outcome. A category was created to
allow the General Assembly to elect seven additional
members from regions not sufficiently represented in
the other categories of the Organizational Committee,
giving particular consideration to those countries that
had experienced post-conflict recovery.
More than four months have passed since
20 December. We have discussed regional
representation at length in both the Economic and
Social Council and the General Assembly. The decision
to allow the Peacebuilding Commission to become
operational is long overdue. The World Summit
Outcome requested that the Peacebuilding Commission
begin its work no later than 31 December 2005. I
acknowledge the difficulties members have faced
during their discussions, in particular since the
composition of the Peacebuilding Commission is
innovative. Let us not forget that, according to its
mandate, one of the main purposes of the
Peacebuilding Commission is to bring together actors
to marshal resources and to advise on, and propose,
integrated strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding
and recovery. I am gratified that, in all categories of
the Organizational Committee, members have shown
commitment and flexibility in spite of what I know are
very strongly held views.
Members now have in front of them draft
resolution A/60/L.52, entitled “Election of seven
members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission”. The draft resolution is
based on paragraphs 4 (a) to (e) and 5 of General
Assembly resolution 60/180, and on Security Council
resolution 1645 (2005). More specifically, the draft
resolution implements paragraph 4 (e) of resolution
60/180, giving the General Assembly a mandate to
elect seven additional members, giving due
consideration to representation from all regional
groups in the overall composition of the Organizational
Committee and to representation from countries that
have experienced post-conflict recovery.
The distribution of seats among the five regional
groups for this year is based on the elections and
selections in the other four categories set out in
paragraphs 4 (a) to (d) of resolution 60/180 and
communicated to the Secretary-General in accordance
with the following: a letter from the President of the
Security Council dated 17 January 2006; Economic and

06-34359

Social
Council
resolution
2006/3,
entitled
“Membership from the Economic and Social Council
in the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission pursuant to paragraph 4 (b) of General
Assembly resolution 60/180 and Security Council
resolution 1645 (2005)”, which was adopted on 8 May
2006; a letter from the facilitator for the group of the
top 10 providers of contributions to the United Nations
dated 8 May 2006; and a letter from the facilitator for
the group of the top 10 troop-contributing countries
dated 5 May 2006.
The letters from the facilitators of the donor and
troop-contributing categories will be distributed as
official United Nations documents. I take note of, and
welcome, the fact that both the donor and the troopcontributing categories foresee some rotation among
their members. Let me take this opportunity to thank
everyone who was involved — the Security Council,
the President of the Economic and Social Council, the
facilitator for the troop contributors and the facilitator
for the donor countries — for the tireless work they
have done to achieve this result.
The General Assembly will elect seven members
for this year, distributed among the five regional
groups as follows: two seats for African States, one
seat for Asian States, one seat for Eastern European
States, three seats for Latin American and Caribbean
States and no seat for Western European and other
States.
I understand that the Economic and Social
Council will conduct its elections on 12 May. I propose
that the elections in the General Assembly take place
on 16 May in the afternoon. Member States are invited
to inform the Secretariat of their candidatures or to
confirm them before 16 May. I understand that the
Secretariat will prepare a list of candidates for
information purposes.
The draft resolution sets out that the rules of
procedure and established practices of the General
Assembly for the election of members of its subsidiary
bodies shall apply to the elections to the Organizational
Committee.
The elected members will serve for renewable
terms of two years, beginning on the day of the first
meeting of the Organizational Committee. A new
element introduced in the draft resolution is that the
term of membership shall be staggered, and that two
members from different regional groups, to be drawn

11

A/60/PV.79

by lots in the first election, shall serve for an initial
period of one year. That will allow for continuity and
for avoiding having all the members from the General
Assembly category change at the same time. Those
members serving for only one year are eligible for
subsequent periods of two years.
The draft resolution will also allow the General
Assembly to carry out an annual review of its
distribution of seats based on changes in the
membership in other categories in the Organizational
Committee. After all, as members will recall, the
General Assembly category was created in order to
provide balanced representation from all regional
groups, thus ensuring legitimacy.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that
representation from all regional groups in the overall
composition of the Organizational Committee is not the
only criterion for the General Assembly category.
Countries that have gone through difficult periods of
post-conflict recovery will be a special asset for the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission. I am confident
that the Assembly will keep that in mind when electing
the members of the Committee.
In conclusion, let me thank the Assembly for
what has indeed been hard work for practically all of
us, as well as for its cooperation with, and support for,
me and my Office. We will soon leave the process of
the creation of the Peacebuilding Commission behind
us. Let us now concentrate on the important work of
preparing for the first meeting of the Organizational
Committee and, even more important, for the first
country-specific meeting. As I have said many times,
our work at the United Nations must always go through
a field test. I would strongly hope that the
Peacebuilding Commission will go through that field
test before the end of the sixtieth session. We owe that
to all those who are in dire need of post-conflict
recovery.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/60/L.52. Before giving the floor to the representative
of Colombia in explanation of position before action is
taken on the draft resolution, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote or position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made from delegations for
their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of Colombia.

12

Mrs. Holguín (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to make this statement on behalf of the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States. Our
Group actively participated in the process of
consultations that established the Peacebuilding
Commission. We reiterate our commitment to that
initiative and to its implementation.
We regret that the key proposal by the States of
Latin America and the Caribbean is not reflected in the
draft resolution before us today. We would like to
express our great concern about the fact that this noble
initiative has been diminished and that it does not
include the right of every Member State to participate
equally.
After several months of discussions, it is evident
to us today that the Commission is a United Nations
body that does not reflect the principle of equitable
regional representation. As proposed, it will be a body
composed mainly of donors and troop contributors.
The principle of equitable regional representation
incorporated in other bodies has been ignored on this
occasion. We wonder whether that will be the future
trend in the Organization, and whether we should strive
to return to the principles and practices of participation
in subsidiary bodies.
The important thing is not to create false hopes
that result in discussions that do not lead to promoting
understanding within the Organization. We are
convinced that it would be beneficial for the
Organization to review the matter of composition in the
future, for the experiences and contributions of all
regions will be of value for the proper functioning of
the Commission. The Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States reiterates that experience in postconflict situations must be taken into account.
For Latin American and Caribbean States, the
principle of equitable regional representation is
fundamental to strengthening universal multilateralism.
In the framework of the consultations to which I have
referred, we emphasized the need for balanced
representation in the overall composition of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission. The concept of balanced representation
was referred to by the President during the adoption of
resolution 60/180, when he acknowledged that
balanced representation among all regional groups was
a factor that ensured the legitimacy of the Commission.

06-34359

A/60/PV.79

As you, Mr. President, told us:
“Finally, in order to have balanced representation
from all regional groups, and thus to ensure
legitimacy, the General Assembly will elect seven
additional members.” (A/60/PV.66, p. 3)
We would like also to express our concern at the
prospect of reducing the space given to the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States, not only in this
specific case, but with respect to other areas of the
reform as well. The principles that should guide us are
those of inclusion and equitable geographic
representation for all regional groups.
In that context, we wish to note that the General
Assembly category was created to ensure a more
balanced representation of the regional groups in order
to ensure equitable representation in and a sense of
belonging to the Committee.
We therefore believe that under-representation by
regional groups in the overall composition must be
considered in the election of the members of the
Organizational Committee by the General Assembly.
This is our interpretation of the fourth preambular
paragraph and of operative paragraphs 2 and 8.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/60/L.52.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/60/L.52. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/60/L.52?
Draft resolution A/60/L.52
(resolution 60/261).

was

adopted

The President: I shall now give the floor to those
representatives wishing to make statements in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Miller (United States of America): The
United States was pleased to join consensus today to
support hallmark measures in the Economic and Social
Council and now in the General Assembly to establish
procedures for the selection of representatives to the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
Getting to this point has required careful
diplomacy, consideration of multiple interests and the
give and take of innumerable direct conversations in
which representatives of all regions worked together.
The United States has been an active participant.

06-34359

The process was prolonged, and the results reflect
compromises. We particularly note in that regard the
aspiration of our Latin American and Caribbean
neighbours to gain enhanced representation in future
years. The United States supports that aspiration and
the adjustments that can be made annually and
biannually to affect the overall composition of the
Organizational Committee in order to make it as
acceptable and effective as possible.
We would also particularly emphasize the
potential contribution of nations that have experienced
post-conflict recovery. The resolution we have just
adopted sustains that intent.
We now need to move ahead swiftly to get the
Peacebuilding Commission up and running. The body
we have established is a promising outcome of United
Nations reform. The quality of the members whom we
select and the diversity of skills, experience and
influence that they will bring to the table will be
critical to our mutual goal of building stability in
countries that have emerged from conflict.
Rules of procedure of the Peacebuilding
Commission must be designed to hasten the
achievement of results, avoiding circuitous debate and
duplicative
efforts,
and
focusing
on
the
work of country-specific committees and their
recommendations.
Mr. Kapoma (Zambia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the African Group following the
adoption by the General Assembly of the framework
resolution on the election of seven members of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
Let me at the outset pay tribute to you,
Mr. President, and to all who facilitated in one way or
another the adoption of this resolution. We owe them
all a debt of gratitude.
It is to be recalled that in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome, our leaders decided to establish a
Peacebuilding Commission and that it should begin its
work no later than 31 December 2005. Consequently,
the General Assembly adopted resolution 60/180, on
the Peacebuilding Commission, on 20 December 2005.
It has taken a little more than four months for the
General Assembly to adopt this enabling resolution,
which will have the effect of operationalizing the
Peacebuilding Commission. The African Group, like

13

A/60/PV.79

others, is indeed pleased with the adoption of the
resolution. In that regard, we wish, however, to make
some observations on some of its provisions.
While taking note of operative paragraph 8,
which talks about setting no precedent for future
elections and states that the distribution of seats as set
out in operative paragraph 2 will be reviewed annually,
on the basis of changes in the membership of other
categories, the African Group would like to see in
future more equitable geographical representation,
which would give Africa no less than seven seats.
It should be noted that in the Security Council
category, the African representation would be for only
one year, in view of the departure from the Council of
the United Republic of Tanzania at the end of this year.
It is our sincere hope that both the Security Council
and the General Assembly would favourably consider
electing another African Member State to replace the
United Republic of Tanzania in the Security Council
category, or, indeed, find an alternative in other
categories.
The African Group is making this earnest appeal
against the background of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s having been established to deal with
global conflict situations. In that regard, it is no
exaggeration to state that the African continent has an
unenviable share of the conflicts in the world —
indeed, a large share. It is therefore natural, in our
view, that African should be given special
consideration.
In terms of operative paragraph 2, the African
Group wishes to note that, if a region submits the exact
number of candidates that have been agreed upon,
there should be no need for elections, but, rather, such
members should be deemed as having been duly
selected.
In conclusion, we have made these observations
mindful of the many concessions and compromises that
have made it possible for the General Assembly to
adopt this framework resolution. The African Group
adequately demonstrated, during the protracted
consultations, its commitment to the adoption of this
resolution. We therefore look forward with
commitment and zeal in equal measure to the
operationalization of the Peacebuilding Commission. It
remains our sincere hope that, indeed, the Commission
will make a difference for countries in need of support

14

from the international community in addressing postconflict situations.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, France welcomes the consensus
adoption of the resolution you submitted to us. This
resolution will pave the way for the establishment of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission. My delegation would like to thank you in
particular for the vital role that you and your
colleagues played in achieving this successful
outcome.
Several months, and efforts made by one and all,
were required to achieve this, because there were
numerous expressions of interest on the part of
Member States wishing to serve on the Commission.
Those expressions of interest were all, of course,
legitimate.
I believe we have attained the best possible
result, because we also had to bear in mind the
overarching need to preserve the Commission’s
original nature. As we know, one of the essential strong
points of the Commission, which will ensure its
effectiveness for countries emerging from conflict,
relates to its unique composition, which is based, inter
alia, on participation by Member States in a position in
one way or another to make a concrete contribution in
a structural sense.
I wish, however, to respond to some of the
concerns that have been voiced. France considers that
all regional groups without exception are entitled to
fair representation in the Organizational Committee by
their member States. That, of course, is true for the
countries of Latin American and the Caribbean, many
of which have experienced post-conflict situations, and
many of which are providing recognized assistance in
that area. We are convinced that the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States has an important
contribution to make to the Commission. France
therefore intends to endorse the candidacy of a member
from that region on the next occasion that the two seats
on the Organizational Committee for non-permanent
members of the Security Council are filled. Let me add
that, in our view, it goes without saying that the seat
that will be vacated at the end of this year by the
United Republic of Tanzania should go to another
country representing Africa.
Our immediate priority must be to successfully
launch the Peacebuilding Commission. To that end it is

06-34359

A/60/PV.79

important for the Organizational Committee, once all
its members have been selected, to expeditiously settle
the initial procedural matters that are essential to the
practical functioning of the Commission. Over the next
few weeks it should thus be in a position to identify the
first situations to be placed on the Commission’s
agenda, so that the Commission can devote itself
without further ado to providing the expected support
for countries emerging from conflict.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
I wish to make some brief informal remarks. I
mentioned in my opening statement on this item that
the Peacebuilding Commission is to assist countries on
the arduous road from violent conflict to recovery,
reconstruction and development. I think we all
recognize that we too have travelled an arduous road in
reaching the conclusion of our discussions on the
resolution we have just adopted. I have already
expressed my thanks for members’ cooperation.
It is always painful and difficult when one makes
institutional decisions. It is no coincidence that our
most difficult and complicated negotiations have been
on the two major institutional reforms that we have
negotiated: the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Human Rights Council. We should be aware that it is
natural that we have those more difficult discussions
when it comes to setting up new institutions.
Again, I thank members for their cooperation. Let
us be reminded that, towards the end of today’s
resolution, we state very clearly that, as has been noted
by many speakers today, the distribution of seats will
be reviewed annually, not least in order to give due
consideration to the representation of all regional
groups in the overall composition of the Organizational
Committee.
Now, I urge that we look to the future again, in
the spirit of our discussion earlier on management and
Secretariat reform. We must look forward and focus on

setting up the Organizational Committee, and on taking
quick decisions on the country-specific Peacebuilding
Commission: that, as I said in my introductory
remarks, is where we will be tested. The test lies out
there in the realities: I just came back from Africa, and
I see the desperate need in that continent and in other
parts of the world for the Peacebuilding Commission as
a catalyst enabling us to do what we have to do,
namely not desert a country that has gone through
conflict.
We have paid a heavy price for leaving these
conflicts when the CNN cameras disappear. We have to
make sure that we are there for reconstruction,
recovery, development, reconciliation processes and
setting up institutions, so that conflicts do not erupt
again. There is a tragic statistic showing that conflicts
erupt within five years after they have finished because
we do not stay on. Now, with the Peacebuilding
Commission, in the field, we will be able to be
catalysts for action, action not only by a better and
better coordinated United Nations, but also by regional
organizations, civil society and the private sector: all in
very close cooperation under the guidance of the
nations involved and with respect for sovereignty. This
is a qualitative step forward for the United Nations; it
could mean that the Security Council will have less to
do in the future.
So, let us now look forward. We have had a
painful, difficult discussion, which is behind us; now is
the time to prove that the Peacebuilding Commission
can make a difference for all those people out there
who have suffered through conflict and who now need
advice from the members of the Organizational
Committee, but above all from those who will serve on
the country-specific Peacebuilding Commission: that is
where we will make a difference.
We are finally reaching one destination on this
arduous road, and the General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (f)
of agenda item 112.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

06-34359

15
