UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/18
13 April 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3518th meeting of the Security Council, held on 13 April 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Angola", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the Secretary-General’s progress
report of 7 April 1995 (S/1995/274) on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III).
"The Security Council welcomes the confirmation by the SecretaryGeneral that the cease-fire is generally holding and that the level of
cease-fire violations has remained relatively low. It also welcomes the
continued deployment of UNAVEM III military and police observers to team
sites and regional headquarters outside Luanda, and the progress reported
by him in a number of important areas, including liaison with UNITA, the
completion of the first phase of disengagement, discussions of the
modalities for the incorporation of UNITA into the national army. It
commends the parties for their efforts in this regard.
"The Security Council notes that a number of developments give cause
for concern. These include reports of continuing military actions and
preparations, in particular the attack on the airstrip at Andulo by the
Angolan air force, the failure to complete the second phase of
disengagement by 10 April 1995, some restrictions on UNAVEM III’s access to
government military facilities, and recent attacks on the personnel of
UNAVEM III and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). It welcomes the
improved access by UNAVEM III to UNITA-controlled areas but notes that some
local UNITA commanders continue to impose restrictions on the movement of
UNAVEM III personnel and calls upon UNITA to ensure unrestricted access.
"The Security Council calls on the parties to cooperate fully with the
United Nations, in particular through the Joint Commission, and to ensure
the safety of the personnel of UNAVEM III and the NGOs. It notes with
satisfaction that the members of the Joint Commission, including
representatives of the Government of Angola, met Dr. Savimbi in Bailundo on

95-10883 (E)

130495

/...

S/PRST/1995/18
English
Page 2

7 April and that at that meeting he publicly confirmed his commitment to
the Lusaka Protocol. It reiterates its call for a meeting between
President dos Santos and Dr. Savimbi as a matter of urgency because such a
meeting may help to improve the climate of trust and give new impetus to
the peace process in Angola.
"The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s decision to
proceed with preparations for the deployment of UNAVEM III’s infantry units
(S/1995/230). It notes that he has reminded the Angolan parties that they
must implement without delay the requirements of the Lusaka Protocol,
provide UNAVEM III with the indispensable logistic support, and undertake
essential tasks such as mine clearance, the repair of major transport
routes, and the designation of quartering areas, to make it possible for
United Nations infantry battalions to deploy to Angola in May 1995. The
Council fully supports the Secretary-General in this regard and emphasizes
the need for full implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. It welcomes his
intention to deploy the infantry battalions in stages. It stresses the
importance it attaches to the Government of Angola providing the logistic
support envisaged for UNAVEM III. In this context it welcomes the
Government of Angola’s agreement to allow the United Nations full
operational access to Catumbela airfield and calls upon the Government of
Angola to ensure that this arrangement is extended for as long as required
by UNAVEM III. It also welcomes the Government of Angola’s intention to
conclude, by 15 April 1995, a Status of Forces Agreement with the United
Nations.
"The Security Council reaffirms the obligation of all States to
implement fully the provisions of paragraph 19 of resolution 864 (1993) and
states that the continuing flow of arms into Angola contrary to the
provisions of the ’Acordos de Paz’ and resolution 976 (1995) contributes to
the country’s instability and undermines efforts at confidence-building.
"The Security Council is encouraged that the Secretary-General has
been able to report overall progress in the humanitarian situation in the
month since his last report to the Council. It calls upon the parties to
continue to facilitate access to all areas of the country for the delivery
of humanitarian assistance. It also calls once again upon the parties to
respect the safety and security of all humanitarian personnel in Angola.
It endorses the call on the parties by the three observer States to the
Angolan peace process (S/1995/239) to cooperate fully in releasing all warrelated detainees through the International Committee of the Red Cross, as
well as all captured foreign citizens or to provide information about their
fate.
"While the Security Council takes note of the progress made in the
implementation of the comprehensive mine action programme, it also notes
the statement in the Secretary-General’s report that the mine situation in
Angola remains critical. The Council therefore urges both parties to
support and facilitate mine clearance and to comply fully with the relevant
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol. In this context, it welcomes the
statement by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General following
the 13th meeting of the Joint Commission that the Government of Angola and
/...

S/PRST/1995/18
English
Page 3

UNITA have pledged to put 800 and 400 personnel respectively at the
disposal of UNAVEM III for mine clearance activities.
"The Security Council will continue to monitor the situation in Angola
closely. It looks forward to the next monthly report of the SecretaryGeneral and requests him, in the meantime, to ensure that it is kept
informed of developments in Angola and on prospects for the prompt
deployment of the infantry battalions of UNAVEM III."

-----
