V.

32/3.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second {:ommittee

Assistance for the reconstruction of Viet
Nam

The General Assembly,
Having warmly welcomed the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations,
Expressing prof ound admiration to the courageous
Vietnamese people in their struggle far independencc
and national reunification and their constant cfforts
devoted to national reconstruction,
Deeply concerned ovcr the grave economic and social
consequences of the long years of war furthcr aggravated by recent severe natural calamities,
Recalling the Secrctary-General's statement in his
report on the work of the Organization far 1974/1975
expressing the hope that the United Nations system
would be able to assist countries in the Indo-China
península in their efforts far national rehabilitation
after the war, 2
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1944 (LVIII) of 7 May 197 5 appealing to ali
States to come to the assistance of the people of IndoChina in their efforts to bring about the reconstruction
of their countries, in accordancc with the needs and
requests of those countries, by ways and means which
the latter deem most appropriate and with full respect
far their national sovereignty,
Recalling further rcsolution 33 adopted by the World
Conference of the Intcrnational Womcn's Year, held
at Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 197 5, Ón aid
to the Vietnam ese people, 3
Noting with appreciation the prompt and pertinent
efforts made by the Secretary-General and by the
organs, agencies and programmes of the United Nations
to mobilize assistance to meet the most pressing humanitarian needs in Viet Nam and to help organize rclicf,
rehabilitation and reconstruction assistance to the Vietnamese people,
Further concerned that massive international assistance, notably in rcspcct of faod, equipment and project
aid, remains urgently needed to speed up the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the social and economic infrastructure of the country,
Noting with satisfaction that the non-aligned group
of countries has established, by rcsolution 28 adopted
by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from
16 to 19 August 1976, 4 a solidarity fund for the reconstruction of the Lao People's Democratic Republic and
Viet Nam to help in the reconstruction effort,
1. Recommends that Viet Nam be included in the
list of the most seriously affected countries;:;
2. Appeals to thc peoplcs and Governments of all
Member States and to all international cconomic, financia! and social institutions to increasc and intcnsify
their efforts and contributions on a bilateral and/ or
multilateral basis to help the Victnamese peoplc in the
rcconstruction of their country;
2
See Ofjicial Records of the General Assemblv, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. JA (A/10001/Add.l), ·sect. XVII.
3
See Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.l ), chap. III.
4 See A/31/197, annex IV, sect. B.
6
See Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtyfirst Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/31/21), annex IV.

75

3. Urges the Secretary-Gencral to continue to encourage further mobilization ?f re~ource_s and eff?rts
from thc intcrnational commumty w1th a v1ew to ach1eving the social and cconomic rchabilitation of Viet
Nam;
4. A uthorizes the Sccretary-General to utilize the
nccessary resources far irnplementing thc present resolution.
34th plenary meeting
14 Ortoher 1977
::\2/ 51.

United Nationi, lnstitute for Traininµ; and
Researeh

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-V]) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
thc Programmc of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order,
Recalling also its rcsolution 3 281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974 containing thc Charter of Economic
Rights and Dutics of States.
Recalling further its resolution 31 / 107 of 16 December 1976 on thc Unitcd Nations lnstitute for Training
and Rcsearch,
Considering its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 Septcmbcr 1975, which set in motion measures that form
thc basis and framework for the work of the competent
bodies and organizations of thc United N ations system,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Exccutive Director of the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research;"
2. W e/comes the emphasis and urges the continuation of the concentration of the work of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research in the
sphcre of economic and social training and research
and thc inclusion of specific projects on the problcms in
the arcas identified by thc General Assembly at its sixth
and scvcnth special sessions and in the relevant decisions of thc Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
3. Expresses the hope that the Unitcd Nations
Institutc far Training and Research will have greater
and wider financia! support from Mcmber Statcs and
organizations.
98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977
32/52.

Manila Communiqué of the World Food
Couneil: Programme of Aetion to Eradie ate Hunµ;er and Malnutrition

The General Asscmbly,
Recalling its resolution 3348 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, by which it established the World Food
Council to serve, in line with resolution XXII adopted
by the World Food Conference, 7 hcld at Rome from
5 to 16 November 1974, as a co-ordinating mechanism
to provide over-all, intcgratcd and continuing attention
for thc successful co-ordination and follow-up of
6
/bid., Thirty-second Session, Supplcment No. 14 (A/32/14
and Corr. l).
7
See Report of the World Food Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.IJ.A.3), chap. II.
