General Assc111bly-Twcnty-third Scssion

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SPECIAL POLITICAL
COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
Tille

lti·n:

Date of
adcption

Pa11,

2382 (XXIII)
2396 (XXIII)

Effects of atomic radiation (A/7296)
The policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa
(A/7348) . . . .
..........
. ...... .

30

Kovcmbcr 1%8

19

United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa (A/7348)

31
31

2 Dcccmb~r 1968

2397 (XXIII)

2 Dcccmber 1968

19
21

2451 (XXIII)

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peace-keeping
operations in ali their aspects (A/7455)
Report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugecs in the Near East
(A/7411)
Resolution A

32

19 l)cccn,l cr 1968

21

33
33

1CJ Dcccmbcr 1968

Resolution B
Resolution C

33

19 Decembcr 1968

21
22
22

R,soltúion
No.

2452 (XXIII)

19 Dccc:nber 1968

2396 (XXIII). The policie.s of apartheid of the
Government of South Africa

2382 (XXDI). Effects of atomic radiation
The General Assembly,
Rccalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955,
which established the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and its
subsequent resolutions reaffirming the desirability of
the Committee continuing its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects on
present and future generations resulting from the levels
of radiation to which man is exposed,
C onscious of the continued need for compiling information a:bout atomic radiation and for analysing
its effects on man and his environment,
l. Notes with appreciation the report adopted by
the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects
of Atomic Radiation at its eighteenth session ;1
2. Commends the Scientific Committee for the valuable contributions it has made since its inception to
wider knowledge and understanding of the effects and
levels of atomic radiation ;
3. Draws the attention of Member States to the
review of information required to continue the Scientific Committee's assessment of world-wide levels of
radiation from nuclear tests, as contained in the letter
annexed to the report of the Committee.;
4. Requests the Scientific Committee to complete its
current programme of work and to review and formulate
plans for its future activities;
5. Notes the intention of the Scientific Committee
to hold its nineteenth S(}ssion in May 1969 and to report
further to the General Assembly.
1709th plenary meeting,
1 November 1968.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 011 this question aud Security Council resolutions 181 (1963) of 7 August 1963,
l 82 (1963) of 4 December 1963, 190 (1964) of 9 J une
1964 and 191 ( 1964) of 18 June 1964,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government
of the Republic of South Africa 2 and the report of
the Sub-Committee on Information on Apartheid
annexed thereto,3
Taking into account the decisions and recommendations contained in the Proclamation of Teheran 4 adopted
by the International Conference on Human Rights,
held at Teheran from 22 April to 13 May 1968,
N oting with concern that the Government of South
Africa continues to intensify and extend beyond the
horders of South Africa its inhuman and aggressive
policies of apartheid and that these policies have led
to a violent conflict, creating a situation in the whole
of southern Africa which constitutes a grave threat to
international peace and security,
Rccognizing that the policies and actions of the
Government of South Africa constitute a serious obstacle to the exercise of the right of self-determination
by the oppressed people of southern Africa,
Com;inced that the international campaign against
apartheid must be intensified urgently in arder to assist
in securing the elimination of these inhuman policies,
2 Ibid., TwcntJ·-tilird Sessio11, agenda ítem 31, document
A/7254.
3 [bid., annex l.
4 See Final Act of tlic Jnternational Confercncc on Human
Rights (Unitcd Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),

1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Tw1mt~•-third
Session, Annexes, agenda item 30, document A/7126.

p. 3.

19

General Assembly-Twenty-third Session

20

C onsidering that effective action for a solution of
the situation in South Africa is imperative in order
to eliminate the grave threat to the peace in southern
Africa as a whole,
N oting that the Security Council has not considered
the problem of apartheid since 1964,
l. Reitera/es its condemnation of the policies of
apartheid practised by the Government of South Africa
as a crime against humanity;
2. Condemns the Government of South Africa for
its illegal 0ecupation of Namibia and its military intervention ancl for its assistance to the racist minority
régime in Southern Rhodesia in violation of United
Nations resolutions;
3. Reaffirms the urgent necessity of eliminating the
policies of apartheid so that the people of South Africa
as a whole can exercise their right to self-determination
and attain majority rule based on universal suffrage;
4. Draws the attention of the Security Council to the
grave situation in South Africa and in southern Africa
as a whole ar,d requests the Council to resume urgently
the consideration of the question of apartheid with a
view to adopting, under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, effective measures to ensure
the full implementation of comprehensive mandatory
sanctions against South Africa;
5. Condemns the actions of those States, particularly
the main trading partners of South Africa, and the
activities of those foreign financia! and other interests.
al! of which, through thdr political, economic and
militarv collaboration with the Government of South
Africa -and contrary to the relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions, are encouraging that
Government to persist in its racial polici65;
6. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of the people of South Africa for al! human
rights, and in particular political rights and fundamental
freedoms for al! the people of South Africa irrespective
of race. colour or creed;
7. Calls upon ali States and organizations to provide greater moral, political and material assistance
to the South African liberation movement in its legitimate struggle ;
8. Expresses its grave concern over the ruthless
persecution of opponents of apartheid under arbitrary
laws and the treatment of freedom fighters who were
taken prisoner during the legitimate struggle for
liberation, and :
(a) Condemns the Government of South Africa for
its cruel, inhuman and degrading treatrnent of political
prisoners;
( b) Calls once again for the release of all persons
imprisoned or restricted for their opposition to apartheid
and appeals to ali Governments, organizations and
individuals to intensifv their efforts in order to induce
the Government of South Africa to release ali such
persons and to stop the persecution and ill-treatment
of opponents of apartheid;
(e) Declares that such freedom fighters should be
treated as prisoners of war undec international law,
particularly the Geneva Convention relative to the
Treatment of Prisoners of War of 12 August 1949 ;6
( d) Requests the Secretary-General to establish and
publicize as widely as possible:
5 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol.

ZS (1950), No. 972.

(i) A register of persons who have been executed,
imprisoned, placed under house arrest or banning
orders or deported for their opposition to
apartheid;
(ii) A register of ali available information on acts of
brutality committed by the. Government of South
Africa and its officials against opponents of apartheid in prisons;
9. Comniends the activities of anti-apartheid movements and other organizations engaged in providing
assistance to the victims of apartheid and in promoting
their cause, and invites ali States, organizations and
individuals to make gene.rous contributions in support
of their endeavours;
10. Urges the Governments of ali States to discourage in their territories, by legislative or other acts,
ali activities and organizations which support the
policies of apartheid as well as any propaganda in
favour of the policies of apartheid and racial discrimination;
11. Requests ali States to discourage the flow of
immigrants, particularly skilled and technical personnel,
to South Africa;
12. Requests ali States and organizations to suspend
cultural, educational, sporting and other exchanges with
the racist régime and with organizations or institutions
in South Africa which practise apartheid;
13. Invites ali States and organizations to commemorate as widely as possible the International Day
for the Elimination of Racial I)iscrimination in 1969
in arder to express their solidarity with the oppressed
people of South Africa;
14. Requests the Special Committee on the Policies
of Apartheid of the Government of the Republic of
South Africa, as a matter of priority. to study and
report on the implementation of the United Nations
resolutions on the question of apartheid, the effects of
the measures taken and the means of securing more
effective international action;
15. Requests the Special Committee to intensify its
efforts to promote the international campaign against
apartheid and, to this end, authorizes it :
(a) To hold sessions away from Headquarters orto
send a sub-committee on a mission to consult specialized agencies, regional organizations, States and nongovernmental organizations ;
( b) To hold consultations with experts and to
arrange for special studies on various aspects of
apartheid, in consultation with the Secretary-General
and within the budgetary provision to be made for this
purpose;
16. Requests ali States, specialized agencies and
other organizations to intensify the dissemination of
information on the evils of apartheid in the light of
the report of the Special Committee and, in this respect,
reiterates its request to those States which have not yet
done so to enc;ourage urgently the establishment of
national committees as provided in paragraph 9 of
General Assembly resolution 2307 (XXII) of 13 December 1967;
17. Requests the Secretary-General, in the light of
the proposals of the Special Committee for the widest
dissemination of information on apartheid:
(a) To ensure that the Unit on Apartheid, established in pursuance of General Assembly resolution
2144 A (XXI) of 26 October 1966, discharges its
increased functions in the light of the proposals out-

Reaolutions adopted on the reporta of the Speelal Polltfeal Committee

lined in paragraph 146 of the report of the Special
Committee;
( b) To take other appropriate steps to assist ali
States. specialized agencies and other organizations to
intensify the dissemination of information;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Special Committee with ali the necessary
means, including appropriate financia! means, for the
effective accomplishment of its task ;
19. Invites States, specialized agencies, regional
organizations and non-governmental organizations to
co-operate with the Secretary-General and the Special
Committee in the accomplishment of their tasks under
the present resolution.
1731st plenary meeting,
2 December 1968.

2397 (XXIII). United Nations Trust Fund for
South Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2054 B (XX) of 15 Decem-ber 1965 and 2202 B (XXI) of 16 December 1966
concerning the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General 6
to which is annexed the report of the Committee of
Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa,
Considering it appropriate and essential to continue
and increase humanitarian assistance to the victims of
the policies of apartheid of the Government of South
Africa,
N otinr, that the Committee of Trustees has drawn
attention to the need for greater contributions to the
Fund ::ind for a revision of its terms of reference,
l. E:rpresses its appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals which have contributed
to the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
2. Commends the Secretary-General and the Committee of Trustees of the Fund for their efü:,rts to
promote the purposes of the Fund;
3. Decides to revise the purposes of the Fund to
provide:
(a) Legal assistance to persons persecuted under the
repressive and discriminatory legislation of South
Africa;
( b) Relief to such persons and their dependants ;
(e) Education of such persons and their dependants ;
( d) Relief for refugees from South Africa ;
4. Again appeals to ali States, organizations and
individuals for generous contributions to the Fund.
1731st plenary meeting,
2 December 1968.

2451 (XXIII). Comprehensive review of the whole
question of peace-keeping operations in all
their aspects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2006 (XIX) of 18 February
1965, 205.3 A (XX) of 15 December 1965, 2249 (S-V)
of 23 May 1967 and 2308 (XXII) of 13 December
19(>7,
6 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-third
Susion, Annexes, agenda item 31, document A/7270.

21

Having received and examined the reports of the
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations of
2 July 19687 and 12 December 1968, 11
Mindful of the importance which Member States
attach to the comprehensive review of the whole
question of peace-keeping operations in ali their aspects,
N oting that the Special Committee has appointed a
working group for the preparation of working papers
for the study that the Special Committee was requested
to submit to the General Assembly in accordance with
paragraphs 3 and 4 of its resolution 2308 (XXII),
N oting that the Special Committee has approved,
as a first model in the programme of its working group,
a study of the United Nations military observers established or authorized by the Security Council for observation purposes pursuant to Council resolutions,
Noting further from the report of the Special Committee of 12 December 1968 that preliminary work has
been undertaken in the preparation of the abovementioned study,
l. Requests the Special Committee 011 Peace-ke<!ping
Operations to continue its work under General Ass~11;bly resolution 2308 (XXII), including the prov1s10ns of paragraphs 3 and 4 of that resolution;
2. Reiterates its request to the Special Committee
on Peace-keeping Operations to keep the General Assembly regularly informed about its progress in the
comprehensive review of peace-keeping operations in
ali their aspects ;
3. Further requests the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to submit to the General Assembly
as soon as possible, and not later than at its twentyfourtr session, a comprehensive report on the United
Nations military observers esta:blished or authorized by
the Security Council for observation purposes pursuant
to Council resolutions, as well as a progress report on
such work as the Special Committee may be able to
undert:i,ke on any other models of peace-keeping
operabons;
4. Transmits to the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations the records of the debates at the
present session on the item entitled "Comprehensive
review of the whole question of peace-keeping operations in ali their aspects", with the request that the
suggestions and proposals contained therein be taken
into account.
1749th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

2452 (XXIII). Report of the CommisBionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugeee in
the Near East
A
The General Assembly_,
Recalling Security Council resolution 237 ( 1967) of
14 June 1967,
Reaffirming its resolution 2252 (ES-V) of 4 July
1967,
Taking note of the appeal made by the SecretaryGeneral in the Special Political Committee on 11 November 1968, 9
7 /bid., agenda item 32, document A/7131.
8 /bid., document A/7396.
9 Jbid., Twenty-third Sessio11, Special Political

612th meeting, paras. 2-14.

Commiltet,
