82·

General Aasembly-Thirtieth Sessioo

Re1olurio11
No.

3522 (XXX)

3S23 (XXX)
3524 (XXX)

Improvement of the economic status of women for their effective and speedy participation m the development of their
countries (A/ 10474) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ........ 75 and 76
Women in rural arcas (A/10474)
.................... 75 and 76
Measures for the integration of women in development
(A/10474) .......................................... 1S and 76

Other decisions
Report of the Economic and Social Council ............................ .
Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination ....... .
World social situation ................................................ .
Policies and programmes relating to youth . . . .
. ...... .
Elimination of all forms of rel-igious intolerance
............. .
National experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic changes for
the purpose of social progress
....................... .
Freedom of information
........
. ......... .
Status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
the lnternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol to the lnternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
United Nations conference for an international convention on adoption law
Human rights and scientific and technological developments ...
Intemational Women's Year, including the proposals and recommendations of
the World Conference of the lntemational Women's Year ........ .
Status and role of women in society, with special reference to the need for
achieving equail rights for women and to women's contribution to the attainment of the goals of the Second United Nations Development Decade, to the
struggle against colonialism, racism and racial discrimination and to the
strengthening of international peace and of co-operation between States

3377 (XXX). Implementation of the Programme
for the Decade for Action to Comhat Racism
and Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the reports of the SecretaryGeneral,1
Recalling its resolution 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, in which it reaffirmed its determination
to achieve the total and unconditional elimination of
racism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Recalling its resolutions 2920 (XXVII) of 15 November 1972 and 3224 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974
concerning measures to improve the situation of migrant
workers,
Considering that the policies of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid are flagrant violations of the
principies of the Charter of the United Nations and
constitutc serious violations of the obligations of Member States under the Charter,
Bearing in mind the vital importance of establishing
a new economic and social world arder based on justice
and equality,
1. Condemns the intolerable conditions which continue to prevail in southern Africa and elsewhere, including the denial of the right to self-determination
and the inhumane and odious application of apartheid
and racial discrimination;
2. Reaffirms its rccognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of oppressc<l peoples to liberate thcmselves
from racism, racial <liscrimination, apartheid, colonialism and alicn domination;
l A/11114~ :,nrl (j,rr.l
J-,¡~r;¡7 :,ritl Add.l :irnl 2.

:,n,I Atld.l; L/5í,11i ancl Add.1-1,

Da.te of

Item

Titltt

12
68 (b)

adot,tion

P4f1•

15 December 1975
15 December 1975

97
98

15 December 1975

98

10 October 1975

99

71
72

79
81
83
84
85
69

15 December 1975

99-100

10 November 1975

100

15 December 1975

100

75

76

3. Urges ali States to co-operate loyally and fully in
achieving the goals and objectives of the Decade for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination
by taking such actions and measures as:
(a) Implementing United Nations resolutions bearing on the elimination of racism, apartheid, racial discrimination and the liberation of peoples under colonial
domination and alien subjugation;
( b) Ensuring immediate termination of ali measures
and policies, as well as military, political, economic
and other activities, which enable racist régimes in
southern Africa to continue the repression of the African people;
(e) Providing full support and assistance, morally
and materially, to the peoples which are victims of
apartheid and racial discrimination and to the liberation movements;
( d) Cessation of emigration to South Africa;
(e) Ensuring the release of political prisoners in
South Africa and of those subjected to restrictions for
their opposition to apartheid;
(/) Signing and ratifying the lnternational Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 2 the Intemational Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid8
and all other relevant instruments;
(g) Formulating and executing plans to realize the
policy measures and goals contained in the Program.me
for the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, including the advisability of establishing nationat arrangements to follow up the implemcntation of the Programme for the Decade;
~ Kcsolution 2106 A CXX), annex.
:i Rc,olulion

'.lllf,I! <XXVIII), anncx.

lleloludom adopted on the reporta of the TbJrd Committee

( h) Reviewing intemal laws and regula~ons wi~ a
view to identifying and rescinding those which provide
for, give rise to, or inspire racial discrimination or
apartheid;
(i) Ensuring the cessation of all discriminatory
measures against migrant workers and extending to
them treatment equal to that provided for nationals of
the host country with regard to human rights and to the
provisions of their labour legislation;
(j) Complying, when due, with the provisions of
paragraph 18 (e) of the Programme for the Decade,
which call for Govemments to forward a report every
two years on the action taken under the Programme
for the Decade, on the basis of a questionnaire circulated by the Secretary-General;
(k) Educating, in particular, youth in the spirit of
equality and respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
4. Urges Member States which are parties to the
Intemational Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination to continue to comply
fully with their obligations under the Convention and,
in particular, to submit their reports within the timetable laid down under article 9;
5. Also urges United Nations organs, the specialized
agencies and intergovernmental and · non-govemmental
organizations to ensure the continuation of their activities related to the Decade with emphasis on, inter alia:
(a) Providing moral and material support to the
national liberation movements and victims of apartheid
and racial discrimination;
( b) Assisting and conducting vigorous educational
and information campaigns to dispel racial prejudice
and to involve public opinion in the struggle against
racism and racial discrimination, in particular to organize an intemational competition for selecting an appropriate emblem for the Decade and to print posters
containing the emblem for wide distribution;
(e) Examining the socio-economic and colonial roots
of racism, apartheid and racial discrimination with a
view to eliminating them;
6. Requests national sports federations of Member
States to refuse systematically to participate in all sports
or other activities together with the representatives of
the racist régime of South A.frica;
7. W elcomes any contributions and suggestions related to the Programme for the Decade by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the
Special Committee against Apartheid, the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to draw on the
expertise of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination and the Sub-Commission on Prevention
of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities while
undertaking the relevant activities of the Decade;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-first session a report
containing proposals to implement efficiently paragraph 17 of the Programme for the Decade, which calls
for the establishment of an intemational fund on a
voluntary basis;

83

1O. Reiterates the call in its resolution 3057
(XXVIII) to make adequate resources available to the
Secretary-General to enable him to undertake the activities entrusted to him under the Programme for the
Decade;
11. Calls upon the Commission on Human Rights,
in collaboration with the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, to
study ways and means of ensuring the implementation
of United Nations resolutions bearing on apartheid,
racisrn and racial discrimination with a view to facilitating the examination of this question by the General
Assembly in accordance with paragraph 18 (i) of the
Programme for the Decade;
12. Appeals to Governments and private organizations in a position to do so to make voluntary contributions of funds which would make it possible to carry
out all of the activities provided for in the Programme
for the Decade, especially in paragraphs 15 and 16
thereof, with regard to research, studies, education,
training and information directed towards the achievement of the goals of the Decade and designed to assist
the victims of racial discrimination and racism;
13. Decides to consider at its thirty-first session, as
a matrer of high priority, the question entitled "Decade
for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination".
2400th plenary meeting
10 November 1975
3378 (XXX). World conference to combat
racism and racial discrimination

The General Assembly,
Having considered Economic and Social Council
resolution 1938 B (LVIII) of 6 May 1975,
1. Notes with appreciation the ofler of the Govemment of Ghana to act as host to the world conference
envisaged as a major feature of the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
·
2. Requests the Secretary-General to enter into consultations with the Govemment of Ghana concerning
arrangements for holding the conference as well as the
nature of the financia! contribution that the Govemment of Ghana will be able to make with regard to its
ofler;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on bis consultations in this regard to the
Economic and Social Council at its sixtieth session to
enable the Council to advise the General Assembly on
this matter.
2400th plenary meeting
JO November 1975
33 79 (XXX). Elimination of all forms of
racial discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1904 (XVIII) of 20 November 1963, proclaiming the United Nations Declaration
on the Elimination of AH Forros of Racial Discrimination, and in particular its affirmation that "any doctrine
of racial diflerentiation or superiority is scientifically
false, morally condemnable, socially unjust and dangerous" and its expression of alarm at "the manifesta-
