228

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

of the entire range of economic, social and cultural, as well
as civil and political, rights;
2. Stresses once again the urgent need for the international community to make every effort to strengthen
peace, remove the growing threat of war, particularly
nuclear war, halt the arms race and achieve general and
complete disarmament under effective international control and prevent violations of the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations regarding the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and the self-determination of
peoples, thus contributing to ensuring the right to life;
3. Stresses further the foremost importance of the
implementation of practical measures of disarmament for
releasing substantial additional resources, which should be
utilized for social and economic development, particularly
for the benefit of the developing countries;
4. Calls upon all States to do their utmost to assist in
ensuring the right to life through the adoption of appropriate measures at both the national and the international
level;
5. Calls upon all States, appropriate organs of the
United Nations, specialized agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned to
take the necessary measures to ensure that the results of
scientific and technological progress are used exclusively in
the interests of international peace, for the benefit of mankind and for promoting and encouraging universal respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
6. Again calls upon all States that have not yet done so
to take effective measures with a view to prohibiting any
propaganda for war, in particular the formulation, propounding and dissemination of propaganda for doctrines
and concepts aimed at unleashing nuclear war;
7. Looks forward to further efforts by the Commission
on Human Rights with a view to ensuring the inherent
right of all peoples and all individuals to life;
8. Decides to consider this question at its forty-first
session under the item entitled "Human rights and scientific and technological developments".
l 16th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/112.

Human rights and scientific and technological developments
The General Assembly,
Noting that scientific and technological progress is one
of the important factors in the development of human
society,
Recalling that the year 1985 marks the tenth anniversary of the Declaration on the Use of Scientific and Technological Progress in the Interests of Peace and for the
Benefit of Mankind, adopted by the General Assembly in
its resolution 3384 (XXX) of 10 November 1975,
Considering that implementation of the Declaration will
contribute to the strengthening of international peace and
the security of peoples and to their economic and social
development, as well as to international co-operation in
the field of human rights,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development, 20
Seriously concerned that the results of scientific and
technological progress could be used for the arms race to
the detriment of international peace and security and
social progress, human rights and fundamental freedoms
and the dignity of the human person,
111 A/40/493 and Add. I and .'

Convinced that in the era of modern scientific and technological progress the resources of mankind and the activities of scientists should be used for the peaceful economic,
social and cultural development of countries and for
improvement of the living standards of all people,
Recognizing that the establishment of the new mtemational economic order calls in particular for an important
contribution to be made by science and technology to economic and social progress,
Bearing in mind that the exchange and transfer of scientific and technological knowledge is one of the important
ways to accelerate the social and economic development of
the developing countries,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General on human rights and scientific and technological developments, 111
I. Stresses the importance of the implementation by
all States of the provisions and principles contained in the
Declaration on the Use of Scientific and Technological
Progress in the Interests of Peace and for the Benefit of
Mankind in order to promote human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2. Calls upon all States to make every effort to use the
achievements of science and technology in order to promote peaceful social, economic and cultural development
and progress;
3. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to take into account
in their programmes and activities the provisions of the
Declaration;

4. Invites those Member States, specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system that
have not yet done so to submit their information pursuant
to General Assembly resolution 35/130 A of 11 December
1980;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue to give special attention, in its consideration of the
item entitled "Human rights and scientific and technological developments", to the question of the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration;
6. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to take
appropriate measures to assist the Sub-Commission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities
in preparing the study requested by the Commission in its
resolutions 1982/4 of 19 February 1982 27 and 1984/29 of
12 March 1984; 29
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Human rights and scientific and technological developments".
l 16th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/113. Question of a convention on the rights of the
child
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/166 of 20 December 1978,
34/4 of 18 October 1979, 35/131 of 11 December 1980,
36/57 of 25 November 1981, 37/190 of 18 December
1982, 38/114 of 16 December 1983 and 39/135 of 14
December 1984,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolu-
