5

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling hopefully the letters exchanged recently
between Mr. Khrushchev, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Mr. Kennedy, President of the United States of
America, and Mr. Macmillan, Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
in which they expressed their readiness to resume disarmament negotiations with renewed determination and
vigour,
Determined to avert the grave dangers to the human
race of nuclear confrontation, on which the recent crisis
focused attention,
1. Reaffirms the need for the conclusion, at the
earliest possible date, of an agreement on general and
complete disarmament based on the joint statement of
agreed principles for disarmament negotiations, submitted on 20 September 1961 by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America9
and endorsed by the General Assembly in resolution
1722 (XVI);
2. Calls upon the Conference of the Eighteen-Nati?n
Committee on Disarmament to resume at Geneva its
negotiations on general and complete disarmament, with
effective controls, expeditiously and in a spirit of constructive compromise, until ag:eement has been reached;
3. Recommends that urgent attention should be given
by the Eighteen-Nation Committee to various collateral
measures intended to decrease tension and to facilitate
general and complete disarmament;
4. Requests the Eighteen-Nation Committee to report periodically to the General Assembly on the progress of its work and, in any case, not later than the
second week of April 1963;
5. Transmits to the Disarmament Commission, and
reques.ts the Secretary-General to make available to the
Eighteen-Nation Committee, the documents and records
of plenary meetings of the General Assembly and meetings of the First Committee at which the question of
disarmament was discussod.
1173rd plenary meeting,
21 November 1962.
1801 (XVII). Question of convening a conference
for the purpose of signing a convention on
the prohihition of the use of nuclear and
thermo-nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the question of convening a conference for the purpose of signing a convention on the prohibition of the
use of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons, 10
Having regard to the usefulness of further consultation with Governments of Member States on this
question,
Requests the Secretary-General to consult further
the Governments of Member States to ascertain their
views on the possibility of convening a special conference for signing a convention on the prohibition of the
use of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons for war
9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 19, document A/4879.
10 Ibid., Seventeenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 26,
document A/5174 and Add.l and 2.

purposes, and to report on the re~ults. of such consu_ltation to the General Assembly at its eighteenth sess10n.
1192nd pfenary meeting,
14 December 1962.
1802 (XVH). Jnternational co-operation in the
peaceful uses of outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1721 (XVI) of 20 December 1961 on international co-operation in the peaceful
uses of outer space,
Believing that the activities of States in the exploration and use of outer space sho1..:d be carried out in
conformity with international law including !he Charter
of the United Nations, in the interest of friendly relations among nations,
Stressing the necessity of the progressive development of international law pertaining to the further
elaboration of basic legal principles governing the
activities of States in the exploration and use of outer
space and to liability for space vehicle accidents and
to assistance to and return of astronauts and space
vehicles and to other legal problems,
B earinq in mind that the application of scientific and
technological advances in outer space, particularly in the
fields of meteorology and communications, can bring
great advantages to mankind and contribute to the
economic and social progress of the developing countries as envisaged in the United Nations Development
Decade programme,
Having considered the report submitted by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in response
to resolution 1721 (XVI) ,11

I
1. Notes with regret that the Committee on the

Peaceful Uses of Outer Space has not yet made recommendations on legal questions connected with the peaceful uses of outer space;
2. Calls upon all Member States to co-operate in the
further development of law for outer space;
3. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue urgently its work on the further
elaboration of basic legal principles governing the activities of States in the exploration and use of outer space
and on liability for space vehicle accidents and on assistance to and return of astronauts and space vehicles and
on other legal problems;
4. Refers to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, as a basis for this work, all proposals
which have been made thus far, including the draft
declaration of the basic principles governing the activities of States pertaining to the exploration and use of
outer space submitted by the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, 12 the draft international agreement on the
rescue of astronauts and spaceships making emergency
landings submitted by the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, 13 the draft proposal on assistance to and
return of space vehicles and personnel suhmitte<l hy the
United States of America,14' the draft proposal on lia11 Ibid.,
12 Ibid.,

agenda item 27, document A/5181.
annex III, A.
13 Ibid., annex Ill, B.
14 Ibid., annex TU, C.
