A /74/PV.44

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

44th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 11 December 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Sinirlioğlu
(Turkey), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 126 (continued)
Global health and foreign policy
Note by the Secretary-General (A/74/470)
Draft resolution (A/74/L.26)
The Acting President: I now give the floor
to the representative of France to introduce draft
resolution A/74/L.26.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the seven members of the Foreign Policy and
Global Health Initiative — Brazil, France, Indonesia,
Norway, Senegal, South Africa and Thailand — it is
a pleasure to introduce, under agenda item 126, draft
resolution A/74/L.26, entitled “Global health and
foreign policy: an inclusive approach to strengthening
health systems”.
At the outset, I would like to say a few words on
the Initiative itself, to which France has been quite
committed since it was launched in 2006. The goal
of the Initiative is twofold — to advocate for greater
recognition of the synergies between global health and
foreign policy and to promote the issue of global health
within the General Assembly.
Every year, the coordinating country proposes a
theme of work related to the subject under consideration

in the programme of action of the Foreign Policy and
Global Health Initiative, as presented in the ministerial
declaration in Oslo in 2007. The chosen theme is then
incorporated into a draft resolution and discussed first
by the group of seven countries in Geneva, before being
negotiated and concluded in New York among the States
Members of the United Nations.
The seven-member group is being chaired by
France this year and has the honour of introducing
a draft resolution on the theme of inclusivity. That
inclusivity applies to both governance and access to
health care. With regard to governance, which is a
key idea in the draft resolution, the text contemplates
the participation of civil society in the definition,
implementation and assessment of health policies. The
goal is to enable citizens to make the best health choices
and to participate fully in the debate on defining public
policies to ensure the sustainability and strengthen the
resilience of the health-care systems of which they are
the beneficiaries. Inclusivity in access to health care
means the provision of health-care services, medicine
and vaccines to the entire population, including the
hardest to reach and the most vulnerable.
In my national capacity, I would like to note the
participation of civil society and communities affected
by AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria in the governance
of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria — both in Geneva and in various countries.
The recognition of community expertise in planning,
implementing and following up on grants is the basis
for the outstanding results achieved by the Global Fund,
which has saved more than 32 million lives since its

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-40380 (E)

*1940380*

A/74/PV.44

establishment. France is the second-largest contributor
to the Fund and hosted the Global Fund’s sixth
Replenishment Conference, held in Lyon on 10 October.
I note that, on that occasion, $14 billion were pledged in
the fight against AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria over
the next three years.
Also in my national capacity, I would mention
that, in his statement before the General Assembly on
24 September (see A/74/PV.3), President Emmanuel
Macron recalled that one of the priority actions of
the international community should be to reduce
inequalities. Combating inequality is also a key priority
of the Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative
this year. Mr. Jean-Baptiste Lemoyne, Minister of
State attached to the Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs, on 23 September emphasized the importance
of inclusivity for strengthening and making health-care
systems more effective. That also means guaranteeing
universal access to sexual and reproductive health
care, as well as safeguarding reproductive rights.
Moreover, in the case of natural disasters, humanitarian
emergencies and armed conflict, it is critical that health
care be guaranteed in a non-discriminatory manner and
that the specific needs of victims of sexual violence be
taken into account. The members of the group consider
access to health care for all as an integral part of social
cohesion and stability, which contributes to reducing
inequality, especially gender inequality. Continuity in
access to care is also critical for those who face crises,
such as natural disasters, humanitarian emergencies
and armed conflict.
The Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative
has tried to lead discussions in an open and inclusive
fashion and to work tirelessly to achieve consensus.
Following the silence procedure, we have done our best
to take into account the requests of several delegations
that broke the silence, while keeping in mind the need
to strike a balance among the various points of view
represented. Through compromise, together with all
of the group members, we have tried to reach a draft
resolution that is acceptable to all. The text introduced
today is the result of that attempt to produce a balanced
text and of the various efforts and compromises by
various Member States. With this draft resolution,
we reaffirm our intention and readiness to continue
to work together in future, including next year under
the Indonesian chairmanship, and especially with the
World Health Organization, in order to obtain concrete
2/14

11/12/2019

results in the framework of the Foreign Policy and
Global Health Initiative.
In conclusion, I call on all States Members of
the United Nations to join us in adopting the draft
resolution, thereby supporting this important initiative.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Casal Rodríguez (European Union): I have
the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
Please allow me to thank the group of seven
countries in the Foreign Policy and Global Health
Initiative, and in particular the Permanent Mission of
France, for facilitating this year’s draft resolution on
global health and foreign policy (A/74/L.26), which
focuses on an inclusive approach to strengthen health
systems. We greatly appreciated the constructive
approach of the facilitator, Mr. Vincent Jechoux, and
his team in leading an open negotiation process.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
continues to be the leading policy framework guiding
the European Union in all aspects, including global
health and foreign policy. In order to live up to our
joint commitment of leaving no one behind, we need to
ensure health for all.
The seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly
is of particular importance when it comes to the topic
of global health and foreign policy. In September, we
adopted the political declaration on universal health
coverage (resolution 74/2) at the high-level meeting
on the subject, a consensual document that paves
the way for achieving universal health coverage by
2030. This session also marks the commemoration
of two groundbreaking international milestones: last
month we celebrated the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD), and next year will mark the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action.
The EU remains committed to the promotion,
protection and fulfilment of all human rights and to
the full and effective implementation of the Beijing
19-40380

11/12/2019

Platform for Action and the Programme of Action of the
ICPD and the outcomes of their review conferences, and
remains committed to sexual and reproductive health
and rights in that context. Bearing that in mind, the EU
renews its commitment to the promotion, protection
and fulfilment of the right of every individual to have
full control over, and decide freely and responsibly
on, matters related to their sexuality and sexual
and reproductive health, free from discrimination,
coercion and violence. The EU further stresses the
need for universal access to quality and affordable
comprehensive sexual and reproductive health
information and education, including comprehensive
sexuality education and health-care services.
Sexual and gender-based violence is a global
health epidemic with far-reaching implications on the
physical, mental and sexual and reproductive health
of individuals. In that connection, we welcome the
importance the draft resolution attaches to ensuring that
persons affected by sexual violence in natural disasters,
humanitarian emergencies and armed conflict have
access to non-discriminatory health-care services. The
EU also stresses the importance of providing genderresponsive services in that regard.
The European Union remains firmly committed
to the promotion, protection and fulfilment of all
human rights. The EU’s strong position is that all
human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent
and interrelated. In the light of that, we regret that
the final text does not include stronger human rights
language, especially as it pertains to the rights to the
freedom of peaceful assembly, of association and of
expression. The EU understands paragraph 8 of the
draft resolution to mean that everyone has the right,
individually or in association with others, to human
rights and fundamental freedoms, including the right
to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of
physical and mental health.
Health is an essential investment for achieving stable
and prosperous societies, economic and social wellbeing and security. The EU promotes a health-in-allpolicies approach, with a specific emphasis on
inclusivity, equity and gender equality. To that end, we
need to invest more in the health sector, not only through
financing but also through ensuring a more robust and
comprehensive approach that guarantees equitable
access to vaccinations and affordable medicines while
also tackling the rise of non-communicable diseases
and antimicrobial resistance.

A/74/PV.44

We note that the twenty-third preambular
paragraph of the draft resolution recalls the United
Nations High-level Panel on Access to Medicines. We
reiterate our concerns about the policy assumptions
and subsequent findings of the Panel, as presented to
the World Intellectual Property Organization Standing
Committee on the Law of Patents on 16 June 2016. We
find it more valuable to base actions and United Nations
language on the informed findings of the World Health
Organization’s 2011 Global Strategy and Plan of Action
on Public Health, Innovation and Intellectual Property.
Please also allow me to highlight the specific
attention that the EU pays to health education, as well
as access to safe, sufficient and nutritious food and
safe drinking water and sanitation, with particular
consideration given to the issue of water-borne diseases,
such as cholera and child diarrhoea.
Finally, please allow me to reassure the Assembly
of the European Union’s commitment to protecting and
promoting the right of everyone to enjoy the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health, and
to promoting human dignity, well-being and prosperity.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
In a world driven by selfish interests, in which capitalism
considers health a commodity and not a right, it will
be impossible to achieve Goal 3 of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development — “Ensure healthy lives
and promote well-being of all at all ages” — and in
particular that of achieving universal health coverage
for all people.
According to World Health Organization
estimates, 5.4 million children aged under 5 died in
2017 — 2.5 million of those painful deaths occurred in
the first 28 days of life. In 2016, 4.3 million deaths were
reported as resulting from diseases such as HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis, malaria, hepatitis and neglected tropical
diseases. Non-communicable diseases were responsible
for 41 million deaths in 2017. More regrettable still,
most of those deaths could have been prevented through
access to health services and medication. To turn the
global health situation around, all we need is political
will, concerted action by the international community
and, above all, change in the unjust international order.
In Cuba health is a right for all persons, as
enshrined in article 72 of the Constitution, and it is a
State responsibility to ensure that health-care services,
protection and recovery are accessible, free and of good
quality. That allowed Cuba by late 2018 to attain life

19-403803/14

A/74/PV.44

expectancy of 78.45 years and an infant mortality rate
of 4.0 per 1,000 live births. Immunization coverage
reached 98 per cent, with 14 infectious diseases
eradicated, nine no longer constituting a health
problem and 29 controlled communicable diseases.
The indicators certifying Cuba as the first country to
eliminate mother-to-child transmission of HIV and
congenital syphilis were maintained.
To achieve those results we overcame not only
the challenges inherent in our status as a small island
developing State, but also the impact of the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States for almost 60 years, which is today
being tightened. The embargo is the primary obstacle
to our development, and currently the sole limiting
factor preventing us from attaining even more effective
results in the field of health. It is a flagrant, massive
and systematic violation of the human rights of all our
people. Health is among the sectors hardest hit by this
genocidal policy of the United States.
We denounce the Government of the United States
for its current attacks on bilateral and intergovernmental
health
cooperation
programmes,
legitimately
established between the Cuban Government and the
Governments of dozens of countries in accordance
with the United Nations guidelines on South-South
cooperation and in response to the health needs
articulated by those sovereign Governments.
Since last year, the Government of the United States
has been waging an intensive and defamatory campaign
against Cuba’s medical cooperation activities, coupled
with threatened sanctions against Cuban leaders and
pressure on recipient States to decline such assistance.
Cuba is being accused of allegedly engaging in modern
slavery and trafficking in persons working in the
Cuban health system, for the purpose of exploitation or
allegedly to interfere in the internal affairs of the States
where they are assigned.
They are also attempting to reinstate the so-called
“Cuban Medical Professional Parole Programme”,
which was in force until 12 January 2017, in support
of an active operation to incite defection, including the
funding of air tickets and legal services, as well as the
issuance of United States visas and travel documents for
Cuban cooperation workers in third countries, with the
purpose of sabotaging the bilateral agreements signed
with those nations, depriving them of such services and
depriving us of highly qualified human resources.
4/14

11/12/2019

It is immoral and unacceptable to question the
dignity, professionalism and altruism of the more than
400,000 Cuban health cooperation personnel who, over
56 years, have accomplished missions in 164 nations.
They have made notable contributions to the fight
against Ebola in Africa, blindness in Latin America
and the Caribbean and cholera in Haiti, and through the
participation of 26 Henry Reeve international brigades
of medical professionals specialized in the management
of disasters and large epidemics in Pakistan, Indonesia,
Mexico, Ecuador, Peru, Chile, Venezuela and elsewhere.
With similar selflessness and dedication, 35,613 health
professionals from 138 countries have been trained free
of charge in Cuba.
The United States crusade against international
medical cooperation represents a vile and shameless
criminal act against peoples in need of medical
assistance, which cannot overshadow the solidarity
and human contribution of the 29,000 Cuban health
professionals who, at great sacrifice and with great
understanding from their families, are currently
providing services in 65 nations.
The approach of the Government of the United
States to this matter is despicable. Cuba’s response
is firm: we will continue saving lives and supporting
global health and well-being throughout the world to
the best of our abilities wherever we may be asked to
do so.
Mr. Ezoe (Japan): At the outset, Japan would like
to express its appreciation to France for its efforts
in steering the difficult and intense negotiations
on the global health and foreign policy draft
resolution (A/74/L.26).
This year’s draft resolution comes at a critical time
following the adoption of the political declaration of the
high-level meeting on universal health coverage at the
General Assembly (resolution 74/2), approved by Heads
of State and Government on 23 September. Entitled
“Global health and foreign policy: an inclusive approach
to strengthening health systems”, the draft resolution
entails numerous relevant elements, as it reaffirms
the political declaration on universal health coverage,
including the leaders’ commitment to covering all
people with quality essential health services and to
eliminating impoverishment due to health-related
expenses by 2030, among other critical commitments.
As Prime Minister Shinzo Abe stated during his
concluding remarks at the high-level meeting, Japan
19-40380

11/12/2019

A/74/PV.44

emphasizes the importance of achieving universal health
coverage globally, while building on its own experience
of managing such coverage as key to socioeconomic
development and a healthy ageing society. Japan has
sought to promote universal health both bilaterally
and through global forums, including the Group of
Seven and, most recently, through the Group of Twenty
presidency. Here in New York, Japan has also sought
to build momentum and deepen understanding of
universal health coverage as the founding Chair of the
Group of Friends of Universal Health Coverage and
Global Health.

the facilitation be carefully conducted in a more
inclusive, transparent and timely manner so that the
draft resolutions reinforce and supplement ongoing
discussions and commitments, in particular with
regard to relevant high-level meetings of the General
Assembly such as the one held in September. We would
also like to suggest that technical integrity could be
maintained with close inputs from relevant technical
agencies, in particular the World Health Organization.
Japan is pleased to co-sponsor this draft resolution with
such requests and our commitment towards achieving
universal health coverage by 2030.

Last week in Afghanistan, Dr. Tetsu Nakamura, a
Japanese medical doctor, was among those killed in a
tragic incident. We express our deepest condolences.
Dr. Nakamura dedicated his life for more than 30 years
in the mountainous areas of Afghanistan as head of a
civil society organization called Peshawar-Kai, serving
the needs of highly marginalized and vulnerable people
who had little access to health, water and nutritious
food. Dr. Nakamura started his work in Afghanistan
as a clinician treating patients. But seeing patients
die not necessarily due to lack of access to medicine
but to malnutrition or diarrhoea, he expanded his
work to secure safe water and nutritious food, which
clearly contributed to strengthening primary health
care towards achieving universal health coverage in
Afghanistan. Dr. Nakamura’s dedication embodies
the core concept of human security, which is to leave
no one behind. His legacy will continue to inspire
tireless efforts around the world towards achieving
universal health coverage, thereby helping to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals. May his soul rest
in peace.

Mr. Kakanur (India): Our people are our greatest
asset. There is no investment more beneficial than
investment in the good health of people. Investing in
health is investing in poverty alleviation, in generating
jobs, in enhancing productivity and in ensuring
inclusive economic growth and healthier, safer and
fairer societies. We appreciate the contribution of
the Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative in
mobilizing political support for major public health
issues and thereby ensuring that they are placed high
on the international agenda.

Japan stands ready to accelerate our efforts
towards achieving universal health coverage by 2030
by leveraging relevant forums next year, including the
upcoming second Universal Health Coverage Forum, to
be held in Thailand, the third replenishment meeting
of the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization,
to take place in the United Kingdom, and the Tokyo
Nutrition for Growth Summit. Those events will prepare
us for the high-level review meeting on universal health
coverage in 2023, here in New York.
Finally, Japan would like to request that these
draft resolutions continue to serve as an inclusive
and relevant vehicle for promoting global health and
foreign policy here at the United Nations. We therefore
suggest that the selection of theme, the drafting and

We thank France for putting put forward this
year’s draft resolution A/74/L.26 on behalf of the seven
member countries on promoting an inclusive approach
to strengthening health systems. This topic is of
particular relevance in the context of implementation of
the high-level political declaration on universal health
coverage, adopted in September (resolution 74/2).
Strengthening the health system can be accomplished
through comprehensive changes to policies and
regulations and relationships across building blocks
in the health system that allow more effective use of
resources and motivate positive changes in behaviour
among service providers and users. We would like to
highlight the following points in that context.
Affordability is the key to equitable access
to health care. Stronger health systems must
guarantee both access and choice. The full use of
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
flexibilities — including the development and use of
generics and local manufacturing capacities to meet
public health objectives, transparency in the cost and
price of medicines and other technologies, innovative
partnerships in research and development and the full
use of new and emerging technologies, including digital

19-403805/14

A/74/PV.44

technologies, and the appropriate use of traditional
medicines — are critical in this context.
Both the public and private sectors have a role to
play in building stronger health systems. However,
we need to be cautious about the commercialization
of health services. A strong public health system is
needed to act as a guarantor. Governments also need to
provide strategic leadership and synergies across health
systems, clear incentives for different private actors to
participate, and a regulatory framework that ensures
quality and accessibility.
There is a need to advance the competencies of
the health workforce and improve distribution and
diversity. We need to address shortages by aligning
the training, recruitment, distribution and retention
of the health workforce to serve in areas of greatest
need. Community health workers play a crucial role in
covering the last mile in the delivery of services. We
need to strengthen their capacity.
Clinical research and innovation are of the utmost
importance in strengthening health-care systems.
As we experience the rapid global spread of digital
health technologies, we need to assess their design and
delivery and ensure that those applications bring about
desired health outcomes.
Health-care reform of unprecedented scale and
scope is currently taking place in India. Our holistic
approach to health care with public-private partnership
provides a unique model for the developing world.
India launched the National Health Protection
Scheme in September 2018. The Scheme is based on
twin pillars of expanding access to primary health care
through health and wellness centres and providing
insurance coverage for secondary and tertiary care
hospitalization for poor and vulnerable families.
Health and wellness centres will deliver comprehensive
primary health care, bringing it closer to communities.
We plan to set up 150,000 such health and wellness
centres by 2022. Over 19,000 hospitals have been
empanelled in the programme, more than half of them
in the private sector. A total of 115 million health cards
have been issued, and 7 million people have availed
themselves of treatment under the Scheme.
The other arm of the National Health Protection
Scheme provides health insurance coverage of up
to $7,000 per household for secondary and tertiary
hospitalization. This insurance is provided to about
6/14

11/12/2019

100 million households, covering 500 million of the
poor and most vulnerable people. It also provides
cashless and paperless access to health-care services
for every beneficiary at designated hospitals across
the country.
A robust information technology system has been
created for connecting service providers, beneficiaries
and the administrators at federal and state levels. With
over 1 million community health workers and midwives,
we have a formidable force of front-line women health
workers. They are the strength of our programme.
Seventy-five new medical colleges are being set up to
add more than 15,000 new medical education places.
India is also developing drugs and therapeutics, as
well as practices and policies, that provide solutions to
local and global health-care challenges.
We saw the transformative potential of affordability
when Indian pharmaceutical companies supplied
medicines to HIV/AIDS patients in Africa for less than
$1 per day in the early years of this millennium. A large
proportion of the antiretroviral drugs used globally
today to combat HIV/AIDS are supplied by Indian
pharmaceutical firms. India is the not only the largest
provider of generic drugs globally, but also caters to
over 60 per cent of global demand for various vaccines.
We have been also partnering with African countries in
developing telemedicine facilities.
We in India generally believe that health and
wellness depend on a delicate balance among the mind,
body and spirit. The world has come to recognize the
value of this holistic approach. We are not just fighting
diseases; we are promoting good health. If the issue of
inclusivity is at the core of this agenda, our efforts to
improve global health cannot be achieved by ignoring
traditional and holistic health systems. We stand
committed to working with everyone based on our
own experience to address national and global healthcare challenges.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): At the outset, allow me
to express my profound appreciation to France for
its leadership this past year in promoting integrated,
people-centred,
gender-sensitive
and
inclusive
universal health coverage.
Indonesia agrees that the national health systems
must benefit all people without any distinction.
Inclusivity is one of five values embraced in Indonesia’s
national health development plan, along with pro19-40380

11/12/2019

people, responsive, effective and clear values. Indonesia
established national health insurance in 2014. We are
now assessing our achievements on the maximum target
of universal health coverage by the end of this year.
We have achieved several universal health coverage
milestones over the past five years. Our national health
insurance has covered more than 223 million people,
representing 83 per cent of the total population. Fortyfour per cent of our current national health insurance
is financed by the State, as are local Government
budgets, to subsidize those who cannot afford to pay
contributions. More than 25,000 health-care providers
have been registered and integrated into the network.
In addition to expanding coverage, the Government
is also improving quality, access and facilities of
health-care services. We are relying on improved
synergy and close collaboration among various levels
of Government and other related stakeholders to
strengthen the system. The inclusive and participatory
contribution of stakeholders will ensure the availability
of affordable health care for all.
For Indonesia’s forthcoming chairmanship of
the Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative in
2020, we have chosen “Affordable health care for
all” as the central theme. Every year, the Initiative
member countries have pioneered, and succeeded in
mainstreaming, health issues within the global health
and foreign policy agenda at the General Assembly and
at the World Health Assembly.
Since promoting global health involves and requires
concerted efforts on the part of multiple stakeholders,
Indonesia would like to revitalize the Initiative to
translate our cooperation into more concrete actions
and results and affordable care for all. That means that
we need to involve other actors, such as the private
sector and related health organizations, in pursuit of
our common interests.
Let me conclude by thanking all delegations
for their cooperation this year. We look forward to
working with Member States on the implementation of
draft resolution A/74/L.26. As we take the helm of the
Initiative next year, we look forward to the continued
support of Member States in working together in
pursuing affordable health-care services for all.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.

A/74/PV.44

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/74/L.26, entitled “Global health and
foreign policy: an inclusive approach to strengthening
health systems”. I inform the Assembly that the draft
resolution has closed for e-sponsorship.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/74/L.26,
Viet Nam, which is among delegations listed in the
document, has notified the Secretariat that it no longer
wishes to sponsor the draft resolution.
In addition to those delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/74/L.26: Albania,
Andorra, Argentina, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Canada, the Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, the Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, the Niger,
Palau, Panama, the Philippines, Portugal, Romania,
Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay and Zambia.
The Acting President: Separate recorded votes
have been requested on the thirteenth preambular
paragraph and on operative paragraph 29 of draft
resolution A/74/L.26. Are there any objections to
those requests?
Mr. Jechoux (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation regrets that a vote has been requested on
the thirteenth preambular paragraph, given that it
uses established language taken from resolution 74/2,
entitled “Political declaration of the high-level meeting
on universal health coverage: moving together to build
a healthier world” — namely, paragraph 68, which was
negotiated at length and adopted without a vote just a
few weeks ago. We call on all delegations to vote in
favour of the thirteenth preambular paragraph.

19-403807/14

A/74/PV.44

The same goes for operative paragraph 29, which
includes language from resolution 73/132, entitled
“Global health and foreign policy: a healthier world
through better nutrition”. Overall, the text reflects a
balance among all subjects. We therefore call on all
States to vote in favour of operative paragraph 29.
Mr. Terva (Finland): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
We are disappointed that a vote has been requested
on the thirteenth preambular paragraph. In 2015, the 193
States Members of the United Nations adopted the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development by consensus.
The language in the thirteenth preambular paragraph
is taken verbatim from target 5.6 of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. It is unacceptable that we
erode an international commitment that we all agreed
to unanimously only a few years ago. The European
Union will therefore vote in favour of this preambular
paragraph. We encourage others to do likewise.
On operative paragraph 29, the European Union
will vote in favour of the facilitators’ text.
The Acting President: Having heard no objection
to the requests for separate votes, I shall put those
paragraphs to the vote, one by one.
I first put to the vote the thirteenth preambular
paragraph of draft resolution A/74/L.26.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Bahamas,
Bangladesh,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
8/14

11/12/2019

Niger, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, San Marino,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Against:
Belarus, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Libya,
Nauru, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi,
Egypt, Guyana, Kenya, Kuwait, Malaysia,
Maldives, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Senegal, Syrian Arab Republic, United
Arab Emirates, Yemen
The thirteenth preambular paragraph was retained
by 121 votes to 8, with 19 abstentions.
The Acting President: I now put to the vote
operative paragraph 29 of draft resolution A/74/L.26.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius,
19-40380

11/12/2019

A/74/PV.44

Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Burundi
Operative paragraph 29 was retained by 148 votes
to 1, with 1 abstention.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Burundi informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that the
assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/74/L.26?
Draft resolution
(resolution 74/20).

A/74/L.26

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, may
I remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary aligns itself
with the statement on the voting delivered on behalf of
the European Union and wishes to add the following
remarks in its national capacity.
Hungary joined the consensus on resolution 74/20
and thanks France for its leadership and the group
of seven States for bringing forward this initiative
this year.

Hungary is fully committed to ensuring the
achievement of the highest attainable standards of
health, especially focusing on an inclusive approach to
strengthening health systems, which is a key priority
for the Hungarian Government. We therefore welcome
the focus of this year’s resolution on that crucial matter.
We are proud of Hungary’s long-standing achievements
in health care and our contributions to advancing global
public health.
At the same time, Hungary would like to take this
opportunity to recall our concerns on certain aspects
of the political declaration of the high-level meeting
on universal health coverage (resolution 74/2), which
we voiced clearly at its approval on 23 September. We
would therefore have preferred a neutral reference to
the declaration in paragraph 2 of the present resolution.
Hungary also disassociated itself from paragraph 70
of the political declaration on the universal health
coverage, and cannot therefore align ourselves with
paragraph 5 of the present resolution. We would further
like to put on the record that paragraph 25 should be in
line with national regulations and competencies.
Mr. Ghorbanpour Najafabadi (Islamic Republic
of Iran): At the outset, I would like to thank the group
of friends of the Foreign Policy and Global Health
Initiative as the co-facilitators of resolution 74/20, in
particular the delegation of France as the facilitator of
this year’s resolution, for the hard work and relentless
efforts in convening and leading the consultations.
My delegation participated constructively in all of the
negotiations in a spirit of engagement in order to have
an inclusive resolution that reflects all the realities and
concerns in a fair and balanced manner.
While the theme of this year’s resolution is an
inclusive approach to strengthening health systems
and although my delegation joined the consensus on its
adoption, there is, however, scepticism as to whether
the resolution has been successful in achieving its goal.
According to the framework introduced by the World
Health Organization, among the factors that affect
access to medicines are affordable prices, sustainable
financing and reliable health and supply systems.
Unfortunately, this resolution does not properly address
the aforementioned factors. The fact is that, due to the
unilateral coercive measures that have been imposed
as a political means in order to achieve foreign policy
goals, sustainable financing, along with reliable health
and supply systems for providing medicine and medical
equipment, has been severely affected.

19-403809/14

A/74/PV.44

The resolution not only does not call on States to
refrain from imposing unilateral economic, financial
and trade sanctions that impede access to healthcare services, medicines and the highest attainable
standards of health, but also predicts a significant
number of commitments by Governments, including
those targeted by unilateral coercive measures, to
ensure the right to the highest attainable standards of
health for all. As a result of such unreasonable factors,
my delegation believes that the resolution lacks balance
and fairness.
Given the serious negative effects on health-care
systems and the health of ordinary people as a result
of the unilateral sanctions, my delegation proposed an
action-oriented paragraph based on agreed language
during the negotiations on the draft resolution.
However, surprisingly, this proposal was rejected by
the European Union and, unsurprisingly, by the United
States, while ironically pushing for the inclusion of
several human rights provisions and instruments in the
resolution so that no one would be left behind.
I would like to bring to the Assembly’s attention
the fact that the most debilitating and critical aspect
of the sanctions is their human toll, which is caused by
the severe shortage of critical medicines and medical
equipment for many Iranians. Among them are children
battling grave diseases, such as cancer and tuberculosis,
who have become the primary victims of the United
States unilateral sanctions on Iranians. That is a crime
against humanity that must be stopped now.
Ms. Schoepfer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the adoption of resolution 74/20
and thanks the core group of seven for its commitment,
in particular France for its facilitation. Switzerland also
welcomes the engagement and efforts of the international
community to ensure that all people receive the health
services that they need without financial difficulties.
It is also vital that essential health services be of high
quality. However, Switzerland wishes to clarify its
position on certain aspects of this resolution.
Switzerland adopts a holistic approach including
all relevant factors that contribute to access to medical
products. With regard to paragraph 29, we cannot reduce
the issue of the price of medicines to the protection of
intellectual property. The setting of such prices depends
on many other factors.
With regard to paragraphs 30, 31 and 35, which refer
to incentive and financing mechanisms, Switzerland
10/14

11/12/2019

notes that it supports mechanisms complementary to the
intellectual property system that are primarily applied
where there is market failure when the system in question
does not generate sufficient investment incentives.
At the international level, significant efforts are
under way in the areas covered by this resolution. We
encourage all parties concerned to participate in and
contribute to the work of international organizations
such as the World Health Organization, the World
Trade Organization and the World Intellectual Property
Organization. Moreover, it is also important to avoid
duplication of discussions in such forums.
Mr. Salah (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I am making
this statement on behalf of the Republic of Iraq and my
country, Libya.
I would like to note that Iraq and Libya joined the
consensus in the adoption of resolution 74/20, entitled
“Global health and foreign policy: an inclusive approach
to strengthening health systems”, since both our
countries are eager to support and enhance international
health systems and are convinced that consensus
in United Nations resolutions strengthens them and
favours their effective implementation. Nevertheless,
we would encourage Member States to refrain when
drafting texts for resolutions from including issues that
are contentious owing to differing social and cultural
visions, for example those related to sexual education
and sexual and reproductive health. Cultural issues
should be governed by national legislation that emanates
from a people’s values and its societal specificities.
Insistence on including contentious concepts prevents
us from achieving the desired consensus and negatively
affects the implementation of United Nations resolutions
and decisions.
Further to the sovereign right of States to implement
their policies as they see fit and to govern their internal
affairs in accordance with national legislation that
emanates from their particular religious and ethical
values and traditions, and consistent with our two
countries’ positions on sexual and reproductive health
set forth in previously expressed reservations on the
Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development, the delegations of
Libya and Iraq voted against the thirteenth preambular
paragraph in resolution 74/20. They also reiterate their
non-acceptance of any interpretation of paragraph 16 of
the resolution — by the United Nations or its agencies,
or any governmental or non-governmental international
19-40380

11/12/2019

body — that conflicts with our respective national
legislation. Finally, we request that this statement be
included in the official record of this meeting.
Ms. Fisher-Tsin (Israel): Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 3, on ensuring healthy lives and promoting
well-being for all at all ages, stands out as the clearest
example of the interconnectedness of the SDGs. Good
health allows individuals and communities to develop
and support other goals, while progress on other goals,
such as those on poverty, hunger, education and gender
equality, reinforce Goal 3. The current resolution 74/20,
on global health and foreign policy, highlights a number
of issues that need global attention, in particular the
vital role of women in formulating health policies, as
well as the right to equal access to health care, including
sexual and reproductive health-care services.
The health and well-being of older persons are also
important, and we must be proactive in addressing the
needs of ageing populations. In Israel’s experience, a
national plan for home- and community-based housing
for older persons helps to support progress towards
achieving Goal 3. Such progress helps to maintain the
routine and continued regular activities with family and
social networks.
Israel also strongly supports the additional
language on persons with disabilities, including the
call to increase access to health services. We should
encourage the use of technology and innovation,
including assistive technologies, to promote the
health and well-being of people with disabilities. An
innovative spirit should guide national systems in the
search for new solutions.
We were happy to join the consensus on this
important resolution, but we believe that the issue of
migration should be subject to the national policies and
laws of each Member State.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The topic of strengthening health
systems through international cooperation under the
socioeconomic direction of the United Nations is a
high priority for the Russian Federation. We believe
that issues such as the prevention and combating
of communicable and non-communicable diseases,
the fight against antimicrobial resistance, and the
promotion of a balanced diet and healthy lifestyle
should unite the international community in its quest
for effective, consensus-based solutions. Guided by
those considerations, we supported the adoption of

A/74/PV.44

resolution 74/20 on global health and foreign policy.
We believe that the goals of ensuring universal health
coverage with an emphasis on primary health care,
the implementation of comprehensive, cross-cutting
measures, and the involvement of interested partners,
with Governments playing a leading role, are key
to inclusive and effective approaches to protecting
public health.
We are compelled to conclude, however, that the
resolution contains a number of controversial provisions
and non-agreed terms that are not directly related to
the resolution’s stated topic. We are concerned about
the fact that every year we see more attempts to shift
the focus of this important document from key healthrelated aspects to peripheral issues. That tends to
duplicate the efforts of the specialized United Nations
platforms, reduce the attention given to pressing
problems of international cooperation on the medical
agenda and risk politicizing related policy discussions.
We want to once again underscore that that approach is
not acceptable to us, and that we support maintaining
the document’s direct focus on the topic of health care.
Regrettably, we have to say that the organization of
this year’s negotiation process this year was not optimal.
The fact that the consultations began just when the work
of the Second and Third Committees was in full swing
seriously hindered full participation in the negotiations
on the draft text. The selective consideration of Member
States’ proposals, as well as unfair working methods,
raised questions. Finally, the unprecedented halt to
negotiations on a non-agreed text undermined Member
States’ ability to arrive at a consensus, which is a key
factor in the success of this process.
In the circumstances, we were forced to distance
ourselves from the consensus on a number of the
resolution’s provisions. That applies to the forty-second
preambular paragraph, which misinterprets the mandate
of the World Health Organization, and operative
paragraph 12, which uses non-agreed language
regarding emergency situations and combating sexual
violence. We do not agree with references in the
resolution to internal documents of the Secretariat that
infringe on Member States’ prerogatives, which applies
in particular to the twenty-first preambular paragraph.
We regret that our reasonable concerns about these
and other issues were not addressed. We reserve our
right not to recognize as agreed the provisions of this
resolution that do not jibe with our views. We are
ready to collaborate constructively in future in order

19-4038011/14

A/74/PV.44

to jointly develop consensus decisions on a unifying
health agenda.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): The
United States is taking the floor to speak on resolution
74/20, on global health and foreign policy, and this
year’s theme of an inclusive approach to strengthening
health systems. We appreciate a number of concepts
in the resolution on which Governments, regardless
of their level of development, can act in concert with
partners to advance the health of their populations.
In order to achieve better health, we must expand
access to high-quality care that centres on patients
and targets those who are vulnerable and at risk. We
must draw on the strengths and resources of both the
public and private sectors by promoting partnerships
that include Governments and private-sector, civilsociety and non-governmental organizations, including
faith and community-based groups. Those and other
stakeholders are critical to achieving our goals in the
health space. Promoting and protecting human rights is
also a key component in strengthening health systems.
Human rights violations and abuses lead to further
marginalization and enhance barriers to accessing
health care, as well as fundamentally weakening
countries’ health systems. We are pleased to see positive
language that calls on States to uphold their human
rights obligations. We were disappointed, however, by
the last-minute weakening of the text on this topic. It is
regrettable that while other topics for which delegations
broke silence were not changed, the sponsors decided to
remove important human rights language.
We also want to draw attention to the fact that we
should seriously reconsider the timing of this resolution
in future. The informal consultations began during the
busiest periods for the Second and Third Committees,
while today’s deadline for adoption and action left us
with several technical inaccuracies and a text that did
not feel final for many delegations. We would encourage
next year’s Chair and the Group of Seven countries to
consider adopting this text either later in December
or in January, and at a minimum to begin informal
consultations after the Second and Third Committees
conclude their deliberations.
The United States remains firmly committed to
improving health around the world and advancing the
health-related Sustainable Development Goals. In 2019,
the United States Government invested $19 billion in
global health programmes. Through our investments
12/14

11/12/2019

we collaborate with States Members of the United
Nations, the United Nations itself, the World Health
Organization and other organizations to achieve our
shared goals in global health.
The United States believes that women should have
equal access to health care. In fact, we are the largest
bilateral donor of global health and family planning
assistance. However, it is unacceptable to inject
controversial terms such as “sexual and reproductive
health” and “sexual and reproductive health-care
services” into this document. We remain committed
to the principles laid out in the Beijing Declaration
and the International Conference on Population and
Development Programme of Action, but as written,
the thirteenth preambular paragraph of this resolution
misstates the international consensus. The United States
therefore called for a vote on that paragraph and voted
against it. As has been made clear over many years,
there is an international consensus that these documents
do not create new international rights, including any
right to abortion. The United States fully supports the
principle of voluntary choice regarding maternal and
child health and family planning. We do not recognize
abortion as a method of family planning, nor do we
support abortion in our global health assistance. The
United States strongly supports the dignity and value
of all human life and rejects any attempt by others to
construe the terms “health services” and “health-care
services” to include abortion.
The United States has joined with countries in
recent forums to support a positive, consensus-based
vision for access to universal health coverage that
promotes better health and the preservation of human
life and dignity. Our vision includes strong support for
equality between men and women and the empowerment
of women and girls by accelerating programmes to
end maternal mortality, improving girls’ educational
opportunities and ensuring that the health sector is
responding effectively to gender-based violence.
It is our view that the United Nations must respect
the independent mandates of other processes and
institutions, including trade negotiations, and must not
involve itself in decisions and actions in other forums,
including the World Trade Organization (WTO). The
United States recognizes the importance of access to
affordable, safe, high-quality and effective medicines,
as well as the critical role that intellectual property plays
in incentivizing the development of new and improved
medicines. It is unacceptable to the United States that
19-40380

11/12/2019

the United Nations and some Member States have used
non-WTO multilateral forums to attempt to characterize
the WTO’s rules and agreements. This could lead to a
misinterpretation of international trade obligations in a
manner that may negatively affect countries’ abilities
to incentivize new drug development and expand
access to medicines. Indeed, the strong protection and
enforcement of intellectual property rights incentivizes
the creation and distribution of lifesaving medicines
and other useful consumer products around the world
that address the health, environmental and development
challenges of today and tomorrow through a carefully
negotiated set of rights and obligations under the WTO
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement). We continue
to oppose language that we believe attempts to
characterize trade commitments.
With those concerns in view, the United States
strongly opposed the inclusion of operative paragraph
29 in the resolution, and we called for a paragraph vote
and voted no. There is recent consensus language from
the outcome of the high-level event on universal health
coverage held during the General Assembly during
high-level week in September; this language should
have been the only reference to the TRIPS Agreement.
The twenty-second preambular paragraph is more
current than the language contained in operative
paragraph 29.
Furthermore, language in operative paragraph
29 has no precedent as an operative paragraph, it
having been moved from the preambular section of the
resolution into the operative section of the resolution
in the final text after negotiations were concluded and
with no substantive or procedural justification from
the main sponsors of the resolution. Such capricious
manipulation of the text undermines consensus on the
entire resolution.
With regard to our position on the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, we expressed our concerns
in our general statement in the Second Committee
delivered on 21 November 2019.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): Guatemala welcomes the adoption of
resolution 74/20, entitled “Global health and foreign
policy: an inclusive approach to strengthening health
systems”. We commend the efforts of the group of
sponsors, as well as the French delegation, in facilitating
the process. We would also like to thank the Wold

A/74/PV.44

Health Organization for its willingness in contributing
its experience throughout the negotiations.
Our Constitution establishes the enjoyment
of health as a fundamental human right without
discrimination. In this regard, as a State that values
multilateralism, Guatemala recognizes the relevance
of the resolution adopted by the General Assembly and
reaffirms its commitments to the physical, social and
mental well-being of its citizens. We are striving to
make universal coverage a reality for all, in accordance
with 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
particularly with the objective of achieving Sustainable
Development Goal 3, on guaranteeing a healthy life and
in promoting well-being for everyone at any age.
When considering the integral focus on health,
my delegation would also like to express that, with
respect to references and interpretations made to and
of sexual and reproductive health and access to sexual
and reproductive health-care services and reproductive
rights, our Constitution establishes that the State
guarantees human life from the point of conception, as
well as the integrity and the safety of the individual
person. The enjoyment of health is a fundamental
human right without discrimination, and methods
of sexual and reproductive health must not include
abortion methods.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Holy See.
Monsignor Hansen (Holy See): At the outset, my
delegation would like to thank France and the Group of
Seven for presenting resolution 74/20, entitled “Global
health and foreign policy: an inclusive approach to
strengthening health-care systems”, with this year’s
specific focus on an inclusive approach to strengthening
health-care systems.
This year’s theme reminds us that we share the duty
of caring for one another, especially the poorest and
those most in need. To ensure that all people have access
to the medical attention and health care that they need
is a concrete expression of solidarity, social justice and
the equitable sharing of the common good. In the light
of this, the Holy See understands an inclusive approach
to strengthening health-care systems as a commitment
to safeguarding the health of the person as a whole,
including the most vulnerable — the unborn, the sick,
persons with disabilities and the elderly — during all
stages in the life of the person.

19-4038013/14

A/74/PV.44

In many countries, religious organizations and
other faith-based institutions assume significant
responsibility for health care and health-care systems.
Approximately 100,000 Catholic health-care institutions
throughout the world serve vulnerable populations
living in adverse conditions. For this reason and as our
moral duty to care for one another, especially those in
need and on the peripheries of society, resolution 74/20
is of particular importance to the Holy See, and my
delegation has engaged actively in the negotiations.
The Holy See would like to reaffirm that the right
to health is universally recognized as a basic human
right and is understood as comprising the health of the
person as a whole and of all persons during all stages of
development throughout their life. The right to health
is therefore inextricably linked to the right to life,
and it can never be manipulated as an excuse to end
or dispose of any human life at any point in the entire
continuum of his or her existence, from conception
until natural death.
With that in mind, my delegation is most pleased to
see language included in the resolution that reflects the
need to provide access to high-quality antenatal-care
services as a key element to preventing both maternal
and newborn deaths. The fact that the large proportion
of maternal and infant deaths occur during labour,
delivery or within the first 24 hours after birth
undoubtedly confirms the need for access to better
prenatal care, which protects the life of the child in the
womb, as well as after birth.
Furthermore, the Holy See recognizes the
importance of promoting and protecting human rights
in the context of health. To advance human rights
protection and to avoid abuses or violations, language
and terminology must abide by and respect international
human rights law, international law and universally
recognized human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Lack of clarity on human rights or their importance
within a specific field, such as health care, often leads
to manipulation and will ultimately undermine efforts
to protect and promote these very rights.

14/14

11/12/2019

It is regrettable that a number of paragraphs in
the resolutions, due to controversial terms or issues of
profound and well-known disagreement, did not find
consensus. This seriously weakens the resolution as a
whole and our common efforts to advance an inclusive
approach to strengthening health-care systems. In
particular, the Holy See considers it most unfortunate
and misleading that the adopted resolution includes
deeply concerning and divisive references to sexual
and reproductive health-care services and sexual
and reproductive health and reproductive rights as
components of inclusive health-care systems.
In line with its reservations expressed at the
international conferences held in Beijing and Cairo,
the Holy See reiterates that it considers the phrase
“reproductive health and related terms” as applying to
a holistic concept of health, which embraces the person
in the entirety of his or her personality, mind and body.
In particular, the Holy See rejects the interpretation
that considers abortion or access to abortion, sexselective abortion, abortion of foetuses diagnosed with
health challenges, maternal surrogacy and sterilization
as dimensions of these terms.
Finally, while the Holy See acknowledges the
particular risks that women and children face in the
context of humanitarian emergencies, as well as their
specific and integral needs with regard to access to basic
health care, essential obstetric services and sanitary
and food security, my delegation is concerned by the
lack of an integral approach to this issue that respects
relevant provisions of international humanitarian law
and international law.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 126?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.30a.m.

19-40380
