IX

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SECOND
COMMITTEE
quired by the General Assembly to carry on the
functions instituted" by resolution 200 (III),
Having decided, in resolution 200 (III), "to
appropriate the funds necessary to enable the
Secretary-General to perform" certain functions
set out in that resolution,

304 (IV). Expanded programme of
technical assistance for economic
development of under-developed
countries
The General Assembly,

1. Agrees with the recommendations of the
Economic and Social Council that the activities
under resolution 200 (III) should be expanded
in 1950 in accordance with the Secretary-General's proposals, that increased appropriations
should be provided therefor and that the regular
budget of the United Nations should continue
to provide for the activities authorized by that
resolution;
2. Notes with approval that the SecretaryGeneral has included an amount for these services
in the budget of the United Nations for the year
1950.4

Having considered the Economic and Social
Council's resolution 222 (IX) A 1 of 15 August
1949 on an expanded programme of technical
assistance for economic development,
1. Approves the observations and guiding principles set out in annex I of that resolution and
the arrangemen.ts made by the Council for the
administration of the programme ;
2. Notes the decision of the Council to call a
Technical Assistance Conference to be convened
by the Secretary-General in accordance with the
terms of paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Council
resolution;

242nd plenary meeting,
16 November 1949.

3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to set up
a special account for technical assistance for economic development, to be available to those organizations which participate in the expanded programme of technical assistance and which accept
the observations and guiding principles set out in
annex I of the Council resolution and the arrangements made by the Council for the administration
of the programme ;

306 (IV). Economic development of
under-developed countries
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 5 presented by the
Economic and Social Council in accordance with
the provisions of General Assembly resolution
198 (III) 6 of 4 December 1948,

4. Approves the recommendations of the Council to Governments participatin~ in the Technical
Assistance Conference regardmg financial arrangements for administering contributions, and
authorizes the Secretary-General to fulfil the
responsibilities assigned to him in this connexion;

1. Notes the measures already devised by the
Council, its commissions and the specialized agencies regarding the economic development of underdeveloped countries and regions, especially those
in the field of technical assistance for economic
development ;

5. Invites all Governments 1<) ,uake as large
voluntary contributions a• ,-,c1ss1ble to the special
account for technical assistance.

2. Takes note of the arrangements made by
the Council to give detailed consideration at an
early session to other questions related to the
economic development of under-developed countries and regions ;

242nd plenary meeting,
16 November 194 9.

305 (IV). Technical assistance for eco•
nomic development under General
Assembly resolution 200 (III)

3. Looks forward specifically to receiving the
Council's studies of and recommendations for
international action concerning the urgent problems of the financing, in all its aspects, of economic development in under-developed countries ;

The General Assembly,
Having considered the Economic and Social
Council's recommendation,2 in accordance with
paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 200
(IIl) 3 of 4 December 1948, including its recommendations concerning "budgetary action .re-

4. Recommends that the Economic and Social
Council:
(a) Continue to give urgent attention to the
problems of economic development of under-

1 See Official Records of the Economic and Social
Council, Fourth Year, Ninth Session, Resolutions, page 4.
2 See Official Records of the fourth session of the General Assembly, Supplement No. 3, page 1S.
8 See Official Records of the third session of the General Assembly, Part I, Resolutions, page 38.

• See Official Records of the fourth session of the General Assembl:,, Suppleiwet No. S, pa&"C 234.
ff Ibid., Supplement No. 3, page 14.
6 Sec Official Records of the third session of the General Assembly, Part I, Resolutions, page 37.

Z1
