General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

268

37/107.

Provisions for a unit of account and adjustment
of limitations of liability adopted by the United
Nations Commission on International Trade

Law
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that many international transport and liability
conventions of both a global and a regional character contain
limitation of liability provisions, wherein the limitation of
liability is expressed in a unit of account,
Noting that the amount fixed in such a convention as the
limitation of liability may become seriously affected over
time by changes in monetary values, thereby destroying the
intended balance of the convention as adopted,
Believing that a preferred unit of account for many conventions, particularly for those of global application, should
be the special drawing right as determined by the International Monetary Fund,
Being of the opinion that the conventions should, in any
event, contain a provision which would facilitate adjustment
of the limit of liability to changes in monetary values,
Taking into consideration any preferential agreements
between the States concerned,
Noting that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law has adopted a provision for a universal
unit of account for expressing monetary amounts in international transport and liability conventions and two alternative provisions for adjustment of the limits of liability in
such conventions, 23
1. Recommends that, in the preparation of future international conventions containing limitation of liability provisions or in the revision of existing conventions, the unit
of account provision adopted by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law should be used;
2. Recommends further that in such conventions one of
the two alternative provisions for adjustment of the limitation ofliability adopted by the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law should be used.
107th plenary meeting
16 December /982

37/108.

Consideration of effective measures to enhance
the protection, security and safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 24
Emphasizing the duty of States to take all appropriate
steps, as required by international law:
(a) To protect the premises of diplomatic and consular
missions, as well as of missions to international intergovernmental organizations,
(b) To prevent any attacks on diplomatic and consular
representatives, as well as on representatives to international
intergovernmental organizations and officials of such
organizations,
Deeply concerned about the continued large number of
violations of, and failures to respect, the inviolability of
diplomatic and consular missions and representatives, and
about the serious threat presented by such violations to the
maintenance of normal and peaceful international relations,
which are necessary for co-operation among States,

,, Ibid., para. 63.
N37/404 and Corr. I, Add. I and Add. I/Corr. I and Add.2-5.

24

Expressing its sympathy for the victims of illegal acts
against diplomatic and consular representatives and missions
as well as against representatives and missions to international intergovernmental organizations and officials of such
organizations,
Noting that only a small number of States have so far,
in response to the call by the General Assembly at its thirtyfifth and thirty-sixth sessions, become parties to the relevant
conventions concerning the inviolability of diplomatic and
consular missions and representatives,
Convinced that the reporting procedures established under
General Assembly resolution 35/168 of 15 December 1980
and further elaborated in Assembly resolution 36/33 of 13
November 1981 are important steps in the efforts to enhance
the protection, security and safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives,
Desiring to maintain and further strengthen those reporting procedures,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Strongly condemns acts of violence against diplomatic and consular missions and representatives as well
as against missions and representatives to international
intergovernmental organizations and officials of such
organizations;
3. Urges States to observe and to implement the principles and rules of international law governing diplomatic
and consular relations and, in particular, to take all necessary
measures in conformity with their international obligations
effectively to ensure the protection, security and safety of
all diplomatic and consular missions and representatives
officially present in territory under their jurisdiction, including practicable measures to prohibit in their territories
illegal activities of persons, groups and organizations that
encourage, instigate, organize or engage in the perpetration
of acts against the security and safety of such missions and
representatives;
4. Recommends that States should co-operate closely,
inter alia through contacts between the diplomatic and consular missions and the receiving State, with regard to practical measures designed to enhance the protection, security
and safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives and with regard to exchange of information on
the circumstances of all serious violations thereof;
5. Calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the instruments relevant to the
protection, security and safety of diplomatic and consular
missions and representatives, inter alia the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961, 25 the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations of 1963, 26 and the respective
optional protocols thereto, as well as the Convention of 1973
on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents; 27
6. Calls upon States, in cases where a dispute arises in
connection with a violation of the principles and rules of
international law concerning the inviolability of diplomatic
and consular missions and representatives, to make use of
the means for peaceful settlement of disputes, including the
good offices of the Secretary-General;
7. Invites:
(a) All States to report to the Secretary-General serious
violations of the protection, security and safety of diplomatic
and consular missions and representatives;
(b) The State in which the violation took place-and,
where applicable. the State where the alleged offender is
"United Nations. Treatv Series, vol. 500, No. 7310, p. 95.
26 Ibid .. vol. 596, No. 8638, p. 261.
27 Resolution 3166 1XXVlll), annex
