s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council
Diatr.
GENERAL
S/25822
22 May 1993
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: CHINESE

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
Following conaultationa with the membera of the Security Council, the
Preaident of the Council made the following atatement, on behalf of the Council,
at ita 3214th meeting, on 22 May 1993, in connection with the Council'a
conaideration of the itero entitled "The aituation in Cambodia":
"The Security Council atrongly condemna the ahelling on 21 May 1993 of
the United Nationa Tranaitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC), during which
the Chineae engineering detachment auffered two deatha and aeven wounded.
It expreaaea ita condolencea to the Chineae Government and to the familiea
of the victima; it paya tribute to the latter for their courage and
dedication.
"The Security Council takea note of the preliminary report by the
Secretariat indicating that the shelling waa carried out by the NADK.
It
requesta the Secretary-General to inveatigate further and to report
urgently to the Council.
"The Security Council expressea ita atrong aupport for UNTAC in
carrying out its rnandate within the framework of the Paria Agreements.
strongly condernna all attacks againat UNTAC and demanda that those
reaponaible cease forthwith all hostile acta againat UNTAC and take
immediate measures to aafeguard the lives and the security of UNTAC
personnel.

It

"The Council recalla the warning contained in ita reaolution
826 (1993) that it would reapond appropriately ahould any of the parties
fail to honour its obligations.
It further warna that it will not
countenance the use of violence to interfere with or overturn the
democratic procesa in Cambodia and will take further appropriate meaaures
against any of the parties failing to honour ita obligationa.
"The Security Council also expressea ita determination that the
election far the constituent asaembly should be held en the dates decided
by the Supreme National Council and endorsed by the Security Council in ita
resolution 810 (1993) and reaffirms ita commitment to resolution
826 (1993).
The council calla upon the Cambodian people fully to exercise
their right to vote in the forthcoming electiona.
In this reapect, the
Council streasea the importance of ensuring the ceaaation of acta of
violence and of all threats and intimidation, as well as of ensuring a
neutral political environment in Cambodia."
93-30080 (E)

220593
