S/PV.8778

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8778th meeting

Monday, 7 December 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Kridelka
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Blanco Conde
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Sautter
Ms. Handaruningrum
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Gonsalves
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Allen
Mr. Mills
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2020/1150)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-34412 (E)
*2034412*

S/PV.8778

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: Before we proceed, may I pay
tribute to the sterling work done by Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines in presiding over the Security Council for
the month of November. All Council members credited
the sterling work that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
did, and we will try to emulate it. I therefore very much
thank Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2020/1150)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to participate in this meeting.
The Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2020/1150, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this further opportunity to provide
the Security Council with an update on the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo following
the issuance of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/1150) before members today and prior to
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
2/21

07/12/2020

Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
We are unfortunately going through a period of
heightened political tensions, marked by ongoing
differences among the members of the ruling coalition.
Six weeks after suspending the Council of Ministers
and announcing the launch of consultations with a broad
range of representatives of the political forces and civil
society, President Tshilombo Tshisekedi addressed
the nation yesterday afternoon. In that speech, the
President announced the end of the coalition between
the Cap pour le changement and the Front commun pour
le Congo (FCC) and maintained that, in view of the loss
of the current parliamentary majority, he had decided
to appoint an adviser tasked with identifying a new
majority ready to support his reform programme. He
also stressed that, if that adviser were unable to identify
a new parliamentary majority, he would proceed to
dissolve the National Assembly and ask the Congolese
people to give him a majority at the ballot box.
As we speak, while noting the end of the coalition,
as decided by the President, the FCC has rejected
the analysis of a crisis between the Government and
Parliament and described the decisions of the Head
of State as unconstitutional. Meanwhile, several civil
society and opposition representatives welcomed
the assessment of the country’s political situation
by the Head of State and expressed their support for
his approach. Unfortunately, today we must deplore the
clashes between militants of the two political forces
surrounding and within Parliament.
In the light of those tensions, over the past month
MONUSCO met with numerous representatives of the
political forces and civil society to encourage them to
resolve their differences through dialogue and avoid
any actions that could incite violence. The Mission
also stressed the need to focus their efforts on reaching
agreement on stabilization policies and institutional
reforms, which are essential to improving the security
and daily lives of the Congolese people. We will
continue to use our good offices to facilitate a peaceful,
early resolution of this sensitive political situation,
which, if it persists, could have serious repercussions
on the economic and security situation in the country in
the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
(spoke in English)
As far as the security situation is concerned, I
remain concerned about the continuing protection
20-34412

07/12/2020

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

crisis in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where insecurity, grave violations of
human rights and displacement continue to affect
civilians, notably women and children. Indeed, while
armed group activities persist in the Djugu and Irumu
territories of Ituri, albeit recently at a reduced level,
very serious incidents of intercommunal violence and
attacks against civilians were once again recorded in the
past month in the Beni, Masisi and Rutshuru territories
of North Kivu, as well as in the Uvira, Mwenga and
Fizi territories of South Kivu. The deadly activities of
national and foreign armed groups in those territories
serve to highlight the crucial role that the MONUSCO
force, including the Force Intervention Brigade, needs
to continue to play to support national security forces
in expanding State authority and deterring violence
against civilians.
The protection of civilians remains a central
priority for MONUSCO, which it pursues through
a whole-of-mission approach involving the civilian,
military and police components. Given the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in provinces affected by
conflict, protecting civilians is also heavily dependent
upon unimpeded access to those in need. I therefore
strongly condemn recent unacceptable attacks
against humanitarian workers who, despite numerous
operational and security challenges, continue to
assist vulnerable civilian populations. The ability
of humanitarian workers to support the Congolese
authorities is absolutely essential to relieve the
suffering of victims of conflict and was key to ending
the eleventh Ebola outbreak in Equateur province.
Protecting civilians also requires closing the
space for actors perpetrating atrocities, by ensuring
accountability for their crimes. The recent trial and
conviction of Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka for war crimes,
including rape, sexual slavery and the recruitment of
children, therefore represents an important step forward
for Congolese military justice in combating impunity.
Some of the most serious challenges affecting the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — from the presence
of foreign armed groups to the illegal exploitation
of, and trafficking in, mineral resources — require
regional and international efforts to achieve sustainable
solutions. In that context, I salute the efforts undertaken
by the Congolese authorities to engage constructively
with the country’s neighbours to resolve their
differences, foster regional economic cooperation and
consolidate regional peace and stability. As President

S/PV. 8778

Tshilombo Tshisekedi approaches the beginning of his
chairmanship of the African Union, those efforts will
most likely be sustained in 2021.
MONUSCO will continue to work closely with
the Office of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region of Africa to
support the Government in that respect, as one of the
constituents of the United Nations Great Lakes regional
stabilization strategy. The Mission also remains
committed to working closely with the African Union,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Southern African Development Community
to ensure synergies and make certain that our joint
investment in supporting regional stability brings about
maximum results.
The drawdown and ultimate withdrawal of
MONUSCO from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo figured prominently in our discussions with
the Government in recent months. The result of those
discussions is the joint strategy on the progressive
and phased drawdown of MONUSCO, which was
shared with the Council by the Secretary-General on
26 October. The joint strategy represents a common
vision for the gradual, responsible and sustainable
drawdown and exit of the Mission.
That transition is not a process that started recently,
but is, rather, a continuation of steps taken following
the 2018 presidential elections and the subsequent
peaceful transfer of power. Since then, MONUSCO has
closed nine field offices and is currently present in only
six provinces, in addition to the mission headquarters
in Kinshasa. The joint strategy recognizes that the
realities on the ground and security needs are different
in each province where MONUSCO is still present.
Therefore, it envisions a tailored approach through
province-specific strategies that aim to progressively
consolidate the Mission’s footprint in the three provinces
most affected by active conflict, namely, North Kivu,
South Kivu and Ituri. By June 2021, MONUSCO will
withdraw completely from the Kasais, and by June
2022, should gains in stabilizations persist, it will also
be in a position to withdraw from Tanganyika.
Ultimately, the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians lies with State authorities. The
sustainability and tempo of MONUSCO’s transition is
therefore dependent upon the Government’s capacity
to assume security responsibilities and strengthen
its institutional presence across the country. To that

20-344123/21

S/PV.8778

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

end, the Mission is already actively supporting the
implementation of the Government’s national police
reform plan and the joint justice reform plan recently
signed between the Government and the United Nations
Development Programme. MONUSCO has also stepped
up its engagement with relevant stakeholders to advocate
for the establishment of the new framework to foster
and supervise the disarmament, demobilization and
community reintegration of ex-combatants and stands
ready to increase its efforts to coordinate international
support for security sector reform.
My Deputy Special Representative and Resident
and Humanitarian Coordinator is leading our transition
task force and has been charged with ensuring that the
comparative advantages of all United Nations actors
and partners are utilized to enhance complementarities,
create positive synergies and avert possible gaps in
programming and support for the Government.
The global coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has affected MONUSCO’s regular activities,
as has been the case in other peacekeeping contexts.
As of today, a total of 173 MONUSCO personnel have
tested positive for COVID-19, 153 have recovered
and six have died after contracting the virus. In this
difficult context, the Mission has made the utmost
efforts to fulfil its mandate while continuing to
ensure the safety and security of civilian staff and
uniformed components. To make this possible, I have
instructed the Mission to comply strictly with World
Health Organization guidelines and put in place all
possible measures to minimize the risk of contagion
and to ensure that suspected and confirmed cases of
COVID-19 are managed adequately.
(spoke in French)
As was mentioned at the beginning of my remarks,
the current political situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is highly volatile. The Council can play a
significant role in fostering a negotiated settlement to
this political crisis so as to prioritize lasting solutions
that place the interests of the Congolese people above
short-term political goals that are liable to further
heighten tensions.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot
afford a grave institutional crisis. It needs stable and
functional institutions that can get back to work as soon
as possible, focusing on national economic recovery and
stabilization in the eastern part of the country ahead of
the general elections scheduled for 2023.
4/21

07/12/2020

To conclude, I wish to take this opportunity to
thank all members of the Security Council as well
as the troop- and police-contributing countries for
their steadfast commitment and their support for
stabilization in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and MONUSCO. MONUSCO is at a critical juncture
in the provision of support to the national authorities
in shoring up stability, so as to usher in a lasting peace
and development.
I wish to pre-emptively thank the Council for its
guidance in the upcoming steps of this vital work for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President: I thank Ms. Zerrougui for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for
her briefing.
I wish to touch on three points.
First, I wish to focus on the ongoing security
challenges in the eastern part of the country. We
condemn the recurrent attacks targeting civilians and
armed forces in the Kivus and in Ituri. The incidents
in Ituri have resulted in some dozen casualties just last
week. There is an overriding need to put an end to the
illegal exploitation of natural resources and to ease
intercommunal tensions by strengthening the presence
of the State so as to break the cycle of violence.
In those provinces, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) must focus its efforts not only on
the protection of civilians but also on the stabilization
of and support for Congolese institutions. In that
regard, efforts towards disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, specifically as concerns the Force
de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri, must be duly
carried out.
Because the violence is perpetrated by both domestic
and foreign armed groups, regional cooperation must
be scaled up. In that regard, I welcome the initiatives
adopted by President Tshisekedi. The Great Lakes
Regional Strategic Framework should generate tangible
results for political stability and for peace.
I turn now to my second point. At the humanitarian
level, the end of the eleventh Ebola epidemic in
20-34412

07/12/2020

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV. 8778

the western part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a success to the credit of both the Congolese
Government and the partners that contributed thereto,
specifically the World Health Organization.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
United Nations are laying the foundation for a renewed
partnership. It is now our duty to support it on the path
to a lasting peace.

However, violations of international humanitarian
law remain of great concern. Food insecurity is
worsening. There is a vital need to guarantee
humanitarian access to all people in need and to
protect civilians, specifically women and children.
Attacks targeting humanitarian personnel must end. It
is essential that human rights be respected. Measures
taken to combat the coronavirus disease pandemic
must not be used to justify violations of those rights.
Moreover, we must also support the country in seeking
to surmount the economic and social fallout from the
pandemic. Stepping up the fight against impunity
and achieving transitional justice and intercommunal
reconciliation are all prerequisites for a lasting peace.

Mr. Pham Hai Anh (Viet Nam): At the outset,
I would like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui for her
insightful briefing.

Turning to my third and final point, it is incumbent
on the Security Council to support MONUSCO’s
transition. The joint strategy presented by MONUSCO
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo charts a
clear course: namely, to focus the Mission on areas
where the situation is most volatile and to pursue the
consolidation of both the State and its institutions. That
strategy lays the foundation for the transfer of tasks
from MONUSCO to the Congolese authorities and to
the country team. Of course, this transition should be
both gradual and sequenced.

On the security front, while more than two thirds
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is stable, the
persistence of insecurity and violence in the eastern
part of the country — especially in North Kivu, South
Kivu and Ituri — remains a source of grave concern. It
is deeply troubling to see that the increased intensity
of attacks by armed groups, including the Allied
Democratic Forces, claimed numerous civilian lives
during the recent reporting period. Viet Nam strongly
condemns all attacks against civilians, the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo, personnel of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and humanitarian workers on the ground. This must
stop. MONUSCO and the national protection capacity
needs to be supported and strengthened.

The lasting stabilization of the country will also
require further efforts and commitment on the part
of all stakeholders. I would note in particular justice
and security-sector reform, but I would mention also
development programmes. In all of those areas, the full
participation of women will be of vital importance. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo knows that it can
count on the full support of France in that respect.
As the Council prepares to renew MONUSCO’s
mandate, I should like to pay tribute to its personnel,
who are operating in a volatile environment conditions
in which they are frequently targeted. In that context,
MONUSCO must be able to reach full operational
capacity, which hinges on the reconfiguration of the
Force Intervention Brigade. Discussions are currently
under way among contributing countries and the
Secretariat, which should facilitate the prompt enactment
of the decisions taken by the Security Council.

I would like to highlight the following points.
First, regarding the political and security situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, my delegation
takes note of the continued efforts of the Government
in reducing tensions and ensuring a favourable political
climate for the sake of peace and stability. We also
take note of the Government’s endeavours to engage
all the relevant stakeholders, especially women, in
political life.

We fully share the view that the protracted conflicts
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo require a sustainable solution. The root causes of
conflict need to be addressed by focusing on restoring
State authority in various regions, strengthening the
capacity of national security forces, enhancing political
dialogue and advancing socioeconomic efforts. Special
attention should also be given to furthering progress
in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as
well as security sector reform. We note that a tailored
approach has been adopted to meet local needs.
Secondly, the continued deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, aggravated by insecurity,
an economic downturn and the coronavirus disease

20-344125/21

S/PV.8778

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

(COVID-19) pandemic, is alarming. According to
recently released statistics, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has the largest number of internally displaced
persons in Africa — 5.2 million people. Between July
and December, 21.8 million people faced high levels of
acute food insecurity, including 5.7 million in phase 4
of the Integrated Phase Classification — emergency.
People in conflict-affected regions, such as North and
South Kivu, Ituri and Kasai Central, suffer the most.
On a more positive note, we commend the swift
actions taken by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to end the eleventh Ebola
outbreak in the west of the country and to prevent the
spread of COVID-19. However, there are still enormous
challenges that cannot be overcome without the valuable
assistance of international partners. We therefore call
for strengthened international efforts to support the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Thirdly, we would like to reiterate the importance
of intensifying regional cooperation to achieve
sustained peace, security and development. In that
regard, we welcome the continued engagement of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and countries of the
region, notably the summit held among the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola, Rwanda and Uganda
to discuss the troubling security situation in the
Great Lakes subregion, the improvement of economic
cooperation and the fight against COVID-19, as well as
bilateral engagement between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Burundi.
We would also like to highlight the critical
contributions of the African Union, the Southern
African Development Community, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and other
subregional and international partners to the pursuit of
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region.
Last but not least, the support of MONUSCO
remains crucial given the dire security situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
especially with regard to protecting civilians and
strengthening State institutions. We warmly welcome
the constructive engagement between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo authorities and the Mission in
order to elaborate a joint strategy on the progressive
and the phased drawdown of MONUSCO. We take
note of the careful deliberation of the situation in the
six provinces, as stated in the Secretary-General’s
6/21

07/12/2020

letter (S/2020/1041). We would like to reiterate the
particular significance of a prudent approach in its
implementation, which should consider the evolving
situation on the ground and an assessment of the capacity
of the Government authorities. It is vital to ensure that
we can preserve our hard-won achievements.
Ms. Handaruningrum (Indonesia): At the outset,
allow me to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui for her briefing.
Two years ago, in the first month of our membership
in the Security Council, we heard her briefing after the
2018 Democratic Republic of the Congo election (see
S/PV.8443). Today, in the last month of our membership,
we reflect on how far we have come.
While we welcome the positive momentum, we are
also committed to tackling the remaining challenges.
To that end, we thank the Special Representative and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
for their untiring efforts for the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also commend
the Government for its excellent cooperation in joint
efforts to secure a peaceful future for the country
and the region. On that note, allow me to convey the
following points.
First, the United Nations and the region should
continue to work together to maintain peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We carefully
considered two recently published United Nations
strategic documents — the joint strategy on the
progressive and phased drawdown of MONUSCO and
the United Nations strategy for the Great Lakes region.
We should continue to hear from the Congolese people
on what they need and proceed carefully on the future
configuration of the Organization’s engagement in
order to avoid a relapse. To that end, peacebuilding
efforts must continue.
The multi-spectrum challenges that the country is
facing requires close cooperation from all stakeholders.
An individualistic and silo mindset will no longer work.
We continue to call for more robust consultation with
neighbours and regional organizations, as well as with the
MONUSCO’s troop- and police-contributing countries.
Secondly, we need to increase humanitarian
assistance in the country. That is an essential element
for sustaining peace. We join the Secretary-General
in commending the Government for taking swift and
decisive action in ending the eleventh Ebola outbreak
20-34412

07/12/2020

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

in the west of the country and limiting the spread of the
coronavirus disease.
Nevertheless, we also realize that other humanitarian
challenges persist. Nearly 22 million people in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are now acutely
food insecure, the world’s highest. At the same time,
5.2 million people remain internally displaced because
of the conflict. We call for all partners to increase their
humanitarian support for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Access to humanitarian assistance is
also crucial.
Thirdly, Indonesia will continue to support
the Democratic Republic of the Congo through our
contribution to MONUSCO, which still plays a vital
role in maintaining peace in the country, and we join the
call of the Secretary-General to extend MONUSCO’s
mandate for another year in order to protect civilians
and strengthen State institutions.
To that end, we need to ensure the safety and
security of peacekeepers, including from attacks by
armed groups, such as the Allied Democratic Forces.
Indonesia is contributing more than 1,000 personnel to
MONUSCO, including 49 women peacekeepers. We will
continue our efforts to save lives and protect civilians
through community engagement by winning their
hearts and minds and building trust. We also recognize
the indispensable role of women in peacekeeping and
continue to promote their participation and increased
role in peacekeeping operations, as envisioned in
resolution 2538 (2020).
As the host of the 1955 Asia-Africa Conference,
Indonesia is bound by the Bandung Principles to remain
committed to peace and promote cooperation with
African nations. We renew our strong commitment
as a true partner to our brothers and sisters in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, even beyond our
time on the Security Council.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Zerrougui for her briefing today.
As the Security Council takes stock of the past
year and prepares to renew the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the
United States is impressed by the progress that the
Congolese Government has made, including the end of
two Ebola outbreaks, the conviction of a former Nduma
défense du Congo warlord and judicial reform, with

S/PV. 8778

the appointment of more women to senior positions in
the Congolese judiciary. Looking forward, the United
States is focused on three key areas of the Council’s
work in the Democratic Republic of the Congo:
first, the need for more progress on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and security
sector reform (SSR); secondly, the full implementation
of reforms to improve peacekeeping performance; and,
thirdly, strategic planning for MONUSCO’s responsible
drawdown and transition.
As we just heard from our Vietnamese counterpart,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform are essential for lasting peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We support
President Tshilombo Tshisekedi’s commitment to
community reintegration for former combatants, but
we have not yet seen a national DDR framework. Those
responsible for abuses and violations of human rights
must be held accountable, including at the commander
level. The consequences of these delays are felt, for
example, in South Kivu, when stalled DDR efforts
resulted in armed group leaders returning to fighting,
and in Ituri, where the Force de résistance patriotique
de l’Ituri poses an increasing risk. We also hope to
see progress in the development of a national security
sector reform strategy and a significant decrease in
human rights violations committed by Congolese
security services. This is especially important as the
United Nations reports a worrisome deterioration of the
security situation in North and South Kivu.
The United Nations is deeply concerned by the
recent increase in attacks by the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF). Thirty ADF attacks killed more than
170 civilians in the last three months alone. We urge
the United Nations to move forward with a nearly yearlong delay in implementing the Force Intervention
Brigade (FIB) enhancements that were mandated in
last year’s MONUSCO resolution (resolution 2502
(2019)). Congolese civilians have suffered the most
from these delays. We expect FIB enhancements to
be implemented immediately, and we welcome the
United Nations commitment to the United Nations
Peacekeeping Capabilities Readiness System for
strategic force generation, including the prioritization
of units at the rapid-deployment levels of readiness.
Progress on these two priorities, we believe, is essential
to achieve lasting peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo as well as for MONUSCO’s responsible
drawdown and transition. With that in mind, the United

20-344127/21

S/PV.8778

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

States welcomes the joint strategy between the United
Nations and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
its timeline for MONUSCO’s exit from the Kasais and
Tanganyika. We are encouraged to see the integrated
transition task force for the Kasais and the joint United
Nations justice reform support programme.
But at the same time, we were disappointed not
to see more progress towards the objectives detailed
in last year’s MONUSCO resolution, or more specific
benchmarks in this year’s recommendations. We hope
to see the future development of more specific and
measurable indicators and timelines for lasting peace
and security in the Kivus and Ituri. We also urge
MONUSCO to begin transitioning programmatic tasks
to the United Nations country team and the Congolese
Government, which would allow the Mission to focus
on the difficult tasks of stabilization, DDR and SSR
that will pave the way to sustainable peace.
Finally, given the important role the region has to
play in reaching sustainable peace in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we welcome
last week’s sharing of the United Nations strategy for
the Great Lakes subregion. Although my delegation is
still digesting the content, we welcome the focus on the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region and
the high-level shuttle diplomacy by the United Nations
Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region of Africa to
engage in the search for political solutions to resolve
the conflict. We also encourage giving more attention
to responsible and conflict-free mineral supply chains
as part of a holistic approach to addressing and
preventing violence.
Mr. Sautter (Germany): First of all, we warmly
thank Special Representative Leila Zerrougui for
her briefing. Germany confirms its support for the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
in particular for the Mission’s leadership, and for all
police- and troop-contributing countries. We believe
that the work that the Special Representative is
contributing to is important and indispensable under
very difficult circumstances.
I have two remarks to make. One is on the political
and security situation and the human rights situation,
the other is on the future of the Mission. I can certainly
echo many of the remarks made by colleagues so
far today.
8/21

07/12/2020

On the political situation, we are concerned about
the ongoing political tensions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would call on all political
actors to continue to resolve their differences by means
of dialogue and in the spirit of compromise. In this
critical time of transition, it is important to focus on
necessary political reforms and security sector reform,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR),
accountability and economic opportunities. None of
the challenges can be met without strong and unified
Congolese ownership. We remain concerned about the
violence in the eastern parts of the country, especially
in the Kivus and in Ituri, and about the activities of such
armed groups as the Allied Democratic Forces. This
violence is always accompanied by high numbers of
human rights violations, including sexual and genderbased violence. It is clear that the protection of civilians
has to remain a top priority.
The humanitarian situation remains deeply
troubling, with more than 21 million Congolese facing
food insecurity. We therefore urgently call upon the
international community to support the humanitarian
response plan for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Germany has so far contributed approximately
€72 million for humanitarian assistance measures in
2020, including measures in response to Ebola and the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
It is also important to acknowledge helpful
developments. Let me mention three: first of all, the
improved security situation in Tanganyika province
and the Kasais. It is worth recalling that we can now
zoom our focus in on three to six provinces in the east
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is a
hopeful sign, and it should be a reminder that now is
also the time to support peacebuilding, stabilization
and development efforts in post-conflict areas of the
country. Secondly, the recent conviction of militia leader
Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka for serious war crimes, to which
the Special Representative referred, is an important
step that shows that the fight against impunity in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is ongoing. Thirdly,
let me commend the Democratic Republic of the Congo
authorities, MONUSCO and all humanitarian and
health workers in successfully fighting off another
Ebola outbreak, as well as successfully mitigating the
COVID-19 pandemic.
My second set of remarks is on MONUSCO. On
the upcoming mandate renewal, we believe that the
Mission’s main tasks — the protection of civilians
20-34412

07/12/2020

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and support for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in State- and institution-building — remain key,
especially in the eastern part of the country, given
the challenging situation there. At the same time, it
is time to take the next steps on the path towards a
reconfiguration and transition of the Mission. Germany
welcomes the joint strategy and the idea of a phased and
realistic regional approach that is based on conditions
on the ground. We reiterate the importance of clear and
binding benchmarks that guide the Mission and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo through the process.
At the same time, we underline the importance of
remaining flexible. Progress and conflict and postconflict settings rarely follow a linear, or predictable,
trend. However, it is crucial that the benchmarks now
be developed rapidly and that the failure to meet them
actually has consequences.
The sustainable progress and success of the
transition will depend heavily on strong national
ownership and responsibility. We therefore call on the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to strongly engage in the next steps of the transition,
especially with regard to the regional and provincial
joint transition strategies. Inclusivity is crucial. Civil
society, especially women and local peacebuilders,
must be part of the conversation. The same is true for
the much-needed progress on community-based DDR
efforts, the creation of trusted institutions and the fight
against impunity. That includes accountability for postconflict and conflict-related sexual violence.
We encourage the Mission to continue its internal
reform process. More mobile and flexible troops will
strengthen protection through projection. We call on the
Mission to make further progress on the optimization
of the force set-up, and we encourage MONUSCO and
the Secretariat to draw as many lessons as possible
from recent and ongoing transitions, such as that of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. In particular, we believe that cooperation with
a country team will be important.
Mr. Blanco Conde (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, we thank Ms. Zerrougui
for her briefing on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/1150).
We would like to begin our statement by
acknowledging the readiness expressed at the virtual
summit among the Presidents of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Angola, Rwanda and Uganda to root out

S/PV. 8778

negative forces, establish a plan for a cross-border
response to the pandemic and explore new economic
opportunities. We also recognize the rapprochement
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi.
Such integration efforts are clearly essential to conflict
resolution and socioeconomic growth.
However, we are concerned about the impact that
the break-up of the governing coalition may have on the
political stability of the country. We therefore call on
the political actors to avoid confrontation and to seek
stability and progress, since the message of peace that
the population so badly needs largely depends on that.
The deteriorating security in the eastern part
of the country remains a concern, where civilians,
including women and children, continue to suffer due
to internal clashes between armed groups, land use,
ongoing inter-ethnic conflicts and attacks by the Allied
Democratic Forces.
We would like to express our support for the
deployment of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) in conflict areas and
for the redeployment of United Nations operations
in the context of the three-track approach in postconflict areas.
Similarly, we reiterate the importance of
implementing Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz’s
recommendations and providing MONUSCO with the
appropriate logistical and intelligence equipment on the
ground to neutralize the armed groups and safeguard
the lives of the members of the Mission.
We also call for the strengthening and robust
deployment of the Congolese armed forces in the areas
vacated by armed groups and in the provinces included in
the joint transition strategy, and we consider it essential
that the revised national framework for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration be adopted and that
the fight against impunity be further strengthened.
We condemn human rights abuses and violations,
including rape and gender-based violence. In that
regard, we welcome the adoption of the resolution on
technical assistance and capacity-building in the field
of human rights by the Human Rights Council (A/HRC/
RES/45/34).
We would like to commend the participation of civil
society in the political and electoral life of the country.
We stress that, despite the efforts of MONUSCO,

20-344129/21

S/PV.8778

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

07/12/2020

greater participation by women and young people in
decision-making and conflict resolution is vital for
sustainable peace.

Since Belgium is a multicultural country, like
South Africa moreover, I will deliver my statement in
English today.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo requires a united region to look after
common interests by implementing regional treaties
and agreements, particularly with regard to the trade
in natural resources and arms control. A fragile
humanitarian situation persists in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We therefore urge the
international community to redouble its efforts to
support the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo by contributing to the humanitarian response
plan to assist the most vulnerable.

(spoke in English)

We are pleased that the Ebola outbreak in Equateur
province has been contained and that the coronavirus
disease pandemic is having a moderate effect on the
population as compared to other countries. We hope that
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse committed
by members of the Ebola response teams will be properly
investigated and those responsible brought to justice.
We support the ongoing work of MONUSCO, even
in such difficult circumstances, and we welcome the
agreement between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Mission regarding a
joint strategy for the progressive and phased drawdown
of MONUSCO.
In conclusion, we would like to urge that the exit
strategy and the renewal of MONUSCO’s mandate be
based on realistic parameters and in accordance with
the capacity of the country’s authorities to assume the
responsibilities successfully transferred by MONUSCO
without jeopardizing the achievements to date with
regard to peace and stability.
Mr. Kridelka (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Representative Zerrougui for her very
comprehensive and relevant briefing at a time when
we are preparing to renew the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
I also thank Ms. Zerrougui for her tireless efforts to
implement the important mandate entrusted to her
in the service of the Congolese people. I would also
like to welcome the presence of the representative of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the United
Nations, our friend and colleague Paul Empole, here
among us at the Security Council today.
10/21

I will make three points.
First of all, Belgium welcomes the joint strategy of
the Secretary-General and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo on the progressive and phased drawdown.
Its vision needs to be adequately integrated into
MONUSCO’s new mandate. We strongly support the
proposal for the protection of civilians to remain at
the core of the Mission. That requires a comprehensive
approach, well beyond military operations, including
civil society engagement, community reconciliation
and continued monitoring and reporting on human
rights issues. Such an approach also includes the further
stabilization of State institutions through an increased
focus on security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.
As such, MONUSCO’s new mandate should fully
reflect President Tshilombo Tshisekedi’s new priorities
in that regard, and the gradual reconfiguration is
beginning to unfold in the Kasais and in Tanganyika.
We cannot stress the importance of the benchmarks
enough. The desired end state, not an end date, should
determine the drawdown.
My second point, which is related, is that I want
to emphasize the intrinsic link among peace, security,
development and human rights, as the joint strategy
does. A sustainable transition is viable only if the root
causes of conflict and humanitarian challenges are
addressed within the framework of the so-called triple
humanitarian-development-peace nexus. That requires
true partnership between the Democratic Republic of
the Congo authorities and the international community.
The success of our joint efforts to ensure the capacity of
the country’s authorities to ensure that end state is key.
The European Union’s backing of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in its determination
to continue the security, defence and justice reforms is
but one example. Belgium and its European partners
welcome even greater involvement by the international
financial institutions, not only in the context of
peacebuilding but also in terms of their sharing of
expertise in terms of governance and transparency.
Belgium will also play its role bilaterally. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo has remained, since
20-34412

07/12/2020

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

1960, the largest bilateral beneficiary of Belgium’s
public development assistance. If the conditions are
right, a new bilateral governmental development
cooperation programme could be negotiated with our
Congolese partners starting in 2021.
The nexus requires also a shared vision, reflected
in clear benchmarks. Belgium therefore welcomes the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s leadership in the
transition process and encourages further progress. The
quicker joint benchmarks are elaborated, the sooner
new partnerships in terms of capacity-building might be
concluded. Moreover, adequate Democratic Republic of
the Congo absorption capacity and governance remain
absolutely key.
The nexus will also require full commitment to
the One United Nations approach. A clear delineation
between the future roles and competencies of
MONUSCO and the United Nations country team in
the transition process should therefore be sought. That
is a process that we could already initiate now. In that
regard, I also want to underline the autonomy of the
United Nations country team when it benefits from
core funding.
Belgium is proud to support the United Nations
development agencies, funds and programmes mostly
through multi-year core funding, as commended in a
recent Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development peer review of Belgium’s development
policy by the Development Assistance Committee. We
are particularly interested in the potential synergy of
the United Nations Development Programme with the
MONUSCO drawdown strategy.
Finally, I would like to underscore once more
the importance of the regional context. Many of the
problems that MONUSCO is dealing with are regional
in nature. Those include the presence of foreign proxies
on Democratic Republic of the Congo soil, the illegal
exploitation of, and trafficking in, natural resources
and several humanitarian problems. It is encouraging
that the new United Nations Great Lakes region strategy
prioritizes preventive diplomacy initiatives, including,
when necessary, joint action between the Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region of Africa and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The action plan for
the implementation of the strategy will need to consider
relevant aspects of the MONUSCO review processes to

S/PV. 8778

ensure unity of purpose and alignment of action by the
United Nations in the region.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
Ms. Zerrougi, for her comprehensive briefing. We
closely read the recent report of the Secretary General
(S/2020/1150) on the efforts of peacekeepers in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We concur that the security situation in the eastern
provinces remains fraught. We are particularly troubled
by the Kivus and Ituri, where inter-ethnic violence and
attacks against civilians continue unabated. The Allied
Democratic Forces continue to pose a significant threat,
as clashes with the Congolese army have significantly
increased in recent months. Against that backdrop, we
are deeply concerned about the growing number of
civilian casualties, which has led to renewed grievances
against peacekeepers in Beni and other cities. Attacks
by illegal armed groups and inter-ethnic conflicts
persist even in the relatively calm Tanganyika.
The situation in the country is compounded by the
political crisis, which has already led to the President’s
decision to disband a coalition with supporters of former
President Kabila Kabange. We count on a reduction in
political tensions in Kinshasa through a resolution of
problems at the constitutional level.
At the same time, there are glimmers of hope.
The Congolese authorities have managed to defeat
the most recent Ebola outbreak. Despite the generally
complicated humanitarian situation, effective measures
are being undertaken to prevent the spread of the
coronavirus disease pandemic. We express our support
for President Tshilombo Tshisekedi’s efforts to involve
the neighbouring States in resolving the problems
in the east of the country. We believe that regional
organizations, in particular the Southern African
Development Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, play an
important mediation role in the peace process. We trust
that the new regional strategy prepared by the Office of
the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region of Africa
will give additional impetus to those processes.
We note the contribution to the stabilization of the
eastern provinces made by MONUSCO through nimble
responses to myriad security threats. There are also

20-3441211/21

S/PV.8778

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

non-military ways to address the problem of illegal
armed groups, including a strategy for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former fighters that
is currently being developed and rooted in partnerships
with local communities. We welcome measures to
expand cooperation between MONUSCO and the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo and
to improve the effectiveness of the efforts of the Blue
Helmets, including the Force Intervention Brigade.
This month, the Security Council has the important
task of extending the mandate of the peacekeepers for
another year. We stand ready to work constructively
on the relevant Security Council draft resolution. We
trust that its authors will manage to craft a balanced
document focused on the specific objectives of the
mission. We continue to believe that any decisions
regarding the configuration of MONUSCO, including
the Force Intervention Brigade, should take into account
the situation on the ground and thoroughly consider
the priorities of Kinshasa and the troop-contributing
countries. In that regard, we support a flexible approach
to the issue, as reflected in the joint strategy for the
phased and responsible withdrawal of peacekeepers
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, based on
the criteria and targets proposed in that document.
In conclusion, let me assure you, Mr. President, of
our country’s readiness, including as a member of the
Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region, to continue
to actively contribute to the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the stabilization
in the Great Lakes region as a whole.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Leila Zerrougui for her briefing today.
I would like to commend the continuation of the
vital operations of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), despite the complex and difficult
operating environment and the continued challenges
posed by the unprecedented coronavirus disease
pandemic. In particular, we welcome the Mission’s
success in Pinga. Its effective intervention in a volatile
situation following the split of the Nduma défense du
Congo-Rénové armed group protected those displaced
by violence and ensured that they could receive
humanitarian assistance.
But I want to reiterate the need for vigilance in
the Mission’s delivery of its mandate. The Beni prison
12/21

07/12/2020

break stands out. MONUSCO should consider if and
how it could have been prevented with a more proactive
approach and learn any lessons from it.
In that vein, we call for the prompt implementation
of mandated reforms within MONUSCO and its Force
Intervention Brigade. Civilian loss of life remains
unacceptably high in the east, in particular around
Beni, owing to attacks by the Allied Democratic
Forces. The lack of progress on mandated reforms to the
Force Intervention Brigade, such as the incorporation
of additional quick-reaction forces, is hindering the
Mission’s efforts to tackle that threat. Those reforms
are key to enhancing the performance of the Mission.
We welcome the joint transition strategy developed
by MONUSCO in collaboration with the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We would
like to see that go further, however, in detailing how
the transition will be taken forward, how it will be
measured against clear benchmarks and how the
Mission will work with the United Nations country team
and other development actors on the handover of tasks
with humanitarian actors and with the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the same
time, we call on the Government to participate actively
in planning for MONUSCO’s eventual exit. National
ownership is crucial in ensuring that the exit allows for
sustainable stability and development.
As the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s secondlargest bilateral aid donor, the United Kingdom remains
committed to ensuring long-term stability and security
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Tackling armed groups remains a major
challenge in this respect. We are therefore pleased to
see progress on a new approach to community-focused
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and we
call on the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to support that momentum by developing a
comprehensive national strategy.
We remain deeply troubled by the human rights
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and we condemn the fact that the security forces
continue to commit almost half of all reported human
rights violations in the country. This remains a major
impediment to significant progress on security-sector
reform. I must call on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to ensure accountability.
Finally, we would like to outline our concern
over the ongoing political tensions in the Democratic
20-34412

07/12/2020

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Republic of the Congo. it is vitally important that
progress on stability and prosperity be protected and
maintained and that all political actors enable the
delivery of crucial democratic and governance reforms
for the benefit of the Congolese people.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui for her briefing.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is largely stable, but the eastern part of the
country remains turbulent, the humanitarian situation
is worrisome, and national governance is facing
many challenges.
I should like to emphasize the following four points.
First and foremost, there is a need to maintain
political stability. China has been following closely
the recent developments in the internal relations of
the governing coalition of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We call on all parties in the country to
respect the constitutional spirit, prioritize the interests
of the country and the people, properly address their
differences through dialogue and consultation, and
spare no effort to preserve the hard-won political
stability and unity. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo must not relapse into crisis.
The international community should respect the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity and make a
positive contribution to its political stability.
Secondly, we need to improve the security situation.
The past three months have witnessed an exacerbation
of armed conflicts and intercommunal violence in North
and South Kivu, causing heavy civilian casualties, which
is very worrying. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and its Force Intervention
Brigade are playing an indispensable role in stabilizing
the situation. The contribution made by troop- and
police-contributing countries is truly commendable.
China supports the renewal of MONUSCO’s mandate
for one year. We welcome the engagement of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in the elaboration of the joint strategy on the phased,
progressive drawdown of MONUSCO and agree that
the Mission’s drawdown and exit should be predicated
on the security situation in the country and the response
capacity of the security institutions.

S/PV. 8778

China supports the region-specific arrangements
made, taking into account the evolving situation and
the conflict dynamics in various provinces. It calls
on MONUSCO to coordinate and cooperate with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the United Nations country team and international
financial institutions to ensure an orderly, responsible
and sustainable implementation of the drawdown
strategy, there by averting the creation of a security
vacuum. Any plan for the reform of MONUSCO and
its Force Intervention Brigade should be adequately
communicated to the troop- and police-contributing
countries and be carried out at a steady pace.
Thirdly, there is a need for an integrated approach
that addresses the root causes of conflict. The years of
instability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
been essentially due to the failure to turn its resource
advantages into a development strength, resulting in
violence and conflict. The legal exploitation and use
of natural resources can provide people with more job
opportunities and better livelihoods, which offers a key
to breaking the vicious circle of conflict.
The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes being developed by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo envisage more
job and training opportunities for ex-combatants in
order to facilitate their integration into the community.
Kasai and Tanganyika will largely transition into the
peacebuilding phase, where the relevant development
agencies should focus on improving the local
generating capacity and consolidate the foundation for
durable peace. The new Great Lakes Regional Strategic
Framework just unveiled by the Secretary-General
provides an innovative approach to conflict resolution
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. China
appreciates this and looks forward to its implementation.
Fourthly, due regard should be given to the
humanitarian crisis, which has been compounded by
the coronavirus disease pandemic and the Ebola virus.
The humanitarian situation in the country is becoming
increasingly fragile, with more than 5 million people
displaced and more than 20 million facing food
insecurity. The international community should
increase its humanitarian assistance to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in order to help improve the
situation for the Congolese people. China was among
the first countries to help the Democratic Republic
of the Congo fight the pandemic, donating dozens
of batches of anti-pandemic supplies and pairing up

20-3441213/21

S/PV.8778

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

07/12/2020

Chinese hospitals with their local counterparts. China
has also donated remote-learning equipment to poorer
and remote areas of the country to help more young
people access education.

demobilization and reintegration, to name but a few. A
refocusing of MONUSCO and a gradual transfer of its
responsibilities must ensure that there are no setbacks
in the progress made.

We are ready to work alongside the international
community to help the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in its quest for peace, stability, prosperity
and development.

The drawdown of Mission activities in various
regions should be phased and should follow related
benchmarks. Its timelines should be flexible and
be adjusted to developments on the ground. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations country team must be ready
and able to fill the gaps created by the refocusing
of MONUSCO. This would be further improved by
including the main humanitarian partners and other
international and national civil-society organizations
in the development and implementation of the
joint strategy.

Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today’s meeting.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
Zerrougui for her valuable insights.
Over the past few weeks, the members of the
Security Council have heard several briefings on
developments in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Red Cross
and others. Regrettably, similar to what we heard
today, the message has been that the situation on
the ground is not improving. Security in the eastern
provinces is deteriorating along with the humanitarian
situation. The number of human rights violations and
abuses continues to increase. The number of internally
displaced persons has surpassed 5 million, the number
of people suffering from food insecurity has reached
10 million, and more than 1,300 civilians have been
killed in the past six months alone.
I join the Secretary-General in condemning in the
strongest terms the continued attacks by armed groups
on civilians, including humanitarian workers. It is also
regrettable that a large number of human rights violations
continue to be perpetrated by State security forces.
Accountability for such violations must be established
in order to avoid the prevalence of a culture of impunity
and build trust in the country’s security forces. As I
have mentioned before, strengthening rule-of-law and
justice institutions is a critical component of efforts to
address the root causes of conflict.
As we discuss the future of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) here, it is
important to keep in mind the challenges facing the
Mission and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the multitude of responsibilities that the Mission is
currently shouldering: protecting civilians, advancing
the women and peace and security agenda, addressing
violations against children, supporting securitysector reform and community-based disarmament,
14/21

I would like to end my statement by commending
MONUSCO, the Congolese authorities and all partners
for their continued commitment to establishing peace
in the country.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of South Africa and on behalf
of the African members of the Security Council — the
Niger, South Africa and Tunisia — and Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines (A3+1).
Let me begin by joining other delegations in
thanking Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for her briefing on the
activities of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). Furthermore, we recognize
and commend MONUSCO’s fundamental role in the
protection of civilians and in addressing the perennial
instability in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Our delegations commend the role and leadership
displayed by Special Representative Zerrougui with
regard to critical issues in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and to MONUSCO discharging its mandate
effectively. We would also like to take this opportunity
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report of 30 November (S/2020/1150), prepared in
accordance with paragraph 51 of resolution 2502 (2019).
The A3+1 statement is structured around the
following issues: the political situation, neighbourhood
relations, the security and humanitarian situations,
the phased and responsible drawdown of MONUSCO,
20-34412

07/12/2020

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV. 8778

and cooperation between the United Nations and the
Southern African Development Community (SADC).

on the country’s authorities to bring the perpetrators
to justice.

On the political situation, our delegations note
with concern the political tensions observed during
the period under review. The A3+1 welcomes the
meeting organized in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo by the Chairperson of the African Union
(AU) Commission, His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, between the coalitions led by President
Félix Tshilombo Tshisekedi and former President
Joseph Kabila, held on the margins of Mr. Mahamat’s
working visit on 2 and 3 December. It is our hope that
this initiative will contribute positively to finding a
lasting solution in order to preserve peace and security
in the country. Furthermore, we strongly support the
Secretary-General’s call on all stakeholders to resolve
their differences through dialogue, in the greater
interest of the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

The A3+1 welcomes MONUSCO’s increased
engagement with, and outreach to, local communities.
We also commend the community-based disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) approach and
framework, which ensure that local communities play
an integral role in resolving conflict and in creating
measures to promote long-term peace, stability and
development. Such interventions by MONUSCO
contribute to countering disinformation and reducing
anti-MONUSCO sentiment.

On neighbourhood relations, the Niger, Tunisia,
South Africa and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
are satisfied with the implementation of the strategic
approach to conflict resolution and peacebuilding in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. The
virtual summit among the Presidents of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola, Rwanda and Uganda is
indicative of the resolve of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region as a whole to address the threat
posed by armed groups in the Great Lakes subregion.
The trust- and confidence-building initiatives
with neighbouring countries demonstrate a continued
commitment towards the full implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as observed in the
recent bilateral cooperation talks held between the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Burundi. It is our view that the improving security
situation in certain parts of the country is also due to
those regional meetings.
On the security situation, we are pleased to see
an improvement in various regions of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, the A3+1 wishes to
reiterate its concern over the ongoing indiscriminate
attacks against civilians, security personnel and
MONUSCO, as well as the harassment and kidnapping
of humanitarian aid workers by armed groups in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
condemn those attacks in the strongest terms and call

The military operations conducted by the
Force Intervention Brigade (FIB) against the Allied
Democratic Forces, as detailed in paragraph 12 of
the Secretary General’s report, are also a welcome
development. It is in that context that our delegations
commend MONUSCO, the FIB and all troopcontributing countries (TCCs) for their efforts to
stabilize the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and protect civilians from the ongoing threat posed by
armed militias and groups in the region.
The Niger, Tunisia, South Africa and Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines emphasize the importance of
protecting civilians and urge the coordination of
deployment so as to avoid creating security gaps. It is
our hope that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will continue with efforts to finalize and implement
a strategy aimed at addressing the peace and security
challenges, including through building the capacities of
the defence and security services.
Against that backdrop, our delegations underscore
the importance of addressing the root causes of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
encourage efforts to support its Government in the
DDR process. We also call for international support
for broader peacebuilding in the relevant regions of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Furthermore, our delegations underscore the
importance of developing and implementing a
comprehensive and coordinated security sector
governance and reform programme in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that, among other things, ensures
women’s representation at all levels and recognizes the
role of young people in peacebuilding and recovery, as
articulated in resolution 2553 (2020). The A3+1 also
calls for further efforts by regional and international
partners to tackle the illicit extraction of and trade

20-3441215/21

S/PV.8778

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

in mineral resources, which remain a key driver of
conflict and a major source of revenue that sustains
armed group activities in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
On the humanitarian and health situations, our
delegations reiterate our concern about the volatile
situation. In addition to the challenges related to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, a worsening
economic situation and the hazards of climate change
have intensified harsh living conditions for many in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Today, an estimated
21.8 million people are experiencing acute food
insecurity and 5.2 million remain internally displaced.
We express our concern at the increase in COVID-19
and call for sustained international support of the
country’s authorities so as to mitigate the pandemic’s
negative impact on the Congolese people and the
economy. On a positive note, we commend MONUSCO
for its support in helping the Government address the
outbreak of the Ebola virus disease.
Turning to the Mission’s effectiveness, it is
commendable that MONUSCO is increasing its
operations in spite of the COVID-19 pandemic and in
creating spaces for women and girls in the context of the
women and peace and security agenda in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The A3+1 is therefore satisfied
with the integration of female engagement teams in
major units, which has contributed to improving the
force’s performance.
Our delegations continue to be concerned about
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the overall
Mission and its personnel. In that regard, we call for the
safety and security of all personnel to be ensured as the
Mission continues to discharge its mandate. We regret
the loss of six MONUSCO personnel from Malawi,
Ukraine and Bangladesh, who died after contracting
the virus, and convey our condolences to their families.
On the phased and responsible drawdown of
MONUSCO, the Niger, Tunisia, South Africa and Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines continue to emphasize
the utmost necessity of the Council’s unwavering
commitment to providing MONUSCO with all the
necessary means to execute its mandate in close
collaboration with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The A3+1 reiterates its
considered view that a budget-driven, rushed exit
of MONUSCO would be disastrous and undermine
decades of investment in peacekeeping. We underscore
16/21

07/12/2020

that MONUSCO and its FIB should be adequately
capacitated in accordance with the recommendation
of the report prepared by Lieutenant General (Retired)
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled “Improving
Security of United Nations Peacekeepers”, to address
the challenges with regard to the effectiveness of the
entire United Nations Mission without compromising
existing capacity, including key force enablers.
With regard to the cooperation between the United
Nations and SADC, the A3 +1 support SADC’s longstanding commitment to assisting the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to achieve sustainable peace,
security and stability and are encouraged by the AUUnited Nations cooperation and their undertaking to
continue engagement in support of the consolidation of
stability and democratic governance in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In this context, our delegations
underscore the SADC Extraordinary Organ Troika
Summit’s appreciation and support for the United
Nations, as well as its pledged regional support to the
development and implementation of a joint strategy on
the progressive and phased drawdown of MONUSCO
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We commend the completion of all negotiations
undertaken to reconfigure the FIB, including the
strengthening of FIB headquarters by staff officers from
non-FIB TCCs, as this will ensure the FIB’s operational
effectiveness in conducting targeted operations against
negative forces in the eastern the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in protecting civilians.
The SADC continues to request the accelerated
approval of all planned operational orders directed
at conducting targeted operations against negative
forces jointly with the Forces armées de la République
Démocratique du Congo — or single-handedly — as
the continued delays embolden armed groups’ attacks
against the defenceless population in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and they greatly undermine and
erode the confidence the population has in MONUSCO
to protect civilians.
In conclusion, the A3+1 reaffirms its commitment
to promoting and achieving an African continent that
is peaceful and prosperous and that contributes to
a world that is just and equitable through effective
multilateralism at subregional, regional and global
levels. It is for this reason that our delegations support
the Secretary-General’s recommendation for the
extension of MONUSCO’s mandate for one year, with
20-34412

07/12/2020

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

its current authorized troop and police strength and
strategic objectives, namely, the protection of civilians,
indeed, all the people in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Empole (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): At the outset, Mr. President, I would
like to extend my warmest congratulations to you as
representative of a kindred country, the Republic
of South Africa, for taking up the presidency of the
Security Council for this month of December 2020. I
also wish to welcome the initiative of holding today’s
meeting on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his
commitment and support for the cause of my country. I
would like to include within these thanks all members
of the Security Council, for the particular attention that
they never fail to pay to the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
I welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
(S/2020/1150), which was just presented by the Special
Representative and Head of MONUSCO, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, whose presence by video-teleconference and
sustained efforts in favour of peace and security in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are most welcome.
Allow me to add the voice of my delegation to this
discussion to share the point of view of my Government
on the concerns raised in the report and to make some
comments, particularly on the political, security and
humanitarian situation in the country and on human
rights issues and the exit strategy of MONUSCO.
The political scene at the moment is currently
being dominated by the address to the nation that His
Excellency Mr. Félix Antoine Tshilombo Tshisekedi,
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
gave on Sunday, 6 December 2020, after the political
consultations among all national stakeholders, which
were held from 2 to 25 November. In his capacity as
guarantor of the nation, and taking into account the
broad convergence of views at the national level on

S/PV. 8778

issues essential to the security, economic and social
rehabilitation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Head of State announced an end of the coalition
between the Front commun pour le Congo and the Cap
pour le changement after two years of tireless effort,
patience and self-sacrifice aimed at preserving the
essence of that coalition — in his words, two years
of grace that unfortunately were not successful in
preventing the infiltration of ongoing crises and the
wasting of time. This decision was also motivated by
the fact that, on the one hand, the coalition Government
set up in the wake of the transfer of political power in
January 2019 did not make it possible for the Head of
State to implement the programme for which he had
been elected to the highest office in the land, and, on
the other hand, he, the President, was therefore unable
to respond to the expectations and aspirations of the
Congolese people. He therefore decided, in accordance
with the provisions of article 78, paragraph 2 of the
Constitution, to appoint a rapporteur who will be
responsible for identifying a new coalition, bringing
together the absolute majority of members of the
National Assembly.
With this new coalition, the President of the Republic
will put in place a Government that will conduct its
action during the remainder of his five-year term and
continue striving to implement his vision, with the aim
of meeting the aspirations of the Congolese people.
The objective is to build the future of democratic life
in the country around and with the sacred union of the
nation — in other words, a group of men and women of
good will, no matter what their political, ideological or
ethnic origins may be — adhering to the principles and
values that will make it possible to establish a true rule
of law and democracy and produce concrete results on
the socioeconomic front.
The security situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has remained calm in general. However,
in some well-identified areas in the east of the national
territory, in the provinces of North and South Kivu and
Ituri, there have been attacks by armed groups of both
internal and external origin, as well as other remnants
of still-active militias acting in flagrant violation
of human rights while causing many casualties and
massive destruction of property and infrastructure.
These terrorist groups, some of which have sworn
allegiance to the Islamic State, practice asymmetric
warfare and continue to indiscriminately attack the
civilian population, humanitarian workers, MONUSCO

20-3441217/21

S/PV.8778

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

peacekeepers and the Forces armées de la République
Démocratique du Congo (FARDC).
In this context, let me inform the Council that since
the military offensive was decided by the President
of the Republic and carried out by contingents of the
FARDC, with the logistical support of MONUSCO,
starting in October 2019, many of these armed groups
have been weakened. Many militias have laid down
their arms and many strongholds of national territory
formerly under the control of these negative forces
have been recovered. Rest assured that the FARDC is
determined, with the support of its partners, including
MONUSCO, to continue its offensives against all these
negative forces that have not complied with the Head
of State’s call to lay down their arms until they are
completely eradicated, in order to impose peace and
thereby secure the population.
Moreover, in keeping with his commitment to
restoring peace and security in the eastern part of the
country and in order to address those security concerns
in the east on a lasting basis, the President of the Republic
has also established and implemented a three-track
strategy, namely, first, building the capacity of the
defence and security forces through security sector
reform in all its aspects; secondly, promoting national
reconciliation, particularly between local communities
in conflict, such as the Hima and the Lendu, the
Twa Pygmies and the Bantu, the Bandundu and the
Batende and Banyamulenge herders and the Babembe
and Bafuliru farmers; and, thirdly, enabling regional
diplomacy through an ongoing dialogue at the highest
political level, which has significantly contributed to
easing tensions in the region, strengthening relations
among countries and restoring confidence among the
respective Governments.
All those initiatives are aimed at peace, security,
stability and economic development in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region and
a return to normal life. If such initiatives are sustained,
they will bring about a lasting and definitive change
in the narrative in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the region by moving
from conflict-driven rhetoric to discourse that focuses
on the path to regional development.
My country counts on support for those initiatives,
including through the political will and the resolve
of all our partners and countries of the region in
particular, to effectively combat mineral trafficking,
18/21

07/12/2020

which empowers armed groups, as well as the Mafiastyle trafficking in arms and smuggling, in order to give
the Government the necessary support for the ongoing
justice and security sector reforms; to provide funding
and adequate support for disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and resettlement or repatriation; to
advocate for the effective implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region and the United
Nations regional strategy for peace consolidation,
conflict prevention and conflict resolution for the Great
Lakes region; and to work towards the comprehensive
implementation of MONUSCO’s mandate and the
strengthening of the offensive capabilities of the overall
force, in particular its rapid reaction force.
For my Government, those tasks and prerequisites
of MONUSCO’s mandate must be followed to the letter
so as to enable the United Nations force to succeed in
its core role in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
namely, the protection of civilians, as well as in its
responsible and scheduled exit in accordance with the
timetable jointly agreed with the Government.
The Council is preparing to renew MONUSCO’s
mandate, which expires on 20 December under the
terms of resolution 2502 (2019), of 19 December 2019.
The same resolution recommended that the Congolese
Government and the United Nations conduct a strategic
dialogue in order to reach agreement on the arrival
of the United Nations Force Intervention Brigade and
its gradual and responsible exit in order to safeguard
the gains of the past. That work was carried out by
means of direct talks between experts of the two
stakeholders in October, resulting in a joint strategy
for the gradual and phased withdrawal of MONUSCO
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which was
validated by the political authorities of my country and
MONUSCO officials.
During those exchanges, we also discussed the
effectiveness of existing initiatives, strategies and
mechanisms with a view to strengthening them where
necessary and better coordinating our joint action for
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region in the light of the current reality on the ground.
The ultimate objective is to strengthen collaboration
within MONUSCO units and with the FARDC so that
the force required to protect the civilian population and
restore peace, security and State authority throughout
the national territory is effective.
20-34412

07/12/2020

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Given that the Force Intervention Brigade will once
again have to play an important role in neutralizing
terrorist movements and armed groups in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, my
country supports the idea of increasing the Brigade’s
operational capabilities, in particular by equipping it
with special units suited to the asymmetrical warfare
waged on us by the armed groups in the eastern part
of the country, reinforcing it with adequate equipment,
such as Rooivalk combat helicopters, artillery, combat
engineers and geolocation and operational devices
appropriate for dealing with the situation on the ground.
In that context, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its partners, notably the
Southern African Development Community (SADC),
have accepted the United Nations proposal to realign
the current strength of the Force Intervention Brigade
to allow the rapid reaction units to have the necessary
scope of action and to form two rapid reaction units with
troops from six SADC member contributor countries
and a third unit from a non-SADC member country.
My country’s Government commends the support
of MONUSCO, in particular the logistical facilities
provided to the FARDC and the Congolese National
Police in their work to restore order and security.
However, in his address of 15 February 2019 to the
diplomatic corps accredited in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the President of the Republic recalled
the Government’s decision to support MONUSCO’s
gradual withdrawal, based on the evolving security
situation, by fully participating in the development of
a joint exit strategy and its progressive transition in the
context of a strategic dialogue.
To that end, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is of the view that the reduction
in MONUSCO’s force, with the ultimate objective of
complete disengagement, should start with troops
deemed non-essential. After having jointly assessed
the security situation in the country, the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO
therefore reached a common understanding on three
kinds of areas, namely, first, post-conflict areas — Kasai,
Central Kasai and Tanganyika provinces; secondly,
areas affected by armed groups and intercommunal
violence — northern Tanganyika and Ituri; and, thirdly,
areas affected by the militancy of local and foreign
armed groups and negative forces, as well as terrorist
acts by the Allied Democratic Forces and the Madina

S/PV. 8778

Al-Tawheed Waljihad in Ituri and North and South
Kivu provinces.
In view of what I have just said, the two partners
agreed the following draft timetable, namely, that the
United Nations Mission would definitively leave Kasai
province in June 2021 and Tanganyika province in
2022. That gradual withdrawal of the MONUSCO force
will be accompanied by a temporary reinforcement of
the police and civilian component, which will support
the strengthening of the rule of law functions and the
gradual transfer of the Mission’s tasks to the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the
assistance of the United Nations country team and other
stakeholder partners. In areas affected by local armed
groups and intercommunal violence, MONUSCO will
maintain its presence to support the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in implementing a
community-based approach to conflict resolution and
stabilization. In areas affected by the militancy of local
and foreign armed groups, MONUSCO will maintain
its presence with a prevention and response capacity.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo
must recommend that such a response capacity be
adapted to the threat of asymmetrical warfare. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO
have agreed to set up a joint working group to propose
practical modalities for the transfer of tasks.
The Congolese Government has already
experimented with disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) in the framework of
the Commission Nationale de Désarmement,
Démobilisation et Réinsertion and the implementation
unit of the national DDR programme. It therefore
reaffirms its determination to establish a comprehensive
programme and, to that end, has launched consultations
to draw lessons from the past in order to better master
this issue. Knowing that a regional or provincial focus
should be favoured for the reinsertion and reintegration
of ex-combatants, the Government has opted this time
to resort to community-based DDR. Ex-combatants
will be reintegrated into their communities of origin
in particular through agricultural work. To that end,
a national structure is being established under the
coordination of the presidency.
The vision of the Congolese Government is to
prioritize community-based DDR in order to enable
sustainable demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants from local armed groups and also
to consider the regional approach of disarmament,

20-3441219/21

S/PV.8778

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or
repatriation (DDRRR) in resolving the issues of foreign
armed groups through dialogue with their countries of
origin, thereby combining non-military options with
military pressure. Moreover, in the current context
dominated by many surrenders, the community-based
DDR and DDRRR programmes, as well as the National
Stabilization and Reconstruction Programme, need
to operate at full capacity. To do so, they need fresh
capital and support from partners.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo remains
committed to the framework agreement, which we
consider to be the best regional path and strategy
to follow in order to definitively emerge from the
instability, which has been affecting the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region for
many years. For its part, the Government of my country
will continue to implement all its national, regional and
international commitments under that agreement and
to assume its responsibility so that peace and harmony
can be fully restored in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in the region.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo takes this
opportunity to call on the countries of the region and the
guarantors of the agreement to seize the opportunity of
the regional momentum in recent months to implement
the commitments which they have all made. It should be
noted that if the provisions of this framework agreement
are translated into concrete action, they will enable the
region to better manage issues of peace, security and
especially cooperation and development through the
logic of integration.
My delegation would like to renew the call made by
our President on the international community, during
the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly (see
A/75/PV.5), to ensure that appropriate, targeted and
effective sanctions are applied to all armed groups and
criminal networks involved in the illicit trafficking in
blood minerals from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The illegal exploitation of natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has consequences
for peace and security in the country and in the region,
and the fight against the organized criminal traffic
in these minerals is crucial, as it is a major source of
funding for the belligerent and harmful activities of
armed groups. Indeed, it will be hard for us to neutralize
and defeat the armed groups if we do not succeed in
eradicating their sources of support and financing.
20/21

07/12/2020

In accordance with the constitutional requirement,
the Government continues to implement its programme
for the defence and promotion of all human rights,
with particular emphasis on combating impunity and
corruption, as well as strengthening the rule of law and
reforming the justice sector. The actions taken to reform
the justice system include capacity-building for legal
personnel, in particular through training; strengthening
the legal framework, especially the harmonization of
national legislation with the Rome Statute; building
and rehabilitating prison infrastructure to improve
the conditions for detainees and prisoners; resolving
intercommunal violence by creating and implementing
transitional justice mechanisms through respective
structures, including the National Council for the
Prevention and Transformation of Conflict, and a fund
for victims of severe human rights violations.
With regard to the fight against violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law
against children in territories affected by conflicts, a
road map has been drawn up in order to put an end to
the recruitment and use of children by armed groups
and ensure their protection from sexual violence.
This road map was signed by some 10 commanders
of armed groups in December 2018 and January 2019,
thereby making it possible to release 553 children in
the provinces of North Kivu and South Kivu, Ituri,
Tanganyika and greater Kasai.
With respect to sexual violence in conflict, it should
be noted that all crimes related to rape are severely
punished by the Congolese State, and the Congolese
Army applies a policy of zero tolerance for any such
crimes. In that regard, I note that between 2019 and
2020, the military justice system tried and convicted
at least 428 perpetrators of reported acts of sexual
violence. These statistics amply demonstrate that the
Congolese Government does not allow the perpetrators
of these odious crimes to go unpunished.
Allegations against elements of national security
forces are always investigated, since wearing the
uniform of Democratic Republic of the Congo security
forces in this conflict area is not always synonymous
with actual membership in the FARDC or the Congolese
National Police. It has been repeatedly demonstrated
by the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo that military property, as well as natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
have often been stolen and trafficked by armed groups.
However, after investigations and trials, the perpetrators
20-34412

07/12/2020

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

are and will always be punished in an exemplary
manner in accordance with the law, regardless of their
social status or rank in the security services of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In that regard, allow me to inform the Council
that the President’s programme to combat sexual
violence has three components: awareness-raising and
community mobilization through a change of mindsets;
fighting against impunity for the perpetrators of these
actions; and, thirdly, support for the victims with
psychosocial support, free legal assistance and the
operationalization of the zero-tolerance programme.
In the context of the fight against impunity, it is
worth noting the conviction on Monday, 23 November,
by the Operational Military Court of North Kivu of
Mr. Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka, leader of the Nduma Defense
of Congo militia for war crimes, murder, rape, sexual
slavery, child recruitment, looting, the destruction of
property and physical harm. It should also be noted
that one of its main co-defendants, Mr. Nzitonda
Habimana Séraphin, known as Lionceau, of the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, was also
sentenced to life imprisonment by the same Military
Court. During the same lengthy trial, which lasted
more than two years, Jean Claude Lukambo, known
as Kamutoto, was sentenced to 15 years in prison and
Jean Batechi was acquitted. The verdict handed down
by military justice in this trial shows the determination
of the Congolese authorities to continue the legal fight
against all war criminals, past and present, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is particularly concerning in the
eastern part of the country following the multifaceted
crisis caused by the consequences of the coronavirus
disease pandemic (COVID-19), as well as the numerous
displacements of populations fleeing atrocities in
conflict zones.
Furthermore, in order to respond to the various
complex challenges created by the pandemic in the
health, economic and security sectors, the Government
has established a multisectoral committee and a technical
secretariat, which has drawn up a structured plan for a
COVID-19 response as well as a multisectoral plan for
the urgent mitigation of the impact of the pandemic,
which was launched on 18 June by the President of the
Republic. Thanks to those efforts, we have been able

S/PV. 8778

to reduce the fatality rate of the pandemic from 10 per
cent at its inception to approximately 2.6 per cent today.
We believe that the return of all displaced persons
to their places of origin could make an effective
contribution to a lasting peace and to renewed
economic and agricultural activity in the region.
Furthermore, with approximately 5.5 million displaced
persons, of whom around 1 million 6,000 are living in
very precarious conditions, humanitarian needs in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for that category
of the population remain tremendous and require
increased support from partners.
Turning to the issue of refugees in Rwanda, Uganda
and Burundi, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, concerned by this issue, calls
for the reactivation of the legal mechanisms created
for that purpose: the tripartite agreements among
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and Rwanda; the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, UNHCR and Uganda; and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, UNHCR and Burundi, in
order to undertake the effective repatriation of all
concerned refugees.
I would like to reiterate the determination of the
President of the Republic and of the Government to
break the vicious circle of armed conflict and insecurity
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, with a view to fostering a return to normal life
on that part of the national territory after more than two
decades of upheaval. To that end, we are counting on
the support of all partners of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to ensure the success of that undertaking.
I cannot conclude without expressing the gratitude
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the troopcontributing countries for their support, and I wish
to pay tribute to the memory of all those who lost
their lives for the sake of peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly the
MONUSCO Blue Helmets, six of whom have fallen
victim to COVID-19.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at noon.

20-3441221/21
