ASSEMBLY

Friday . 12 De

THIRT EENTH SESSION

Official Records

N

CONT ENTS
Agenda item 8:
Adoption of the agenda (co'J1cluded)
Second report of the General Commi ttee••• ••••

567

Agenda item 73:
Admiss ion of new Membe rs to the United Nations
Admiss ion of the Republi c of Guinea to membe rship in the United Nations ••••• ••••• •••••

567

Agenda items 36 and 37:
Informa tion from Non-Se lf-Gove rning Territo ries
transmi tted under Article 73 e of the Charter :
reports of the Secreta ry-Gen eral and of the Committee on Informa tion from Non-Se lf-Gove rning
Territo ries:
W Informa tion on social conditions;
(Q) Informa tion on other conditio ns;
(Q) General question s relating to the transmi ssion
and examin ation of informa tion;
@ Method s of reprodu cing summa ries of informa tion concern ingNon -Self-G overnin g Territo ries:
report of the Secreta ry-Gen eral;
<ID Report ofthe Secreta ry-Gen eral on develop ments
connect ed with the associa tion of Non-Se lfGovern ing Territo ries with the Europe an Economic Community;
ill Offers of study and training facilitie s under
resoluti on 845 (IX) of 22 Novemb er 1954: report
of the Secreta ry-Gen eral
Question of the renewal ofthe Commi ttee on Informa tion from Non-Se lf-Gove rning Territo ries: report
of the Commi ttee on Informa tion from Non-Se lfGoverni ng Territo ries
Reports of the Fourth Commi ttee and of the Fifth
Committee ••••• ••••• ••••• ••••• •••••

579

Agenda item 38:
Election, if require d, to fill vacanci es in the membership of the Commi ttee on Informa tionfrom NonSelf-Go verning Territo ries
Report of the Fourth Commi ttee • • • • • • • • • • • •

586

2. Does any Membe r wish now to speak fo
the inclusi on of this item as recomm e
Genera l ~ommittee? If not, I take itthatt h
approv es the inclusi on of the item and th
dealt with directl y in plenar y meetin g at t
Item 73 was include d in the agenda withou
AGENDA ITEM 73

Admission of new Members to the Unite

ADMISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF G
MEMBERSHIP IN THE UNITED NAT

Presid ent: Mr. Charles MALIK (Lebanon).
AGENDA ITEM 8
Adoption of the agenda {concluded)

SECOND REPOR T OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE
(A!4076)
1. The PRESIDENT: The Genera l Assem bly has before it the second report of the Genera l Comm ittee
[A/4076] on the admiss ion of new Memb ers to the
United Nation s. In this report the Genera l Comm ittee
recommends to us that the item entitle d"Adm ission of
new Membe rs to the United Nation s" be include d in the
agenda of the thirtee nth session as item 73, and that
the Assem bly procee d to the consid eration of this item
directly in plenary meetin g.
567

3. The PRESIDENT: The Assem bly has
draft resolut ion submit ted by the delega t
and Japan [A/4060]. In additio n to those
whose names are mentio ned at the head
resolut ion, two new co-spo nsors wish to
names .added to th:!t text-G hana and Ha
Add.!] . Conseq uently, the Assem bly is to c
draft resolut ion as being propos ed jointl
Haiti, Iraq and Japan.
4. I shall call first on the sponso rs
resolut ion to speak on it, and after they have
shall put it to a vote.
5. Mr. MATSUDAmA (Japan): My <ielaga
honour and the privile ge of submit ting fo
siderat ion of the Genera l Assem bly a draft
the purpos e of which is to have the Genera
decide to admit the Republ ic of Guinea to m
in the United Nation s. We are confide nt t
Republ ic of Guinea is a peace- loving State,
able to carry out the obligat ions conta
Charte r. I hope that the Gene::-r.: Assem bly
in this view and will adopt our draft resolu
6. May I take this opportu nity to pay warm
France , which has by this genero us action a
page to its gloriou s traditio n of human ism
will remem ber this.
7. May I also extend our sincere congra t
the young Republic of Guinea in anticip a
admiss ion to ·this body tonight. May its futur
and may the high expect ations held for it by
and by the world be fulfille d.
8. Mr. JAWAD (Iraq): It is particu larly gr
the delegat ion of Iraq to come before this a
of nations as a co-spo nsor of a draft resolut i
admiss ion of Gu~llea to Membe rship of t
Nation s. This is a histori c occasio n for the
Guinea, who have already taken the first
becom e a free and indepen dent sovere ign na
eventfu l hour must surely mark the peak of
tional rejoici ng. They are awaitin g confi
result of our deliber ations here which, lam
comple te the proces s of admitti ng that c
membe rship of the United Nation s. The people

in the Charter.
9. The manner in which the people of Guinea have been
enabled to qualify as s. nation ready for membership of
the United Nations is a development of historic importance in itself and one which, in our opinion, is
deserving of special mention here.
10. The General Assembly will rec211 that Guinea's
rise to the status of a sovereign and independent State
came about as a result of a promise based on the
provisions of the Constitution of the French Republic.
On 25 August 1958 General de Gaulle, stressing this
promise, declared that Guinea, through areferendum,
was free to choose national independence. He also
stated solemnly that France would place no obstacla in
the path' of Guinea's independence. This action on the
part of the French Government was in the highest
tradition of the peoplf. of France and their devotion to
the rights of man proclaimed to the world during the
glorious revolution of 1789, and was inspired by many
liberal French thinkers and intellectuals.
11. The French Government offered most French
overseas territories the choice of deciding their national future by a peaceful and orderly process. On the
day of the referendum, 28 September 1958, the people
of Guinea made their choice unmistakably clear. The
vote in favour of independence was approximately
twenty to one-a clear manifestation of th\~ir genuine
desire to break away from their colonial sh\tus and to
lead a free national existence.
12. I believe that it would be well for 'Us to reflect
hel'e upon this unusual turn in French colonial policy
and upon the fact that aformer French colony has been
enabled, by means of a peaceful, constitutional and
denlocratic process, to leave the French Empire for
the international community of free nations. Is it too
muc:h to hope that this welcome departure in the policy
of France vis-a.-vis its overseas territories,will not be
limited to GUinea, but will mark the beginning of a
general approach to all peoples under French jurisdiction? Is it too soon to believe that the rulers of
France, a country which has contributed so much to
the enrichment of human dignity and culture, have at
last seen the bright light of liberalism and realism in
their attitude towards overseas territories?
13. Only three days ago, as we celebrated the tenth
a:nmiversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the Assembly heard the moving message of
Professor Ren~ Cassin, one of the principal architects
of that Declaration and a champion of its principles. Is
it fanciful to expect that his countrymen and his Government would be moved by the spirit of this Declaration and the fundamental principleR of the Charter on
which it is baaed? We fervently hope thatthe time has
come when the rising voice of millions of Africans
will reach the ears of France and its conscience, and
that at last their cry to the people of France to deliver
them from the misery and destruction of modern warfare will be heard.
14. The delegation of Iraq haB watched attentively the
various constitutional steps tarten by Guinea since the
referendum. Four days after the referendum-on 2
October 1958-Guinea solemnly proclaimed its na-

special session h
with deep satisfa
of the Charter an
its obligations t
amined the Cons
which is based on
in conformity wit
Universal Declar

15. Finally, we h
recognition of the
only one month af
tion of the new re

16. The Iraqi d
conclusion that
requirements of t
qualified for mem
this same conclu
sor in the Securit
of Japan, a draft
sion of Guinea to
With the same co
Assembly, in the
support to the rec
17. In conclusion
happy to suppor
State and to welc
ganization. On be
Iraq, I wish to ex
GUinea~ on this
congratulations a
peaceful, progres

18. ,The PRESID
draft resolution
admission has be
19. The Assemb
sponsored by Gha
Add,i]. May I as
that draft resoluti
20. Mr. GEORGE
French): The Fren
the, draft resolutio
French Governme
tion is not in a
definite attitude w
mitted to the Ass
admission of Gu
reason mentioned
Iraq; he recalled
France would put
independence, no
admission to the
French delegation
draft resolution n
already explained
known to other de
has be~!ll circulat
our future action.
In the absence o
was adopted.
The delegation o
the General Assem

take on stature.
22. .As President of the General Assembly during this
session, I wish to extend my sincerest personal and
official congratulations to the representative, the
Government and the people of Guinea on having attained t.his position of freedom and independence and
on having been admitted to membership in the family
of fJ.'ee and independent nations. I wish them every
success, all prosperity I peace and every advancement
in the future. :;: am certain that they will live up to our
expectations of them.
23. I was especially moved to hear the other day that
Guinea had included in its Constitution a clause to the
effect that it would observe the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. That is a most
\\'elcome sign of Guinea's goodwill and maturity as a
member of the free and independent family of nations.
24. I am sure that I speak for the whole world and for
all representatives here when I repeat to the repre-

sentative, the Government and the people of Guinea our
sincerest congratulations and our best wishes for a
happy and prosperous future both id our midst and in
their relations with the entire world.
25. Mr. TELL! (Guinea) (translated from French): It
is at the same Ume a great honour and a unique
privilege for me to represent here, on this solemn
occasion, the you..ng Republic of Guinea, which the
General Aasembly, on the almost unanimous recommendation of the Security Council, has just admitted
witt,.out opposition as the eighty-second Member of the
United Nations.
26. Allow me ~irst of all; J.I!f..r. Preaident, to say how
deeply moved I was by the kiild words with which you
welcomed the representative of the new-born State to
the international scene; words which, through me, were
in reality addressed to the people of the Republic of
Guinea whose thoughts in this moment are with us here.
27. It is on behalf of this people, of its Government
and of its President, Mr. Sekou Tour~, our beloved
leader I that I would express our thanks and our gratitude for the mark of confidence just shown in the
youngest State in the world which has achieved national
independence. My thanks naturally include all those
friendly States which have recogn.tzed us~ and also all
the peoples, all the a'\.lthorities, both public and private, in all continents, which have demonstrated their
fellow-feeling for us on the occasion of our liberation
and which have supported our car.didature in the various
competent organs of the United Nations.
28. I am sure you will allow me to make a special
reference to Ghana, our sister State, whose friendship,
assistance and spirit of active solidarity are an encouraging pledge of that inter-African co-operation
which we desire with all our hearts.
29. Although their contacts with the rest of the world
have in the past been within the exclusive competence
of the Government 01 the French Republic, the people
of Guinea, like all subject peoples thil'stingfor dignity
and freedom, havs always followed with interest and
attention the work of the United Nations, its Ullm
wea:ry1ng efforts to obtain respect for the principle of
the right of peoples to self-deter:mination and the

30. Thus in the eyes of the pe
those of all the peoples of colon
Nations has been from itA ince
imperfections and vicissitudes n
ization can avoid, remains the su
supreme hope of the small count
peoples which are strivingtolibe
foreign domination.
31. This fund consisting of the c
of all the lowly of t:h.e earth is
least in our eyes, the fairest an
session of which the United Natio
for its part, will always endeav
precious fund and add to it.
32. As you are aware, Guinea a
on 28 September 1958, in an atmo
and dignity, by a majority of o
people of Guinea, acting as one m
Government and tt,sir party, cho
no feelings of hatred or hostili
other State, but in order to secur
enable it to achieve its aims, i.
poses both at the internal level,
international level.
33. It is my duty to proclaim
sciousness that it belongs to Afri
by ties of kinship and solidarity
Africa and Asia. Furthermore,
larize its relations with France
co-operation consistent with resp
ence, its dignity and the param
people.
34. B-l1t, beyond Africa. and Fra
peoples of the world and to all
which respect the equality and
peoples that the Republic of Gui
ship and co-operation, with a vie
gress from the status of an und
to that of an industrially and soci
try. In our relations with all t
comply with the rules of internat
titude will be one of frankness, lo

35. By the very t:arms of its Co
St:Jt.te subscribes unreservedly t
Charter and the Universal De
Rights; it accepts flll the obligati
siders its~lf capable of respecti
pared to do so.
36. This is the message which M
Head of my Gove:rnment~ has ask
the na.me of the young Republic of
to you my country knows it is bei
to its heroes, true to its liber
service of Africa and true to the p
in the world for the benefit of the
community.
37. The PRESIDENT: There are
want to congratulate our younges
great pleasure in E!xtending to th
one.
38. Mr. ASHA (United Arab Re
the delegations of the United Ara

portance in the political development of Africa and the
life of the United Nations. We are proud and happy to
see the representatives of the Republic of Guinea with
us today. We are confident that this new Republic will
play its role and make its valuable contribution in
furthering the principles and objectives of our Charter.
39. The admission of the Republic of Guinea is of
special significance. It marks the continually accelerated pace at which Africans are regaining their independence, freedom and sovereignty. When the United
Nations Charter was signed in San Francisco in 1945,
only three independent States from Africa participated.
Since then five more States from Africa have regained
their independence and joined us. Today the ninth State
has been admitted. This will undoubtedly give additional
strength to the African States in their struggle to
liberate the rest of that continent. These States working
together will inten~ify their efforts to consolidate peace
and security in the world. They will dedicate themselves to the development of their vast resources and
riches in order' to raise the standard of the 120 million
Africans who have suffered from the yoke of colonialism and from economic exploitation.
40. We are confident that this will not bethe last occasion on which we witness the admission of new Members from the great continents of Africa and Asia. In
the next year or two we hope to welcome Somalia,
Nigeria, Togoland and the Cameroons, and these Will,
no doubt, soon be followed by many others who are
still struggling for their freedom and independence.
41. During this whole week, in·the First Committee,
the fate of the brave and valiant people of Algeria has
been discussed, and we are confident that Algeria will
be with us very soon. Let us hope that those who have
been obstructing their independence will have a change
of heart.
42. The liberation movement in Africa is symbolized
in the admission of the Republic of Guinea to the United
Nations. This movement is marching fast. And it is our
fervent hope tha... it will not be long before we welcome
the remaining Africans and others who are not free to
speak for themselves, but are still under colonial
domination.
43. We, on our part, will stretch out our hand to the
new State, to its people, to its leader and President,
Mr. Sekou Tour~, in amity, fraternity and friendship,
in every endeavour which will bring about the complete
liberation of the people of Africa. We wish the new
Republic success and prosperity in the future. We
congratulate the Government, the people and leaders of
Guinea on this happy occasion.
44. Mr. Ali SASTROAMID.JOJO (Indonesia): On behalf
of the Indonesian delegation, I have the honour and
privilege to extend to the people and Government of
Guinea ('u.r most heartfelt congratulations for the
achievement of their national aspirations, and we Wish
them every success, peace and prosperity. Welcoming
a new Member into our Organization is always a happy
occasion and to my delegation this applies with more
force today, since the State we are welcoming as a
new Member of our Organization is a sister State from

Government, sub
admission to me
delegation was c
considered by th
on 2 O~tober by t
adherence of the
embodied in the C
tion leaves no
peace-loving Sta
obligations conta
tions were emph
meeting of 9 Dec
lution submitted
J?pan in the Co
Security Council
to admit Guinea a
testimony to the
membership in th

46. We are parti
in the Security C
the principle of
ciple also laid do
tions. My Govern
ciple, since we b
ship of our Organ
principle, by the
are willing and a
tained in the Cha
towards the ma
United Nations.

47. On behalf o
people we extend
of Guinea, and w
in our work will
Guinea, but to ou

48. We would ho
tribute to the pol
Guinea. The attai
peaceful way com
France is follOWi
and fruitful relati
France and the yo

49. However, da
of the African c
lightened policy t
be commended a
not be too far off
bers of this aug
well as from othe

50. Mr. SYLVAI
The admission of a
always a source o
of Haiti, which se
the principle of u
is Guinea-with
united by age-ol
called our very fl
our forebears, wh
dom by force of
dependence in an
pride that my de
independent Repu

789th meeting - 12 December 1958

nth strong bonds of

li, on behalf of his
ation of Guinea for
United Nations, my
vould be favourably
The proclamation
bly of Guinea of the
ea to the principles
usal of its Constituds that Guinea is a
Ie to carry out the
9r. These qualificaurity Council in its
nsidering the resotatives of Iraq and
10US decision of the
lsembly this evening
Organization bea.rs
s fully qualified for

uring the discussion
; have been madeto
lembership, a prinand Accra Declaraadvocated this prinit possible memberle application of this
s many States which
:he obligations con: more successfully
ce, towards a true

: and the Indonesian
lship to the Republic
lat its participation
efit to the people of
well.
lful if we did not pay
ance with respect to
lence by Guinea in a
:tfor the wise policy
hope that cordial
established between
ruinea.

'e

LUg over vast areas
plication of an enmies is certainly to
mt that the day will
~elcoming as Mem.ons from Africa as
rId.
ated from French):
le United Nations is
.on to the delegation
!ssful application of
hen the new Member
:ry is indissolubly
e of our poets has
hence came most of
'in the right to free'e their national in'is with emotion and
welcomes the new
our Organization.

51. Guinea's past of struggle, suffaring <tnd greatness
is the surest guarantee of its will to co-operate as a
fully-fledged Member of our Organization in the implementation of the purposes and principles of the Charter,
which it has just pledged itself to respect.
52. Thus it is with immense satisfaction that from this
rostrum the Republic of Haiti welcomes the Republic
of Guinea and extends the most cordial good wishes for
its progress, prosperity anti well-being as it sets out
on the difficult road of independence and democracy.
53. Mr. TABIBI (Afghanistan): The Afghandelegation
is happy to see that from the emerging nations of
Africa another young nation, the Republic ofGUinea, is
joining us. My country recognized this republic when it
received its independence from France, and it will be
happy to welcome its admission to this Organization.

54. We are looking forward to co-operation with it
both inside and outside the United Nations, and we Wish
the Government of Guinea every success and great
prosperity in its future endeavours.
55. We should also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate France for its liberal action in paving the
way for Guinea toward independence. We hope that
other nations of Africa and Asia whioh are entitled to
independ.ence as well will soon take their rightful place
among us.
56. There is no greater joy for us than to see Guinea
as a Member of this Organization. I want to convey to
Ambassador Diallo Telli and through him to the people
and Government of Guinea my sincere congratulations.

57. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): My delegation joins
the several others which have spoken before me, and I
feel sure I voice the sentiments not only of those who
are in the Assembly, but also of the entire civilized
part of the world in the developments preceding the
event we are now welcoming.

58. We join in congratulating the two main parties who
made this event possible, namely, the new Republic of
Guinea and the Republic of France.
59. While countries have won freedom before, the
modern age has seen imperialisms abdicating their
power and, at least in the last stage, in an atmosphere
. of friendship and co-operation or at least in the acceptance of the inevitability of freedom. We are also
glad to feel that in the rise of the Republic of Guinea
there has been an expansion of the arena of freedom in
West Africa, opened in recent times by the action of
the United Kingdom in welcoming what was the former
Gold Coast to the sisterhood of the nations of the
Commonwealth.

60. We have no doubt at all that this event has had an
impact on the awakening and the fruition of the efforts
of the people of West Africa, and Ihope that the whole
of Africa will continue to have it in the same way.
61. In the case of Guinea there is one other factor
which we must not lose sight of, and that is the great
national movement which has enabled Guinea to become
independent today-that is, the participation of the labour movemen~ of that country-and it is the full participation of the great trade union organizations which
gives us the hope or the insurance of social equity and
social progress in this new republic of Africa. We welcome this eighty-second Member, therefore, not
merely as an addition to our large number, but as one

571

which \\till bI'ilig to this AsBembly new ideas and which
will contribute generally to the lessening of tensions
and to the richness which so-called small nations have
contributed to the work of this Organization.
62. I feel sure that all of us, and you more particularly, Mr. President, will feel that the admission of
Guinea by th,e General Assembly, especially after such
a smooth passage from the Security Council-and even
here it was Without a vote actually being taken-is not
a vindication but is a proclamation of the justice of the
principles of the Charter itself. The Charter stands
fully vindicated in th\':! sense that non-self-governing
peoples can rise to freedom provided either the obstructions are removed or the strength of their organizations are adequate to overcome them.
63. So far, encomiums have been paid on occasions of
this kind, but we should never forget in this gathering
that while we welcome good things we are only too
happy to congratulate ourselves and others.64. We are a political organization in the sense that
we are composed of sovereign nations dealing with issues which affect the vast masses of people in the
world.
65. Standing here this evening, one cannot forget the
fact that lmtil two or three years ago the Assembly was
considering year after year an item on the admission of
new Members, and here today nations are with us which
must wonder Why, if Guinea could get in so easily, they
had to wait so many years outside. When those sixteen
countries were admitted, followed l:il.ter by two others,
the General Assembly did something that was very
good. It was an example that good conduct follows good
conduct; that is to say, when we broke the deadlock in
regard to the admission of new Members, thanks to the
co-operation of the permanent members of the Security
Council and the general impact of world opinion, we
opened not the floodgates but the doors of freedom, that
is, of membership, of this Organization to all those who
were ready to come into it.
66. We hope that the admission of Guinea willbe followed by the admission of other countries with which
it was linked until a few days ago. Since 1946, Guinea
has been a part of the French West African Federation.
Only two days ago we read that Dahomey, the Ivory
Coast and other parts of that French federation had
become republics. We hope that the republican form of
government, the content of it, will jp.stify their application for admission and our welcoming them here.
67. This stands in contrast to the policy in Africa
Which has been set out very eloquently by the head of
State of one of the colonial Powers. I thi$ it would be
discourteous to mention names. This is what this great
man said only very recently:
"European positions in Asia having been almost
entirely liquidated,"- which of course is not true unless "liquidated" means "very much spread over""we now see the new states preparing indiscriminately"-and we have one of the results of this indiscrimination- "to instigate subversive movements
all over Africa, as if conditions were identical in the
various regions of that continent or similar to those
prevailing among the Asiatic peoples who have gained
their independence. Since Bandung, this movementis
quite openly led by the Indian Union.
"Apart from the four or five independentStates"and this is of importance to us- "which are to be

571
which
lsions
shave
~ticu­

ion of
rsuch
leven
Is not
of the
,tands
rning
e obr or>nsof
ering
.y too
lthat
thisn the

It the
. was
on of
~hich

they
deen
lers,
very
good
ek in
) the
lrity
l,we
that
who

fol'hich
.inea
tion.
vory
had
mof
ica-

rica

d of
d be

reat

lost
un-

'''-

lmin-

mts

the
ose
ned
ltiS

572

General Assembly - Thirteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

- found in Af:rica, and apart from the Mediterranean
seaboard"-which does not include Guinea incidentally; I did n,ot say so here-"of·that continent where
there is a movement to hasten the process of evolution toward a system of autonomous governments or
associated independent states, it may be said that
Africa lives and must continue for an unforeseeable
time to live under the control and guidance of a
civilized state."
Incidentally, there is no definition given of a privileged
station-whether a person who rules over someone is
more civilized than the person who figi'lts and gains his
freedom. The quotation continues:
"Notwithstanding the political experiments which
Britain has recently promoted in limited areas, the
major sections of Africa consist of territories which
depend on European States and lack the conditions
necessary for existence as i: iependent, democratic
nations. Public administra- ",n and the guidance of
labour is unavoidably in the hands of a small minority
of Europeans. Their tasks cannot be abandoned or
handed over to the indigenous elements indiscriminately and all at once. Transfers of sovereignty are
conceivable there, but not the abandonment of it.
Herein is the problem. "
That is a statement from the head of a State Member
of this Organization. I am happy to think that the consummation of events today stands in contradiction of
this very fallacious doctrine.
68. We must also take this opportunity of congratulating once again the United Kingdom, Italy and France,
which have in the last two or three years assisted in the
implementation of the purposes of the Charter by
enabling dependent territories to come into the membership of the United Nations.
69. I believe that Guinea is the first element in the
French colonial empire proper-that is, excluding
Cambodia, Laos, Tunisia and Morocco, which were
protectorates whose sovereignties were, theoretically,
only mothered by the presence of an empire on top of
them. This is the first part of 4. 5million square miles
of colonial territory of the French empire in Africa
which, by dint of its own efforts and by the co-operation of the leadership of the French G07ernment, has
been able to come into the United Nations. We hope that
this example will spread not only to the rest of Africa,
but also to the Mediterranean to which the quotation I
read awhile ago refers.
70. But French Guinea is not the only Guinea in
Africa. There are other parts of Africa-to the east
and to the west, there are parts of Equatorial Africa
which are not French and which are still colonial, and
we hope that they will soon come into the fulness of
their freedom and be admitted into our Organization.
Also in the heart of Africa incidents are occurring in
which one of the parties involved is the same, where
sanguinary situations have arisen which are now engaging th r attention of the United Nations itself.
71. We all hope that the Wisdom, the foresight and the

recognition of the ineVitability of the expansion of
freedom, which must be in the back of the minds of any
imperialist Power, will be recognized in regard to
these areas.
72. My Government, which recognized the Government of the Republic of Guinea as soon as it was born,

joinB with all of you not only in congratulating this new
Republic, but in hoping that their admission to the
United Nations will rapidly lead to the expansion of
freedom in East Africa, in the rest of Equatorial
Africa-not only in French Equatorial Africa, but in the
rest of the former mandated and Trust Territories,
such as Tanganyika, and, as a previous speaker has
said, in two or three years time when the neighbouring
territories come into the Organization, we would have
altered the composition of this body sufficiently to make
it more representative of the wor,ld as it is.
73. Mr. MANGASHA (Ethiopia): The Ethiopian delegation would like to extend a heartfelt welcome to the
new State of the Republic of Guinea, which has just been
admitted to the United Nations by the General Assembly. With this action of the General Assembly, one
more step has been taken towards the realization of
universality in this Organization in accordance with
the spirit and purposes of the Charter.

74. We in Ethiopia have a great many things in common with our African neighbour in Guinea. It is therefore with a unique feeling of happiness that the people
and Government of Ethiopia welcome this new State in
the family of the United Nations.
75. It is the belief of my Government that the Republic of Guinea will be a useful Member of this Organization. Through its representatives Guinea will in future
years be able to tell the Assembly what it really feels
about African problems in particular. The Assembly
will do well to heed the small voice of Guinea with
particular attention.
76. The entry of another African State in this Organization will once again renew the hopes and aspirations of many African States which as yet do not have
the rights which independent States enjoy both inside
and oqtside the United Nations. The admission of the
Republic of Guinea in this unique family of nations is,
we believe, a sigp. of good things to come.

77. It is the sincere hope of my Government that in
the very near future we shall have many more opportunities to welcome other sister African States in the
family of the United Nations.
78. Sir Pier.'son DIXON (United Kingdom): It was a
great pleasllre for the United Kingdom delegation to see
the Republic of Guinea unanimously admitted to membership in the United Nations, just as in the Security
Council the United Kingdom was glad to vote in favour
of the resolution which recommended Guinea for membership.
79. The peaceful attainment of independence by the
Republic of Guinea in agreement with France has been
greeted with pleasure by Her Majesty's Government in
the United Kingdom. We see this event as the fruit of
enlightened policies which augur well for the future
stability and peace of the world. We do not see it, as
some others seem to, as a blow to the so-called
colonialist camp. We see it as a happy and beneficial
event which will perpetuate mutual friendship and common interests. The act of France in offering independen~e to Guinea is itself a refutation of the kind of
argument used earlier this evening by the representative of the United Arab Republic.

80. To return to the pleasurable subject actually under
discussion, my delegation looks forward to useful cooperation with the representatives of Guinea in the ad-

789th meeting - 12 December H}58

ongratulating this new
heir admission to the
d to the expansion of
he rest of Equatorial
torial Africa, but in the
and Trust Territories,
previous speaker has
ewhen the neighbouring
nization, we would have
ody sufficiently to make
or-ld as it is.

a): The Ethiopian deleeartfelt welcome to the
ea, which has just been
S by the General AsGeneral Assembly, one
~ards the realization of
ion in accordance with
:::harter.
at many things in comr in Guinea. It is there.ppiness that the people
ilcome this new State in

s.

irnment that the Repubimber of this Organizares Guinea will in future
Ibly what it really feels
rticular. The Assembly
11 voice of Guinea with

~ican State in this OrIW the hopes and aspira-

vancements of the aims q,nd purposes of the Chartar,
We are confident that they Will make a useful and
constructive contribution to our deliberations.

will reach every country on that continent. We cannot,
like King Canute, command the waves to go thus far
and no further.

81. I Wish, finally, to repeat the: welcome which I
voiced in the Security Council and to extend to the delegation, the Government and the people of Guinea our
congratulations and best Wishes on this auspicious
moment in their history.

89. The delegation of Pakistan wishes to pay tribute to
the noble act of France and of its great statesman,
General de Gaulle, which has enabled the people of
Guinea to exercise their inalienable·righttoindependence. In this way France has once again shown itself
true to that tradition of liberty to which it has been so
attached throughout its history.

82. Mr. RODRIGUEZ FABREGAT (Uruguay) (translated from Spanish): On behalf of the Latin American
group, of which I have the honour to be Chairman at the
present time, I extend our very warm welcome to the
new state which has just joined the international community of the United Nations. The representative of that
State has just mada his first speech from this rostrum
in the noble French language. In greeting the representative of Guinea at this time, we should lLlee to express the best Wishes of all the Latin American States
for the success of his undertaking;
83. It is our hope that the new independent country,
its people and its Government may, through the democratic procedures described and established in the new
State's constitution, fulfil its destiny.
84. We Latin Americans are very familiar with the
path-and for us it was often a path of heroic struggletowards full independence and the exercise of sovereignty, the conditions in. which human rights and
freedom can flourish. The text of the Constitution of
the new Republic of Guinea embodies the new thinking
with regard to the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the human rights provisions of the United
Nations Charter and it is our earnest hope that all
those objectives will be achieved.

Ihich as yet do not have
States enjoy both inside
s. The admission of the
ue family of nations is,
~s to come.
my Government that in
lave many more opporer African States in the

85. The representative of the new State whom we have
aeard here, and whose intelligence we have admired
from the first in his friendly relations with our group,
will find in the United Nations ample opportunity for
his people and his Government to contribute to the
common welfare and to the course of human progress.

:ed Kingdom}: It was a
ingdom delegation to see
Dusly admitted to mem, just as in the.Security
lS glad to vote m favour
nended Guinea for mem-

87. Prince ALY KHAN (Pakistan) (translated from
French): The delt;gation of Pakistan today has the
honour of joining many delegations in warmly welcoming the Republic of Guinea to this world-wide Organization and community of nations. The admission of
Guinea will result in the African continent being represented in a Wider and more varied manner in the United
Nations and will give a new African people the opportunity to make its own great contribution to the
achievement of the high objectives of the Charter and
to this noble monument to peace, justice and respect
for the fundamental rights of man.

of independence by the
int with France has been
lIaj esty' s Government in
his event as the fruit of
gur well for the future
'Id. We do not see it, as
blow to the so-called
3 a happy and beneficial
tual friendship and comlce in offering independ'efutation of the kind of
ening by the representaic.
le subj ect actually under
.s forward to useful coives of Guinea in the ad-

573

86. It is with particular pleasure that the countries of
Latin America welcome the new State of Guinea to the
United Nations.

88. The peoples of Africa have too long been deprived
of the right to liberty conferred on each one of us on the
day of our birth. The deep, full voice of the African
continent has remained too long silent. At long last
the hour of liberty has struck. One after another, year
by year, the peoples of Africa are attaining sovereignty and achieving freedom from foreign domination.
At the same time, they are establishing their right to
the equality and human dignity which for too long have
been denied to them. The wave of freedom which we
now see spreading over Africa cannot be checked; it

90. It is a source of great satisfaction to my delegation that the resolution on the admission of the Republic
of Guinea to the United· Nations was adopted unanimously.
91. Mr. COOPER (Liberia): It is with much pleasure
that my delegation welcomes our new sister State, the
Republic of Guinea, into the United Nations; but it is a
special pleasure to us, for not only is Guinea a sister
republic but its territory is contiguous to ours.
92. I am sure that the bonds of friendship that now
exist between our two countries will be further
strengthened with the passing of time.
93. I wish to extend my personal congratulations to the
Ambassador of Guinea and, through him, the best
Wishes of my delegation for the peace and prosperity
of the Government and people of Guinea. My delegation
feels confident that the Republic of Guinea, under its
dynamic and inspiring leader, Premier Sekou Tour~,
will justify the confidence placed in it and will fully
meet the requirements set out in the Charter of the
United Nations.
94. We also take this occasion to pay tribute to the
French Government, which, without any coercion, gave
its colonies the right to remain in the Union or to
secede and become free and independent States. I am
sure that this example of France's stability andgenerosity will make a deep impression not only upon the
citizens of France and its dominions in Africa but also
on all Africans who still cherish the hope of being free
and independent in the near future. It is the hope of my
delegation that other colonial Powers possessing vast
territories in Africa will follow this grand gesture of
the French nation.
95. Mr. DELGADO (Philippines): I should like to say
that, at the request of the permanent representative of
Spain, my remarks on this occasion are maJe in behalf
of both Spain and the Philippines.
96. We are privileged to join the rest of the General
Assembly in welcoming Guinea into the United Nations.
97. The admission of a new Member into the ranks of
the world Organization is always an event of great
significance. It constitt\tes a landmark as much for the
new Member as for the institution of which it seeks to
become a part. This is so for two· reasons. First, it
marks a further step forward in the slow and laborious
process of achieVing the ideal of universal membership
set forth in the Charter. And second, it provides additional and convincing evidence of the Wisdom of
peaceful change in bringing new nations into being.
98. As long as the representation of peoples in the
Assembly remains partial, the character of the work of
the United Nations will continue to be tentative and
halting. I think it is not entirely a result of fortuitous
circumstances that the Assembly in recent years has

574

General Assembly - Thirteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

acquired a force and influence it did not possess before. And as more and more nations enter into its
folds, so in proportion will that force grow and that
influence expand. With each new admission, the outlines of the future of the Assembly become clearer and
the day may not be too far off when we can speak of it,
not in piety but in simple truth, as the Parliament of
Man.
99. It has been said of our agethat it is a violent one,
as an age of excessive and radical change is bound to
be. Yet, one of its principal triumphs is the nearly universal recognition that such changes, where they involve the liberation of countries from colonialism, are
best achieved by peaceful, if necessarily slower,
methods. The parturition of nations exacts its own
inevitable hazards, but that these can be minimized and
that the explosive energy Which accompanies independence can be channeled to constructive purposes has
been sufficiently proved.
100. As a country which gained its independence in
this fashion, the Philippines can speak with some
authority. While the case of Guinea differs from that of
the Philippines in some respects, they are basically
similar. Neither case is unique any longer, for the
successful method of peaceful evolution has spread
very rapidly and has given the strongest encouragement
to all those countries still burdened by the yoke of
colonialism.
101. In this spirit, we welcome Guinea into the family
of nations and wish its people every success and
prosperity.
102. Mr. FILALI (Morocco) (translated from French):
The Moroccan delegation is deeply moved at the honour
of being present on this historic day, when the young
Republic of Guinea has been admitted as a Member of
the United Nations. For an African State like my own,
and for the African countries still underforeigndomination, the admission of Guinea is an event of great
importance which will undoubtedly have far-reaching
repercussions in the awakening continent of Africa, the
peoples of which yearn for dignity and freedom and are
engaged in a decisive struggle for independence and
liberation.
103. My delegation is fully conscious of the ties of
culture and friendship between the peoples of Morocco
and Guinea and wishes every success to this new
African republic. By opting unhesitatingly for national
independence, the people of Guinea chose the path which
they were bound to take in the light of their own interests and of their natural and sacred rights, thus
testifying to their great political maturity, vitality and
farsightedness. My delegation firmly believes thatthe
birth of this new African State is an important contribution to progress, justice and stability in Africa.
We are sure that it will give proof within the Organization of its attachment to the principles and purposes of
the United Nations Charter. Having set this example,
the people of Guinea will have an important part to play
not only within the family of the free nations of Africa
but also alongside the nations which constitute this
Assembly, whose moving force is a spirit of justice
and a determination to promote friendship and cooperation among the peoples'of the world.
104. Mr. LODGE (United States of America): The
United States cast its vote in the Security Council in
favour of the admission of the Republic of Guinea to

membership in the United Nations. It has been our
pleasant task today to reaffirm that vote here in the
General Assembly.
105. One of the great facts of our day is the emergence
to nationhood of the people of Africa. This development
is a source of great gratification to the United States.
We also appreciate the part which France has played
in providing guidance and assistance to this newest
sovereign nation.
106. The United States recognized the RepUblic of
Guinea on 1 November. In a message sent to the President of the Republic of Guinea on that day, President
Eisenhower expressed his good wishes for the future of
Guinea.
107. The General Assembly's decision tonight will
enable the United States to take another step forward in
strengthening its ties with the Government of Guinea
through our association in the work of the United Nations. We look forward to this new association.
108. The United States is happy to accept the declaration of the Government of Guinea that it is able and
willing to carry out the obligations contained in the
United Nations Charter, and has taken great pleasure
in joining with other Members here tonight in this
final official act which has resulted in the admission
of the RepUblic of Guinea to the United Nations.
109. This is an appropriate and orderly time, Ithink,
for me to express on another subject, but one which
falls within the same category of membership in the
United Nations, the profound regret which the United
States feels that the Security Council has had to report
once again its failure to recommend the admission of
the Republic of Korea and Viet-Narn to membership in
the United Nations. The United States joined with other
members of the Security Council in submitting two
draft resolutions [S/4129/Rev.l, S/ 4130/Rev.J.] asking
the Council to recommend the admission of these two
countries. An overWhelming majority of the Members
of the United Nations have repeatedly affirmed that
both the Republic of Korea and Viet-Nam are fully
qualified for membership and should be admitted to the
United Nations. But the will of the General Assembly
continues to be thwarted. We are deprived of the
presence here of two great Asian countries because
the Soviet Union chooses to abuse its veto power in the
Security Council. The United States shares the disappointment felt by the people of the Republic of Korea
and Viet-Nam in this result, but we believe firmly that
the will of the Assembly will prevail. We will continue
to do everything in our power to hasten the day when
the Republic of Korea and Viet-Nam take their rightful
places here among us.
110. Allow me to conclude these remarks on a happy
note and to extend once again on behalf of the United
States the warmest congratulations and best wishes to
the Government and the people of the Republic of
Guinea.
111. Mr. BOLAND (Ireland): On behalf of thedelegations of Austria, Denmark, the Netherlands and Norway
as well as on behalf of the delegation of my own country, which is one of the oldest nations although one of
the youngest States in Western Europe, I should like to
extend an especially warm and cordial welcome to
Guinea on the occasion of its admission to membership
of the United Nations.

S

alol'e U
lor us

~rtent

,bat fu

I\olllen
~lnd U

l1'epro
\.{empo

Illats a

DeW gro

contlne
W'nlon

shlp in
113. T

~liticaJ

~Ies

o

~ans£OI

many D

keland

order 0
$ndon

~elr pll
~elr lU

entille
mlBslon

Membe
moral s

lit W
France
madeth

f\lsslble
GuInea I
mcAustJ
~eland,

eiJlcere

prosper:

1I~, M:
Ilea) (tr:

lallonp
li·Gulne
~e Afrl
national
other vi
merei,
w!l1ch t

states}!

116, W

state, tl
~viet ~
IJld pea

!Iate, t
Union, c

IeU·det
IBplrati

~recoe
lovere~

I1sh dip

intent is

789th meeting - 12 December 1958

Nations. It has been our
rm that vote here in the

our day is the emergence
Africa. This development
tion to the United States.
which France has played
ssistance to this newest

cognized t~le Republic of
essage sentto the PresiLea on that day, President
Od wishes for the future of

y's decision tonight will
Ite another step forward in
he Government of Guinea
le work of the United Nais new association.

lppy to accept the declaraJuinea that it is able and
ligations contained in the
has taken great pleasure
bers here tonight in this
resulted in the admission
the UI'Ilted Nations.

and orderly time, I think,
ler subject, but one which
:ory of membership in the
id regret which the United
r Council has had to report
:ommend the admission of
iet-Nam to membership in
:ed States joined with other
:ouncil in submitting two
~v.1, si 4130/Rev.l] asking
he admission of these two
majority of the Members
repeatedly affirmed that
~ and Viet-Nam are fully
Id should be admitted to the
l of the General Assembly
We are deprived of the
t Asian countries because
abuse its veto power in the
:i States shares the disape of the Republic of Korea
but we believe firmly that
'1 prevail. We will continue
ler to hasten 1."1e day when
iet-Nam take their rightful

I

these remarks on a happy
ain on behalf of the United
l1ations and best wishes to
)eople of the Republic of
l): On behalf of thedelegahe Netherlands and Norway
lelegatioll of my own coun~st nations although one of
~rn Europe, I shoul;d like to
1 and cordial welcome to
3 admission to membership

112. We are convinced that Guinea has a most valuable
and significant part to play in the councils of this
Organization. As an African state keenly alive to the
trends of opinion and events surrounding it in its part
of the world, it can do much to deepen our understanding of the problems and aspirations of the continent of
which many of us perhaps know all too little. But the
admission of Guinea to membership of the United
Nations is more than a mere accession to our strength,
more than a new source of guidance and enlightenment
for us in our deliberations; it is also a symbol and a
portent of the future. It serves to focus our attention on
what future historians may well declare to be the most
momentous movement of our times. It serves to remind us that former colonies and dependent territories
are progressing towards freedom and independence at
a tempo no one would have thought possible a bare ten
years ago, and that already, even at this hour, a whole
new group of young nations and ancient peoples on the
continent of Africa stand, by a process of peaceful and
harmoniOUS development, on the threshold of membership in the world community.
113. The poliUcal map of Africa, the whole pattern of
political relationships in Africa and between the countries of Africa and the rest of the world, is being
transformed more radically and more rapidly than
many of us realize. Nobody rejoices more than we in
Ireland at the progressive development of this new
order of things in which former subject peoples can
stand on their own feet infreedom and dignity and take
their place in the councils of nations, aplace to which
their ancient cultures and their fundamental rights
entitle them. It is in this spirit that we hail the admission to the United Nations of yet another African
Member. Its presence here among us lends us new
moral strength and encouragement.
114. We cordially congratulate the Government of
France on the imaginative act of statesmanship which
made the admission of Guinea to the United Nations
possible. "And to the distinguished representative of
Guinea I cordially extend, on behalf of the delegations
of Austria, Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway and
Ireland, a warm welcome to our midst and our most
sincere good wishes for the future peace, progress and
prosperity of his country.
. 115. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet SocialistRepublics) (translated from Russian): It gives the USSR delegation particularly great pleasure to greet the people
of Guinea and all the African peoples. The peoples of
the African continent, which are struggling for their
national independence and freedom, have won yet another victory. A new State has joined the ranks of the
sovereign countries of Africa-the Republic of Guinea,
which today has taken its rightful place among the
States Members of the United Nations.
116. Warmly congratulating the new independent
State, the Soviet delegation, together with the entire
Soviet people, wholeheartedly wishes the Government
and people of Guinea success in the building of their
State, their economy and their culture. The Soviet
Union, consistently championing the right ofpeoples to
self-determination and respecting the just nationalist
aspirations of the people of Guinea, was one of the first
to recognize the Republic of Guinea as an independent
sovereign State and to express its readiness to establish diplomatic relations with it. The Soviet Government is convinced that the establishment of diplomatic

575

relations will facilitate the development of friendship
and co-operation between the peoples of the Soviet
Union and Guinea in t.lte interests of consolidating international peace.
117. The establishment of a new independent African
State cannot but arouse the enthusiastic approval of all
the freedom-loving peoples of the world, which have
the greatest sympathy and '.mderstandingfor the growing national liberation movement among the peoples of
the colonies and the dependent countries.
118. The Guinean people may be sure that this young
African republic has the goodwill of all. the peaceful
peoples of the world, which are ready ,.:l support the
new State in its first steps towards the c .:>nsolidation of
its independence. Today the example of the Republic of
Guinea serves as an inspiration to all the peoples of
Africa wilich have not yet thrown off the chains of
colonial slavery.
119. The participation of the Republic of Guinea in the
activities of the United Nations will unqIJ.estionably
make it easier for the young State to solve the problems which it faces. At the same time, the admission
of this new Member to the United Nations enhances the
latter's role and authority as auniversalinternational
organization.
120. The Soviet delegation. warmly welcomes the
young Republic of Guinea as a new Member of the
United Nations.
121. Yet while we have today to our great satisfaction
admitted the Republic of Guinea to membership in the
United Nations, it should be noted that the young African
State WE:.S lucky-it was admitted to the United Nations
without delay, immediately after submitting its application for membership, In that connexion the Soviet
delegation feels that it must remind the General Assembly of another State which has been waiting for
twelve years for our decision to admit itto the United
Nations. I am speaking of an Asian State, the Mongolian People's Republic. Everyone present is undoubtedly aware that the admission of this peace-loving
State, which meets all the requirements set forth in
the Charter, is being held up by the discriminatory
policy of the United States, which opposes with every
means at its command the admission to the United
Nations of States whf.chhave chosen the path of socialist
development.
122. It should be recalled that during the tenth session
of the General Assembly, in 1955, a majority of the
States Members of the United Nations supported the
application of the Mongolian People's Republic and it
was only the opposition of the United States which prevented a favourable decision. The United States completely ignored the generally accepted principle of
universality upon which our Organization is based,
disregarding the fact that such action constitutes a
gross violation of the United Nations Charter.
123. The Soviet delegation expresses the hope that the
day will soon come ·w'.I1en the Mongolian People's Republic will take its rightful place in the family of
States Members of the United Nations.
124. Mr. ISMAlL (Federation of Malaya): On behalf of
the Government and people of the Federation of Malaya
I wish to offer our very sincere felicitations to the
Republic of Guinea upon its admission to this great
assembly of nations. It was just over a year ago that

576

General Assembly - Th~rteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

we ourselves experienced the signal honour andprivilege of being cordially welcomed to take our place
among the nations of the world in this Assembly. With
the memory of that happy occasion still fresh in our
minds, my delegation understands the justified pride
and sense of achievement which our colleagues from
Guinea must feel at this moment which marks not only
the triumph of the people of Guinea but constitutes yet
another milestone in the march of colonial peoples
everywhere towards their emancipation.

125. We took great pride in the fact that we ourselves
achieved our independence in a peaceful manner. We
are very happy that the Republic of Guinea has taken
the same peaceful road to independence. It is to the
credit of the new French Republic that the principle of
self-determination as inscribed in the Charter of the
United Nations has been applied to Guinea.
126. The people of Guinea have demonstrated their
political maturity and readiness to take on the full
responsibilities of nationhood through the secret ballot
conducted in the recent referendum.
127. My delegation is confident that the Republic of
Guinea will have an important contribution to make in
the great work of this world Organization in the interests of humanity.
128. It would not be out of place on this happy occasion
when we jubilantly welcome yet another former colonial
territory to membership of the United Nations, to express the hope that before long all colonial territories
in Asia, Africa and elsewhere will also attain their
independence as Guinea and Malaya have done, and take
their rightful places in this great family of nations.
129. On behalf of the Government and people of the
Federation of Malaya, my delegation joins other delegations in wishing the new independent Republic of
Guinea a peaceful and prosperous future.
130. Mr. KURKA (Czechoslovakia) (translated from
Russian): Allow me, on behalf of the delegations of
Albania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, Romania and
Czechoslovakia, to hall the admission of the Republic
of Guinea, the new independent African State, to membership in the United Nations.
131. The establishment of this new State represents
the victorious conclusion of the Guinean people's
struggle to throw off colonial rule and attain their
nationlL1 freedom and independence. We are convinced
tha.t an independent Guinean State is the surest guaran~
tee that the people of Guinea will have a bright future.
We wish the Government and people of Guinea all success in the building of their State, their national economy and their national culture.
132. The establishment of a new State on the Mrican
continent has been welcomed by all peace-loving
peoples throughout the world, which sympathize with
the ever-growing movement of the Mricanpeoplesfor
freedom and national independence. We are profoundly
convinced that the day is not far off when the other
colonial peoples will attain their freedom and independence and take their places in the United Nations.
133. It gives us the greatest pleasure to see a new
African State, the RepUblic of Guinea, emerge on the
international scene. The countries on whose behalf I
have the honour to speak support the principle of universality of membership in the United Nations. For that
\

reason they gave their unconditional support to
Guinea's application for admission to the United
Nations and they welcome the representatives of GUinea
to our Organization with deep satisfaction and warm
friendship.

134. Mr. VIDIC (Yugoslavia): The Yugoslav delegation
wishes to'join those other delegations which have expressed their satisfaction in the admission of the
Republic of Guinea to membership of the United Nations.
135. On behalf of my delegation, I wish to greet
warmly this new Member of our Organization and to
wish it every success in its further development. The
Government and people of Yugoslavia have followed
with sympathy and understanding the efforts and struggle of the people of Guinea for their independence and
have welcomed every step forward in the process of
their emancipation. The fact that the Republic of
Guinea has embarked upon a course of free and independent development represents a signliicant mark
in the further advance of the peoples of the African
continent and a new and important step on the path of
achieving the universality of our Organization and its
strengthening as an international centre for the preservation and promotion of world peace and co-operation among nations.
136. Mr. WALKER (Australia) (translated from
French): The Australian Government takes pleasure in
welcoming the appearance of a new independent State
in the Mrican continent. In his message of 4 November
to the President of Guinea, the Australian Prime Min~
ister, Mr. Menzies, said: "We shall follow with the
greatest interest and with genuine good wishes the
future development of Guinea as an independent State.
We hope to develop ever closer bonds with you in many
fields of international activity in our common interest."
137. Australia warmly congratulates Guinea on the
peaceful attainment of its independence. We are happy
to support its admission to membership of the United
Nations and we all expect that Guinea will make a
constructive contribution to the work of this Organization, a contribution which will be a worthy expression
of the great traditions and sense of responsibility of
the Mrican peoples.
138. I take this opportunity of conveying to France
also our sincere congratulations on the birth of this
new Republic. France guided the people of Guinea by
democratic methods to the point at which that country
felt itself able to decide its own future. Such a process
is in the highest French tradition and is fully in accordance with the spirit of the Charter.
139. The Australian delegation hopes that relations
of close and cordial co-operation will be established
with the representative of Guinea who took his seat
among us this evening. On this occasion I would request him to convey to the Government and people of
Guinea the warmest good wishes of the Australian
Government and people for a prosperous future.
140. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from French): It
is with a feeling of deep emotion that Tunisia today
welcomes the entry into the United Nations of Guinea,
a sister African country. As it has just done now in the
case of Guinea, the General Assembly a little more
than two years ago welcomed my country, Tunisia, as
a new Member. As it has just done now, the General

AsseJnbly W1
States to swe

IU. The av.
lIlarked by a·
~aUght with
=ourageous ~
struggle in vi.

bave been en~

which took p]
no way detral
bas also bee

Government (

{lct-that it h
Illdhas acceI
/or the future
It is.

142. In wele

of France wh.
~ve friendly
~sk of trans

relationships
on freedom.
~1nea and

113. Mr. BRI
Ibe C anadiar
~on expresSI
ltates in wel
public of Guir:
In the Securl
~Is new State
~nerous ges1
General de G;
IOlonies tlle r
144.

Canada,

~ther two gr\
lerritories, 1~
I new State is
Il'eat countr~

IO\U'ces, will
lependent Sta
~ new collel
jla.tulations 0
latlon. We tr1
nth a parl1a:
lighted men,
.nth prudenCE
~len filled w:1

145.

Mr.OaI

~ great pride
~n behalf of 1

leprea entativ,

on their COUI
United Nation

146. My sen
mother newl~
pnization ire
b emphasize
pjUtical devE
~cond World
to illusions,
~~ntinue at a
~~lne into its
117.

We are

well equipped
~ganization

, unconditional suppor t to
r admiss ion to the United
the repres entativ es of Guinea
deep satisfa ction and warm

via): The Yugoslav delegation
t' delega tions which have exon in the admiss ion of the
embers hip of the Uilited Na-

delegation, I wish to greet
Ir of our Organization and to
its further development. The
of Yugoslavia have followed
;tandingthe efforts and strugla for their independence and
ep forwar d in the proces s of
I fact that the Republic of
Ion a course of free and ineprese nts a signifi cant mark
If the peoples of the African
import ant step on the path of
y of our Organization and its
rnation al centre for the preof world peace and co-ope ra-

\.ustralia) (transl ated from
Government takes pleasu re in
ce of a new independent State
In his messag e of 4 November
la, the Austra lian Prime Mln~
d: "We shall follow with the
rith genuine good wishes the
linea as an independent State.
closer bonds with you in many
ivity in our common interes t."
congra tulates Guinea on the
; independence. We are happy
to membe rship of the United
lect tilat Guinea will mak:e a
1 to the work of this Organi za~ will be a worthy expres sion
and sense of respon sibility of

llnity of conveying to France
ltulations on the birth of this

;uided the people of Guinea by
ne point at which that country
its ownfut ure. Such a prOCeS5\
n traditio n and is fully in acof the Charte r.
ilegation hopes that relatio ns
.operat ion will be establi shed
of Guinea who took his seat
On this occasio n I would rethe Government and people of
Dod wishes of the Australia..'1
tor a prospe rous future.
L) (transl ated from French ): It
IP emotio n that Tunisi a today
the United Nations of Guinea,
• As it has just done noW in the
neral Assembly a little more
omed my country, Tunisia, as
,as just done now, the General

789th maeting - 12 Decem ber 1958
577
Assembly will, I hope, welcome other young African
that it will be a worthy Member of the United Nations
States to swell the family of the United Nations.
and will do all in its power to help this Organization
achieve its great objecti ves.
141. The awakening of our vast continent has been
marked by a numbe r of stages , happy indeed, but often
148. In conclusion, I wish to thank all the Memb ers
fraugh t with difficulty and only accom plished after a
of the Genera l Assem bly whose frien.dly suppor t made
courag eous and steadfa st struggl e. .rhe victori ous
it possib le for the Republic of Guinea to be admitte d
struggl e in which the people and Government of Guinea
without any difficulty to membe rship of the United
have been engaged was, to be sure, apeace ful strugg le
Nations.
which took place only in the politic al field; but that in
149.
U THANT (Burma): I should like to join other
no way detrac ts from its value- quite the contra ry. It
represe nta"ive s in extending our felicita tions to the
has also been to the great credit of F'ranc e-and the
Republic of Guinea on its admiss ion to the Unitfld
Government of Tunisi a has pleasu re in recogn izing the
Nations. Our joy is all the greate r becaus e the Republic
fact-th at it has prepar ed the way for this development
of Guinea has been admitt ed to this world Organization
and has accepte d it. May this be taken as a good omen
only a few months after the attainm ent of its indefor. the future? We have after all the right to hope that
pendence.
it is.
150. France also deserv es its full share ofcred itfor
142. In welcoming Guinea, we welcome a new friend
recognizing the realiti es of the situatio n in Guinea by
of France who, like ourselves~ will be in a positio n to
grantin g that country full independence and not standin g
give friendl y and sincer e help to that country in the
in the way of its admiss ion to the United Nations.
task of transfo rming former colonial connexions into
151. The grantin g of independence to Guinea and the
relatio nships that are friendl y becaus e they are based
warm welcome to this world Organization accord ed to
on freedo m. We bid welcome to our brothe rs from
it are symbolic cf the shape of things to come. We are
Guinea and to their great leader, Sekou :rour~.
all witnes sing a profound change, a change which is
143. Mr. BROWNE (Canada) (transl atedfro m French ):
affecting the politic al landscape of the whole world and
The Canadian delegation shares the genera l satisfa cwhich has been mainly centred in the continents of
tion expres sed by the repres entativ es of Member
Asia and Africa . People s who in the past have been
State'j in welcoming the arriva l among us of the Remainly agitating for freedo m from foreign domination
publh~ of Guinea. We already had the privile ge of
and people s who have not been sufficiently developed to
voting
in the Securi ty Council in favour of the admiss ion of
be animat ed by any consci ous desire for independence
this new State. We have the greate stadmi rationf or the
are now demanding the same rights of nationa l sovgenerous gesture made by the French Prime Minist er,
ereign ty which more advanced States long ago acquire d.
General de Gaulle, in offerin gthe people s of the French
152. The delegation of Burma hopes that Guinea 's
colonies the right to choose immed iate independence.
case will inspiJ:e the birth of many more nations and
144. Canada, as a federat ion which has welded tOM
make the United Nations a real force for peace.
gether two great races and unified severa l colonies and
153. My delegation joins others in wishing the Reterrito ries, is fully aware of the proble ms with which
public of Guinea a peacef ul and prospe rous future.
a new State is confronted. We sincere ly hope that this
great country, so richly endowed with natura l re154. Mr. ORTONA (lta!y) (transl ated from French ): I
source s, will be able to grow and prospe r as an inM
should like to join the other delega tions in extending
dependent State. We hold out the hand of friendship to
congra tulatio ns to the Republic of Guinea on the occaour new colleague and extend to him our sincere consion of its admiss ion by unanimous vote into the United
gratulations on his countr y's admiss ion to our Organi Nations. I have great pleasu re in conveying these conzation. We trust that the new republ ic will be blesse d
gratula tions also in the name of the delega tions of
with a parliam ent and government of patient and farBelgium, Luxembourg and Portug al.
'sighte d men, who will be able to guide the new State
155. We are fully confident that the Republic of
with prudence through a world which is distulb ed and
Guinea is able and anxious to fulfil the obligations of
often filled with difficu lties.
the Charte r and that it will have an import ant cont::-ibution to make to the work of the United Nations.
145. Mr. Daniel CHAPMAN (Ghana): Itisvdt hasens e
of great pride that I take the rostrum to congratulate,
156. In welcoming Guinea, the entry of which inon behalf of the Government and people of Ghana, the
crease s the number of independent Africa n States
represe ntative of the Government and people of Guinea
forming part of our Organization, the Italian delegation
011 their countr y's admiss ion to membe rship
of the
wishes to pay a warm tribute to the enlightened policy
United Nations.
of France , which has made it possib le for the people of
Guinea to achieve their independence jn an orderly and
146. My sense of pride stems from the fact that yet
peaceful way through free electio ns. We are conanother newly independent nation has joined our Orvinced that peacef ul development of this kind will lay
ganization from the continent of Africa. This fact goes
the best possib le foundations for future relatio ns beto empha size the trend which has been evident in the
tween the new republ ic and the community of nations .
political development of Africa since the end of the
The proble ms and tasks which each new State must
Second World War-a trend about which we need have
face are indeed most grave and complex. The United
no illusion s, for, we are happy to say, it is going to
Nations is constantly increas ing its efforts to provid e
continue at an ever-in creasin g pace; and Africa will
further assista nce to the under- develo ped countr ies.
come into its own inherit ance•
We feel sure that our Organization ·and each of its
147. We are confident that the Republic of Guinea is
Membe r States will help the new republ ic along the
well equipped to discha rge its respon sibiliti es to our
difficult road of human endeavour in an atmosp here of
Organization and to the interna tional community, and
peacef ul co-ope ration.

578

General Assembly - Thirteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

157. Lastly, I wish, on behalf of my Government,
which has already recognized the Republic of Guinea,
to express every good wish for the future prosperity
and happiness of the new Member State.

I

158. Mr. OSMAN (St. n): The struggle forthefundamental rights of man nas once again prevailed in the
continent of Africa. This time the newly-born Republic
of Guinea has attained its independence, and has taken
its rightful placeinthisgreatfamilyofnatiol1s. We are
confident that other States will soon be welcomed into
O\lr ranks. It will be recalled that my country was
among the first to recognize the Republic of Guinea as
9~ sovet"eign and independent State, not only because the
Republic of Guinea is rooted in the soil of Africa, but
because we are satisfied that the Republic of Guinea
will live up to the high expectations of the General
Assembly and thatit will carry out, diligently and faithfully, all its international obligationsw'der the Charter
of the United Nations and all other oblig;,.tions normally
assumed by sovereign 2:ld independent States in the
~:::~m,c~:~~i;~n~:~~:o:er~~\~:ionsbased on
159. And, finally, it is with deep eraotions that I extend the congratulations of the people and Government
of my country to the sister republic of Guinea for the
role U has just assumed ty being admitted into the
membership of the United Nations. We wish the people
of Guinea every happiness and prosperity, and the
Government of Guinea every success.
160. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylon): It is a matter of the
greatest gratW.cation to my delegation to have this
opportunity of joining in welcoming the Republic of
Guinea as a Member of the United Nations. It is an
added cause for joy that Guinea becomes a Member so
soon after the attainment of her independence and with
the unanimous approval of this Assembly. In this the
repxoesentative of the Republic of Guinea will note the
keen interest with which the Members of the United
Nations welcome the attainment of the status of sovereign independence of all countr-ies, big or small.
161. I Wish also on this happy and historic occasion to
express our deep appreciation of the liberal, 'bold and
statesmanlike action of General de Gaulle, Prime
Minister of France, which has made today's happy
event possible. His was an act in the true tradition of
the greatness of France. It required courage, vision and
a liberal attitude of mind. And now he will be glad, no
doubt, +.0 know that the whole world l'ejoices over an
act which led to the freedom and independence 9f a
people who, shortly before, were not free.
162. I should like at the same timetopay a tribute to
Mr. Sekou Tout';, President of the Republi~.ofGuinea,
for the courage, skill and vision With which he led his
people to the goal 0: freedom. My Government has
recognized GUinea, ~d it gives me -nuch pleasure,
therefore, on behalf of my delegation, my Government,
and the people of my country to offer to the Government
and people of Guinea an(! to th~;r repl·(..~entative,
Ambassador Telli, O'tr warmest and sincerest congratulations, and our best wishes that the Republic of
Guinea may flourish and advance, and that the people
may live in happiness, peace and prosperity in the
communi,tY of the free. nations of the. world.
163. Mr. LOURIE (Israel): Tod2y, as one surveys the
membership of our Organization and recalls that of the
League of Nations twenty years ago, one is struck by

-"""

the far-reaching differences which characterize these
two great international bodies-fue one of yesterda.y,
the other of today. Within less than two decades, independence has come to vast areas of Africa and Asia,
and that continuing historical development of such
dramatic significance finds its due reflection in the
composition of our Organization. It is a development
which is still in full flood, and it is with deep satisfaction that, folloWing the admission of Ghana, at the
last session, we tonight record the accession to our
numbers of another African State, and look forward to
welcoming among us in the next year or two Nigeria
and other countries of Africa.
164. It is right that we should, in thIs connexion, pay
tribute to France-pay tribute to the generous and
farsighted policy of that country which, having for so
long guided the destiny of the Republic of GUinea, has
now accorded her fudependence.
165. Similarly, Togoland, another African territory
administered by France, has now emerged from tutelage to full self-government, and will soon be claiming
its place among us.
166. Israel values deeply its growing network of
friendly contacts and relations with the world of Africa,
as we do, too, with the countries of the continent of
Asia of which we form a part. We offer to our new
associ~~e our congratulations and our warm good
Wishes.
167. Mr. RAHNEMA (Iran) (translated floomFrench):
The birth of a nation and its entry into our great
family is always a historic event of such significance
that it is difficult to greet it Without some emotion and
legitimate pride.
168. This emotion is all the greater because we have
the pleasure today of greeting the birth of an African
nation, a nation which only yesterday was non-se!fgoverning, and a. nation which owes its independence
not only to its people's struggle for freedom and to the
development of its national identity, but also to the
observance of a generous promise made in good faith
by the administering Power, namely, France.
169. The people of Guinea have chosen independence
by an act of self-determination. The people of France,
haVing promised through their Prime Minister to
respect the free expression of the will of the people of
Guinea, granted that independence, thu~ remaining
faithful to the great liberal tradit~- . i France's history.
170. This true and honest co-operation between a
great administering Power and a people Whose only
strength lay in their unshakeable faiL'l in their cause
and in their future deserves unanimous tribute from all
the peoples of the world. In that trft-.ute my delegation
wishes Wholeheartedly to join, as Npresenting one of
the ancient peoples of Asia which stands side by side
with its young brothers of the African-Asian world
in their march towards national freedom.
171. This event, like so many others we are witnessing, reflects the far-reaching changes which characterize oul' age, which is the age of the disintegration of
the old colonial system and the creation of new and
various nationalities, the age of tj).e right of selfdetermination and of the will to devote the power of the
people to peaceful and constructive causes, the age of
the most fantastic accomplishments, when former sub-

..

789th meeting - 12 December 1958
ject peoples are beginning to glimpse thepossibility of
accomplishing in one generation things which they had
not imagined could be accomplished in ten and to go
ahead on that assumption.
172. Guinea has gained its independence by free and
joint action of its own people and of France. Following
in its footsteps, five new nations will soon join the great
family of free sovereign nations, four of those five
having taken their first steps towards self-government
and independence under the aegis of the United Nations.
113. Those are events which the peoples of the world
rightly consider of great historic importance, an importance reflected in this evening's unanimous vote.
It is our dUty to continue to help those countries in
every possible way, so as to support and sustain them
in their national efforts to secure a better future. In
that connexion, it is natural that a specialresponsibility should devolve upon the former administering
Powers. Their task is sometimes thankless and difficult, but it will be a great and noble one if it is undertaken in the spirit of the new international humanism,
and if it is approached intelligently with a sense of
history and with the vision required by the changing
future.
174. In the present instance, the part played by France
is characteristic of the noblest traditions of its history,
and my delegation wishes to salute and congratulate
France on this occasion.
175. As for the Republic of Guinea, my delegation
earnestly hopes that the new State, with the disinterested help of all the nations of the world, and above
all of France, will successfully come through the difficult initial stage of its independence and will go on
with increased confidence towards an ever more promising future. Thus my delegation Wishes to extend a
most cordial welcome to the representative of Guinea,
and in the name of the Government and people of Iran
to offer to the young Republic of Guinea its warmest
good Wishes for happiness, success and prosperity in
the attainment of its national aims.
176. Mr. EL-ARAB! (Libya): It is the pleasure of the
Libyan delegation to extend its warmest congratulations to the new African State of Guinea, first, for
achieving independence, and secondly, for taking its
place as a sovereign independent State among these
eighty-one Members representing sovereign States all
over the world.
177. I honestly believe that the new State which we
have just welcomed among us will contribute highly to
the cause of international peace, security and understanding. May I therefore wish for the newly-born
state and its people all success and prosperity. I also
hope to see more African and non-African states joining the United Nations during the coming years. In
particular, this is the occasion to state that there is a
country in North Africa which is struggling for independence and self-determination. It will be the
pleasure of my Government and people to see this
country become a sovereign State represented in this
Assembly.
178. Mr. SUGAIR (Saudi Arabia): Speaking for the
first time in the United Nations, I would like to take
this happy occasion to extend the warm and sincere
congratulations of the Government, the people and the
delegation of Saudi Arabia to the people, the Government and the leaders of the Republic of Guinea for

579

achieVing their liberty and independence. I am sure
that the young Republic of Guinea is a peace-loving
nation and its admission to our Organization will be a
great contribution to the peace and securityof the free
nations of the world.
179. Mr. BOULOS (Lebanon) (translated from
French): I wish to join with the other delegations which
have this evening welcomed the admission of Guinea,
a new sovereign State, to the United Nations. The
peaceful evolution through which Guinea has acllieved
its independence and sovereignty is proof of the
patience, intelligence and high qualities of the leaders
and people of Guinea. That proof, furnished by Guinea
during its peaceful though nonetheless glorious struggle for independence, is a guarantee that that country
will be a sound and constructive Member of oux Organization, and one truly representative of the new
Africa on the march to freedom.
180. I would like to take this opportunity of thanking
Guinea, a country noted for its hospitality, for the welcome it has given to more than 10,000 Lebanese citizens. I also Wish to pay tribute to the liberal attitude
of the French Government which has made it possible
for Guinea tO,achieve its independence and sovereignty.
That action will have its place in the noble tradition of
French liberalism and humanism.
181. On behalf of my delegation I welcome the delegation of Guinea, and on behalf of the Government and
people of Lebanon, I Wish all good fortune to the Government and people of Guinea.
182. Mr. TELLI (Republic of Guinea) (translated
from French): I have listened with happy emotions,
which it would ill become me to conceal, to all the
speakers who have conveyed to the Republic of Guinea
from this rostrum the friendly welcome of 'their
respective countries.
183. Guinea, which has now regained its independence
in an atmosphere of calm, unity and dignity by peaceful
means that are fully in accordance with the noble principles of this Organization, was aware that 1t could
count on the active sympathy and friendship 01 all
peoples and many States. But in truth I must openly
admit that the unanimity and spontaneity of the good
Wishes Which have just been expressed far exceeded all
my expectations. I interpret them not only as marking
a special sympathy and understanding for the Government and people of Guinea, but as a further heart- .
warming proof of the univer sal support for the guiding
concept of independence, with Which my country has
become identified, and which is the basis of understanding and fruitful co-operation among peoples.
184. Once more I Wish to express my sincere and
humble gratitude, and I Wish again to assure you that
the Republic of Guinea will spare no effort to deserve
your esteem, your trust and your support, and thus
remain worthy of its place among you in the United
Nations, and ever equal to its historic mission in the
service of Africa and the whole international community.
AGENDA ITEMS 36 AND 37
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter: reports of the Secretary-General and of the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing TerrItories:

r"

I a

••51

bj;:~qlli

"Ii' "~~C

11111l1i'i

11. III

IlI!t.Lt.t~~~ •.•,~!l!l!!!iM!M _ _•

Genera l Assembly - Thirtee nth Session - Plenar y Meetings
191. There is nothing new in this motion, and my
(g) InformatlOl"'lon social conditions;
delegation does not believe it necess ary to take the
(~) Information an other conditions;
Assem bly's time to elaborate on a question which the
(B) General questlo.'1s relatin g to the t"ansm lsslon and
Assembly knows thoroughly and has consistently deexamination of Inmrmatlon;
cided, at the last two session s s to consid er as important
(~) Methods of reproducing summa ries of Information
the purpos es of Article 18. However, I should just
for
concerning Non~Self~Govorning Territo ries: relike to remind the Assembly that the draft resolution
port of the Secret ary-Ge neral;
now before us is entirel y simila r in its genera l word(!) Report of the Secret ary-Ge neral on developments
ing and in its purpose to two previo us draft resolutions
connected with 'the associa tion of Nan-SeIY~GovernsesWhich were before the Assembly at the past two
Ing Terrlto rle's with the European EconomlcComd by it. We know that the sole
rejecte
were
and
sions
munlty;
aim of the sponso rs of all these draft resolutiolls, alof study and trainin g faciliti es under resoOffers
(!)
terms, is
thOUg~1 they are disguis ed in carefully vague
f
b 1954
lutl 845 (IX~ f 22 ...to single out some countr ies and discrim inate against
: report 0 the
.""vem er
iI 0
on
them so much so that we feel it our duty this year to
Secretory-Genercd
put this motion ourselv es before the Assembly .:iUs the
Questlonof the renewal of the Committee on Inform asubmission of my delegation that the importance which
tion from Non-Self-Govern3ng Territo ries: report
Assembly a.ttached to this matter in the past has in
the
of the Committee on Information from Non-Self~
no way diminished; if anything, it has increas ed. It
Governing Territo ries
would seem lOufficient to recall- and I would stressinthis
point before the Assem bly-th at during the debate the
REPORTS OF THE FOURTH COMMITTEE (A/4068)
Fourth Committee many repres entativ es, including
AND OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (AI 4065)
SOnie of the sponso rs of the presen t draft resolution,
185. The PRESIDENT: In addition to the report s of
emphasized the very great importance of the question
the Fourth Committee [A!4068] and of the Fifth Comwent so farasto saytha tthis was a proble m which
and
mittee [A/4065], the Assembly has before it a draft
jeopard ize international peace and securit y, addmight
and
Mexico
,
Liberia
resolution submitted by Iraq,
connexion with this draft resolution, that ti''le
in
tng,
Morocco [A/L.259].
Assembly has the right of investigating national constituUons in order to decide whether the constitutional
was
it
ure,
proced
of
rules
Pursua nt to rule 68 of the
limitat ions are well founded, as enVisaged in Article
decided not to discus s the report of the Fourth Com73 e of the Charte r.
mittee .
ComFourth
the
of
Mr. Eilan (Israel ), Rappo rteur
draft resolution, I
192. However, in relatio n to this respec
t of the last
mittee , presen ted the report of that Committee.
wish to stress a further point in
amounts
aph
paragr
this
fact,
In
aph.
paragr
ve
operati
186. The PRESIDENT: The Genera l Assembly will
e, of
purpos
lar
particu
a
to an extension, admittedly for
now vote on the drait resolut ions submitted by the
aInform
on
ittee
Comm
the
of
ce
referen
of
the terms
Fourth Committee in its report [A/406 8].
all
we
As
ries.
Territo
erning
lf-Gov
tion .from Non-Se
Draft resolut ion I was adopted by 71 votes to 1, with
know, the establi shmen t and the definition of the terms
8 abstentions.
of referen ce of that Committee have always been considered as requiri ng a two-th irds majori ty vote, and we
Draft resolut ion n was adopted by 77 votes to none,
to see any reason to depart from that wise and
fail
with 2 abstentions.
legal proced ure, particu larly when the terms of
187. The PRESIDENT: In connexion with draft resolu referen ce of the Committee would be extended, if the
a
ted
tion m, the delegation of Austra lia has reques
draft resolution is approved, to such a degree that they
separa te vote from the beginning of the text down to
of Member
would enable it to scrutin ize constitutions
and including operat ive paragr aph 2.
States and pass judgement on securit y measu res that
some countr ies may find necess ary to take for their
That part of draft resolution m was adopted unanidefence.
mously.
193. For all these reason s I again move that draft
188. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now vote
resolut ion IV should be subjec t to a two-th irds majority
on operati ve paragr aph 3.
vote, under Article 18 of the Charte r. Iask that a rollThe paragr aph was adopted by 67 "fotes to 7, with 6
call vote be taken.
abstentions.
194. As regard s my explanation of vote on draft resoDraft resolut ion ID as a whole was adopted by 79
lution IV, if you do not have any objection, I think it
votes to none, with 1 abstentioil.
would be perhap$ morl. approp riate that I make my
explanation of vots when we come to the vote on the
189. The PRESIDENT: We turn now to draft resol\/.resolution.
draft
who
al,
Portug
of
tion IV. I recognize the repres entativ e
ation
explan
in
and
order
of
point
a
on
speak
to
wishes
195. The PRESIDENT: Another point of order is noW
of his vote.
being raised. Let me first make a simple statement
on the first point of order and then I will r~cognize the
190. Mr. GARIN (Portugal): The Assembly is now
in
ed
contain
IV
ion
resolut
draft
on
vote
to
represe ntative of Iraq on a point of order.
called upon
h'le report of the Fourth Committee. Before you call
196. The represe ntative of Portug al, on a point of
up'On the Assembly to vote, my delegation formally
order, has presen ted us with a question which must be
on
mO~'9sthat this draft resolut ion should be voted
dealt with before we can proceed. to vote on the draft
under the two-th irds majori ty rule as it deals with an
resclu.tion before us. The question is clear-w hether
import ant question within the terms of Article 18 of
or not draft resolution IV should be regard ed as falling
the Charte r.

580

7BSllt meeting - 12 Decemoor 1958
under the two-t.hirds rule of Article 180f&e Charter.
While it is proper that the matter be raised on a point
of order, he can raise it and I can rule on it, and we
can go ahead. if the ruling is challenged, the challenge
is put to the vote according to the regular procedure
on a point of order. While it is proper that the matter
be raised on a point of order, Ido not t.hink it would be
appropriate to follow that procedure in this case. I
should like, therefore, to present to you in a perfectly
objective manner the situation in which we find ourselves. The motion before us, namely the Portuguese
proposal, is that draft resolution IV should require a
two-thirds majority of Members present and voting.

motton, and my
~3.ry to take the
estion which the
consistently de:ler as important
er, I should just
draft resolution
ls general wordtraft resolutions
ne past two seslOW that the sole
resolutioI1s, al, vague terms, is
riminate against
duty this year to
ssembly .it is the
.mportance which
in the past has in
las increased. It
would stress this
glIte debate in the
atives, including
draft resolution,
:e of the question
a problem which
lnd security, add~solution, that t..i.e
19 national constithe constitutional
risaged in Article

197. Now, every Member of the Assembly is
thoroughly faroiUar with all the issues and implications
of the motion. as well as with all the issues and implications of draft resolution IV itself. As a consequence,
the longest possible debate would not add to the fund of
knowledge of any one of us. Furthermore, we have been
working under very heavy pressure, and, as President,
I must remind you of tte new target date of closure
that you established today, namely tomorrow. It lathe
universal desire of all of us to proceed as expeditiously
as possible to the conclusion of our work.
19a. For these two re~sons-you.t.' Qwnabsolutefamiliarity with the issues involved and the pressure under
which all of us have been wOl'king-I propose to the
Assembly that we voluntarily accept an arrangement
whereby two speakers would be permitted to speak for
the motion of the representative of Portugal and two
speakers against. Upon the conclusion of these four
interventions we would proce.ad to the vote. I believe
that this is a sensible arrangement which will appeal
to all of you as a fair and equitable way of dealing with
this matter. This is my suggestion conce:riling the
motion of the representative of Portugal.

traft resolution, I
'espect of the last
tragraph amounts
ticular purpose, of
littea on Informa!tories. As we all
,nition of the terms
i always been con.jority vote, and we
rom that wise and
en the terms of
~e extended, if the
I a degree that they
mtions of Member
~ity measures that
y to take for their

199. But now I give the floor to the representative of
Iraq on a p~int of order.
200. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): The Assembly will note
that the draft resolution submitted by my delegation,
together with the delegations of Liberia, Mex:lco and
Morocco, [A/L.259], relates to the same question that
has been raised by the representative of Portugal. For
this reason I should have thought that in view of our
draft resolution this question of invoking the two-thirds
majority rule on any of the draft resolutions relating
to Non-Seli-Governing Territories might be premature
until we get the adVisory opinion of the Inte:mational
Court of Justice. At a later stage I would ask your
permission to allow me to introduce the draft resolution. r will then clarify the reasons which. have
prompted the four delegations to present thils draft
resolution.

In move that draft
wo-thirds majority
r. I ask that a roll•vote on draft reso)bjection, I think it
te that I make my
i to the vote on the
lnt of order is noW
1 simple statement
•will r::lcognize the
, order.
!gal, on a point
stion whiC~must bt
to vote on the draf
11 is clear-whether

0;

regarded as

.

201. I would therefore like to ask our colleague from
Portugal if he would withdraw his request for applying
the two-thirds majority rule on this draft resolution; but
I realize that there might be some difficulties involved.
But if he would withdraw this request fora two-thirds
majority vote, then I think it would be fair for the Assembly to decide not to take up this draft resolution,
and postpone consideration of it until the follOWing year.
2G2. In waiting for the reply of the representative of
Portugal, I should like to reserve the right of my delegation to intervena in opposition to his motion, if he
should insist on it.

faJ1jng~ •.•

581

203. The PRESIDENT: I take it that the representative
of iraq is suggesting that we do not act on draft resolution IV at this stage. That is certainly a proper suggestion. Would he like to put it as a formal motion that
the Assembly not act on this text at the present session? If so, such a motion, being entirely procedural,
would have precedence over everything else.
204. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): I formally proposs that
the Assembly should not take UP draft resolution IV
this year.
205. The PRESIDENT: Is there any discussion on this
purely procedural motion? Representatives may take
time to think it over because it is very important.
206. b order to avoid confusion, let me say that the
only motion before the Assembly ij!l the one made by
the representative of Iraq to the effect iliat the Assembly should not consider draft resolution IV at the
present session. If representatives wish to raise a
point of o:rder or to discuss the motion, they are welcome to do so.
207. Mr. GARIN (Portugal): First of alltl should like
to find out if the representative of Iraqis Withdrawing
the draft resolution 011 behalf of all its sponsors.
Secondly, I should like to say that the President has
ruled that we should take up the draft resolution which
was just submitted [A/L.2 591 after the report and,
therefore, after disposing of draft resolution IV.
208. I should also like to know, if the representative
of Iraq is really WithdraWing draft resolution IV,
whether he is also withdraWing, at the same time, the
draft resolution that was just submitted. All these
points are unclear to me.

209. The PRESIDENT: I will ask him to answer you.
But my understanding-which he may, of course, either
verify or deny-is that he does not :want the Assembly
to take a decision on draft resolution IV precisely
becaus:"' he wants action taken onhisowndraft resolution. Therefore, he is not Withdrawing his draft resolution.
210. Mr. GARIN (Portugal): Is the representative of
Iraq making a formal motion to withdrawdraftresolution IV?

211. The PRESIDENT: His formal proposal is that
the Assembly should not take a decision on draft
resolution IV.
212. Mr. GARl:N,; (Portugal): In that case) I would
formally propose that the rule with regard to a twothirds majority should also be applied to the draft
resolution that \l,.'as just submitted.
213. The PRESIDENT: When we reach that point, !
will entertain the motion of the representative of
Portugal.
214. Mr. GARIN (Portugal): In my opinion, the two
points are absolutely inter.connected.
215. The PRESIDENT: They are ~nterconnected,
certainly. Now we have before us only the motion of
Iraq that draft resolution IV from the Fourth Committee
not be acted on. It Is a procedural motion and is very'
clear.
216. Mr. GA..lUN (Portugal): Then I think that this
procedure comes too lat~\ because the President has
already ruled that he is going to take a vote with regard to a two-thirds majority on the draft resolution.
",.11,;,'1

81
ve
0-

giat

sLl,

tat
lV

lis
Ite

ne
by
13-

ne
a
1lee
Ilg

s.
i!.S
~h

d,

U.

91"

ly
ly

1-

)-

I)f

J.-

d

1-

ft

!
f

0

,
f

e

y

583

General Assembly - Thirteenth Session - Plena~,~y_M_ee_tin_·...:gs:::.....

_

217. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Portugal
can vote against the motion of Iraq.

order at the moment when you were going to talce a vote
on my formal motion.

218. Mr. GARlN (portugal): Could YOUj\lst clarify the
pointfol'me, Mr. PrE:sident?DoesL'le motion presented
by the !'epresentative of Iraq have priori't'J over your
decision to put to the vote m~' form,:timotion regarding
the t.wo-thirds majority?

227. The PRESIDENT: You made a motion, the representative of Iraq made another and his had priority
over yours. This is the exact procedural situation.
228. Mr. GARIN (Portugal): If you haVI;l ruled that his
motion has priority over mine, of course I have to SUbmit to your ruling.

219. The PRESIDENT: The motion of the representative of Iraq is definitelymol'efar-l'eachingthanyours.
I made no ruling at all. You made a motion and I will
certainly put it to the vote when the time comes. But
the representative of Iraq put forward a far more
radical motion, namely, that the Assembly should not
take a decision on the question. I have to ask the
Assembly to deal with that motion first.

220. Mr. GARIN (Portugal): I thinktherightcaurseis
to ta.."te a vote on the formal motion t.'lat I have made.
After that, if the representative of Iraq wants to withdraw the draft resolution, that would be the time fox
him to do so and not before. I say this with all due
respect.
'
221. The PRESIDENT: I have to act on the motion of
the representative of I1'aq because it is the more farreaching one. I cannot change that procedural situation.
I made no ruling. You made a proposal that this matter
should require a two-thirds majority vote. Obviously
that motion applies to a text that is going to be acted on
this year. If another repres~m~ative proposes that we
do not act on it at all this year, then I must first test
the Assembly on that position. If the decision is negative, I will certainly turn to Y10ur motion.
222. Mr. GARIN (Portugal): With all due respect, I do
not think that the representative of Iraq made his
motion at the right time. I belileve ,that the vote on my
formal motion should have beEm taken. Then it was for
him to say whether or not he would like a vote to be
taken on his draft resolution.
223. The PRESIDENT: You made a formal motion but
he also made a formal motion.
224. Mr. GARlN (Portugal): Butyou had already ruled,
Mr. PreSident, that you were going to vote on my
motion. Therefore you sho\ud have passed to the vote
on my motion. Then would have been the time for the
representative of Iraq to makle the suggestion that we
have heard. I simply suggest, with all due respect, that
his motion was premature.
225. The PRESIDENT: I did not make any proposal.
I put beiore the Assembly the exact situation with
respect to your motion. My suggestion was that, if your
proposal was going to be taken up, we proceed in a
certain manner At that point, the representative of
Iraq rose on a p:;..~nt of order, as he has every right to
do, and introduced his radical motiOn that we do not
act at all on draft resolution IV. ThIs is exactly what
happened. Consequently, his motion has priority over.
yours.
226. Mr. GARm (Portugal): With all due respect, I
submit that mine was a clear-cut motion, namely, that
with regard to draft resolution IV we should apply the
two-thirds majority rule. Nothing was needed but a vote
for or against. Delegations were free to decide on this
clear-cut motion. You ruled thatyou were going to take
a vote on that motion. I cannot even see how the representative of Iraq can come forward with a point of

229. 'rhe PRESIDENT: That is the case. That is
exactly the situation as I understand it. As the motion
of the representative of Iraq is mOl'e far-reaching than
your El, it has priority because it is purely procedural.
230. Mr. GARIN (Portugal): I should like to insist that
I do not think his point of order in regard to the draft
resolution should be admitted at this time. You were
just about to take the vote on my formal motion. You,
yourself, said that you could not entertain any points of
order on this, and you suggested that two representatives on each side speak on my formal motion.
231. The representative of Iraq came here with a new
motion that had nothing to do with my motion; therefore I really cannot see why his motion should have
priority, or on which of the rules of procedure you are
basing your ruling.
232. The PRESIDENT: I would request the representative of Portugal to take his seat while I explain
the situation.
233. We have before us two motions: that of the representative of Portugal that the draft resolution be acted
upon under the two-thirds majority rule; and another
by the representative of Iraq that draft resolution IV
not be acted upon this year at all.. It is quite clear to
me that the procedural situation requires that we act
on the motion of Iraq first. I will therefore put the
motion of Iraq to the vote of the Assembly first.
234. I call on the representative of Spain on a point of
order.
235. Mr. DE PINIES (Spain) (translated f:rom Spanish): Rule 132 of the General Assembly's rules of procedure states: "If two or more proposals relate to the
same question, a committee shall, unless it decides
otherwise, vote on the proposals in the order in which
they have been submitted. It
236. Rule 131 states: "When an amendment is moved
to a proposal, the amendment shall be voted on first.
When two or more amendments are moved to a proposal, the committee shall first vote on the amendment
furthest removed •••• It These are amendments; but I
cannot consider what has been put forward by the
representative of Iraq as an amendment-it is a separate proposal.
237. The PRESIDENT: Your point of order iethatthe
proposal of the representative of Iraq is not an amend"
ment. But it is. a procedural motion, and procedural
motions hava preference over substantive motions.
2Sa. Mr. DE MARCHENA (Dominican Republic)
(translated from Spanish): I ask for your attention in
order to preserve that uniformity of procedure in the
General Assembly which has been maintained through"
out all previous sessions.
239. The draft resolution submitted by Iraq, !',iberia,
Mexico and Morocco (A!L.259] is interesting and the

a

-----._-egoing to

taltS a vote

~ l\ motion , the repraand his had priorit y
cedura l situatio n.
lU have ruled tl1athis
course IhIlve to sub-

the case. That is
'l.nd it. As the motion
Dl'e fal'-rea ching than
ls purely proced ural.
,ould like to insist that
n regard to the draft
:this time. You were
formal motion. You,
intertai n any points of
that two represe ntalrmal motion.
came here with a new
th my motion; theres motion should have
of proced ure you are

I

I reques t the repre-

s seat while I explain

ons: that of the reprelit resolut ion be acted
rity rule; and another
at draft resolut ion IV
n. It is quite clear to
I require s that we act
will therefo re put the
Assem bly first.
s of Spain on a point of

'.ranslated from Span;embly 's rules of proIroposals relate to the
12.11 unless it decides
I in'the order in which
amend ment is moved
hall be voted on first.
s are moved to a provote on the amendment
ire amend ments; but I
n put forwar d by the
andme nt-it is a sepalint of order ia that the
If Iraq is not an amendlotion, and procedural
ubstant ive motions.
(Dominican Republic)
k for your attention in
'lty of proced ure in the
en mainta ined throughlitted by Iraq, Uberia,
is interes ting and the

Ma.

789th meetin g - 12 Decem ber 1958
sponso rs are entitle d to a word of apprec iation from us
on that account. But it reache d our hands only a few
minute s ago. It is a draft which is of consid erable
import ance. Whene ver in the past theGen eralAs sembly found it desirab le to have recour se to the Internationa l Court of Justice With a view to obtaining its
opinion on contro versial matter s, the questio n was
discus sed here with due deliber ation.
240. I reques t in the name of my delegat ion that we be
given time to refer to our Govern ments. For that
reason , and becaus e we know that the Genera l Assem bly
will be sitting tomor row-I invoke rule 78 of the rules
of proced ure, which states, inter alia: "Durin gthedi scussion of any matter , a represe ntative may moveth e
suspen sion or the adjour nment of the meetin g. Such
motion s shall not be debated, but shall be immed iately
put to the vote."
241. My delegat ion consid ers that this is an import ant
matter , requiri ng further discuss ion and on which we
should not be compe lled to vote this evening. Accord ingly my delega tion formal ly propos es t1.lat the meetin g
be adjourn ed under rule 78 until tomorr ow. There can
be no discus sion of such a propos al, which must be put
to tho vote immed iately.
242. The PRESIDENT: I will immed iately put to a vote
Without any further debate , under run~ 119, themot ion
of the represe ntative of the DOi!1inican Republic, but I
would ask our colleag ue filr"lt if he is propos ing the
adj ournm ent of the consid eration of the matter only,
or the adjourn ment of the meetin g. Would he be agreeable to limitin g the adjourn ment to this matter only, so
that we can procee d with the remain der of the agenda ?
I will do Whatever your pleasu re is, becaus e you have
the right to invoke any rule you Wish.
243. Mr. DE MARCHENA
(Dominican Republic)
(transl ated from Spanish): In additio n to the reason
which I have already given, namely , that we should be
allowed the opportunity to :fEller to our Gover nment sand I would point out that telephonic communication on
some routes is not availab le at this hour-i t is quite
clear to me that there is a great deal of confusion over
this new motion . That is my main reason for asking
for the adjourn ment. But, should the Presid ent so
desire, and in order to fall in With his Wishes, my
delegation would be prepar ed to agree that this matter
. should not be taken up now but should be postponed until tomorl'OW. In the meanti me, and if the Presid ent
and the Assem bly should so desire , we could procee d
to consid er other and less contro versial questio ns.
244. The PRESIDENT: I shall now put to the vote the
motion of the repres entativ e of the Dominican Republic that the consid eration of resolut ion IV and the draft
resol\!tion submit ted by the repres entativ es of Iraq,
Liberia , Mexico and Moroc co [A/L.259] be deferre d
until tomorr ow.
The motion was rejecte d by 39 votes to 23, with 16
!:!Jstentions.
245. The PRESIDENT: I call on the represe ntative of
Austra lia on a point :of order.
246. Mr. WALKER (Austra lia): I endeav oured to catch
the eye of the Presid ent to make a point of order before the vote was taken. I apprec iate his wish to press
on and take a vote.
247. The point of order which I was going to make
adequately explain s why I was going to "Vote agains t

583
adjour nment. It would seem to me that the four-P ower
draft resolut ion introdu ces a new item for the agenda
which has not been consid ered by the Genera l Committee and, I think, cannot be enterta ined at this stage.
Theref ore, from that point of view it seems to me to
be entirel y irrelev ant to consid er the matter at this
time.
248. The PRESIDENT: We have not yet reache d the
draft resolut ion. We are now discus sing the other
situatio n. When we reach the draft resolut ion, I shall
recogn ize the repres entativ e of Austra lia again in order
that he may make whatev er remark s he may wish to
make.
249. I call on the represe ntative of Iraq on a point of
order.
250. Mr. P ACHAC m (Iraq): The repr9s entativ e of
Portug al asked whethe r I was prepar ed to withdra w
draft resolut ion IV. I am not entitle d to withdra w it because it is not mine. This is the draft resolut ion of the
Fourth Comm ittee. It seems to be commo n sense that
we cannot vote on what majori ty we would like to apply.
251. The PRESIDENT: The repres entativ e of Portug al
did not ask the repres entativ e of Iraq about draft resolution IV; he aSked about the draft resolut ion of the
repres entativ e of Iraq, and the latter has answer ed by
saying he is not prepar ed to withdra w it. If I am mistaken, will the repres entativ e .:: IraQ. please correc t
me?
252. Mr. PACHACm (Iraq): I heard the repres entativ e
of Portug al ask whethe r I was prepar ed to withdr aw the
two draft r"!solutions. Draft resolut ion IV is notmin e,
but the draft resolut ion under the symbo lA/L.2 59 was
introdu ced by Iraq and three other delega tions.
253. Regard ing this questio n ofproc edure, iUs really
a matter of common sense that we cannot vote on what
majori ty which we should like to apply in voting on a
draft resolut ion which is, in any event, under discus sion for withdra wal or suspen sionun tilnext yearj even
if the Assem bly should vote on what majori ty should be
applied, then my motion would come next, and if it
came next, the Assem bly would decide whethe r to take
it up this year or not. Theref ore, the vote as to a twothirds or a simple majori ty would be quite irrelev ant.
It seems to me that, first of all, we must take up the
questio n of whether we wish to consid er this matter or
not. If we decide that we should like to consid er it this
year, then it becom es necess ary to put the motion of the
represe ntative of Portug al to a vote, namely , whethe r
to have a simple or a two-th:lrds majori ty vote.
254. At the same time, may I say that it is quite
clearly the intention of the repres entativ es of Portug al
and Spain to defeat draft resolut ion IV-wh ile lam suggesting that the Assem bly should not consid er this
draft resolut ion. Actually, then~ what they are after
will be satisfie d to some extent by the Iraqi motion. So
it escape s me why they should object to my motion
being taken up first since it would have the same effect
which they hope to get after invoking the two-th irds
majori ty rule on the questio n.
255. The PRESIDENT: Let us not call points of order
what are not points of order. They are discus sions on
what I have just said, namely , that the motion of Iraq
has priorit y over the motion of Portug al.
256. Sir Andrew COHEN (United Kingdom): As Ihave
unders tood the motion put forwar d by the repres entative of Iraq, it is that the draft resolut ion submit ted by

584

General Assembly - Thirteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

the Fourth Committee should be withdrawn and not
acted upon this year.
257. Now, there is another draft resolution which has
been put forward by the delegations of Iraq, Liberia,
Mexico and Morocco. My delegation would be disposed
to support the motion put forward just now by the
representative of Iraq, ontheveryclearunderstanding
that if the joint draft resolution is still before the
Assembly, whatever takes place, there will be no
.prejudice to what might happen on this draft resolution. In other words, the withdrawal of draft resolution IV will not affect what action may be taken,
favourable or unfavourable, on the joint draft. I should
like to get a clarification 'on this particular point
before we go further.
258. The PRESIDENT: They are two separate things
entirely and, procedurally, they are not related to one
another. The four-Power draft resolution is not now
before the Asse mbly. What is before the Assembly now
is only the procedural motion of the representative of
Iraq. That has priority over everything else and does
not relate to the four-Power draft; it relates to draft
resolution IV of the Fourth Committee.
259. Sir Andrew COHEN (United Kingdom): Then, if
my understanding is correct, I should be in favour of
adopting this motion of Iraq to Withdraw draft resolution IV submitted by the Fourth Committee, because I
understand from what the President has said that we
have taken no decision on the draft resolution under the
symbol A/L.259 and that this withdrawal is entirely
without prejudice to anything that may happen on the
joint draft resolution.
260. The PRESIDENT: It will be absolutely without
prejudice.
261. Sir Andrew COHEN(UnitedKingdom):lthinkthat
I have made my view clear.
262. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly now has before
it only the purely procedural motion of Iraq that we do
not act on draft resolution IV submitted by the Fourth
Committee.
263. Mr. DE prNIES (Spain) (translatedfromSpanish):
I feel that it would be much better if the Assembly were
informed, not whether the joint draft resolution is before us but, if it is not before us, whether it is to be
submitted to us later. I feel that we have a right to
know what the answer is. If, in accordance with the
motion by Iraq, which we support, it is consistent with
the rules of procedure to consider the Portuguese
motion first, before that of Iraq, and if it is agreed to
withdraw resolution IV, what in that case happens to the
joint draft resolution? I should be grateful to have a
definite reply on this point.
264. The PRESIDENT: I have not the vaguest, the
faintest, idea What would happen to the joint draft
resolution. In fact, that draft resolution is not before
us now. I am not worried about it at all; it is up to the
General Assembly to take a decision on each draft
resolution when it is before the Assembly.
265. At this moment, the Assembly has before it only
the procedural motion made by the representative of
Iraq-and nothing else. With regard to anything else, the
Assembly is absolutely free to do what it wishes.
266. I now put to the vote the motion. made by the
representative of Iraq that the General Assembly
should not act this year on draft resolution IV recom-

mended by the Fourth Committee in its report [A/
4068].
The motion was adopted by 70 votes to 2, With 8 abstentions.
267. The PRESIDENT: Draft resolution IV is therefore no longer before us. I shall now put to the vote the
other draft resolutions recommended by the Fourth
Committee.
Draft resolution V was adopted by 58 votes to 5, with
15 abstentions.
268. The PRESIDENT: The representative of France
has asked that a separate vote be taken on the words
"with concern" in the third paragraph of the preamble
to draft resolution VI.
The words were adopted by 34 votes to 25, with 17
abstentions.
Draft resolution VIT was adopted by 77 votes to none!
with 2 abstentions.
Draft resolution VI as a whole was adopted by 55
votes to 16, with 7 abstentions.
Draft resolution VID was adopted by 72 votes to 1,
with 4 abstentions.
269. Sir Andrew COHEN (United Kingdom): We inthe
United Kingdom claim to have done as much as any
country represented in this Assembly to help the people
of Non-Self-Governing Territories in their progress
toward nationhood. This great human partnership between peoples in something that we are deeply proud
of. It is a partnership which has borne fruit, and continues to bear fruit, in the emergence of independent
nations, to whom we are bound by ties of the closest
friendship, and whom we welcome here in the Assembly
as Members of the United Nations. More countries Will
be coming forward in this way in the years ahead. We
are working with our people, by all means in our
power, to help them forward to nationhood.
270. It is for this reason that I felt it necessary to
explain our abstention on the resolution reneWing the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories. Although our position is not new and is
familiar to other delegations, I feel that I ought, in
fairness to the Assembly, to explain our attitude again
on this occasion; and I must apologize for taking a
little time to do so, because it has some importance
for us.
271. Chapter XI of the Charter contains, in Article 73,
a declaration by the Administering Members of the
United Nations recognizing the principle that the interests of the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories are paramount, and accepting "as a sacred
trust the obligation to promote to the utmost, Within
the system of international peace and security established by the present Charter, the well-being of the
inhabitants of these territories".
272. Article 73, in its sub-paragraph e, also contains
one specific obligation, which is to transmit regularly
to the Secretary-General for information purposes,
subject to certain limitations, statistical and other
information of a technical nature relating to economic,
social, and educational conditions in these territories.
We have, of course, scrupulously carried out this
obligation. The obligation is to transmit this information to the Secretary-General for information purposes, a very specific statement in Article 73 e.

273. The UIl
4eld, and cont
right under
consider and
W~ believe t
IIrlifters of thl
ted under Ar1
cussed by the
tlon would not
it is drafted.
274. The Uni1
consistently q
constitutional
from Non-Self
reason that m
renewal of the
275. So much
Government 0
question. I hopl
also apractic:
recognized anc
the wish of tl1
Nations that a (
we have 'given
objections onpl
establishment c
taken into aCCOl
taring Memberl
field of Non-SI
Kingdom was
continues to be
practical contri
276. For that
participate full~
understandings,
tlon, period of
should be as th
should not go ou
practice or as
Assembly requiI

277. That contiJ
I am glad to say

adapted by the
standings I have
shall be preparel
Committee's wor
that other delega
Uves and expert
past years have
contribution and
our approach to
on the reports of

278. The attitudE
bOdies has been d
Assembly, our de
bers as far as
perience which WI
social and educatJ
the people of Non.
of some value in
lIIatters.

279. Mr. WALK.
Australia's vote I
resolutions IT and

280. On resoluti
CODUnission for

789th meeting - 12 December 1958

ttee in its report [AI
votes to 2, with 8 ab-

esolution IV. is thereLnowput to the vote the
mended by the Fourth

ed by 58 votes to 5, with

presentative of France
be taken on the words
agraph of the preamble
34 votes to 25, with 17

pted by 77 votes to none,

10le was adopted by 55

dopted by 72 votes to 1,

ted Kingdom): We in the
e done as much as any
3embly to help the people
aries in their progress
,human partnership be~at we are deeply proud
as borne fruit, and conaergence of independent
ad by ties of the closest
,me here in the Assembly
,ons. More countries will
, in the years ahead. We
e, by all means in our
o nationhood.
lat I felt it necessary to
resolution renewing the
om Non-Self-Governing
Isition is not new and is
I, I feel that I ought, in
lxplain our attitude again
t apologize for taking a
it has some importance
~r contaL"ls, in Article 73,
ltf~ring

Members of the
he p,,:,inciple that the in[on-Seif-Governing Teraccepting "as a sacred
ote to the utmost, within
eace and security establr, the well-being of the
!s".
aragraph e, also containS
I is to transmit regularly
r information purposes,
lS, statistical and other
~re relating to economic,
~ons in these territories,
ulously carried out this
to transmit this informa~al for information purlent in Article 73 e.

273. The United Kingdom Government has always
held, and continues to h~ld, that the Charter confers no
right under Article 73 to the General Assembly to
consider and discuss the information so transmitted.
We believe that, if it had been the intention of the
drafters of the Charter that the information transmitted under Article 73 e should be considered and discussed by the General Assembly, the Article in question would not have been drafted in the terms in which
it is drafted.
274. The United Kingdom Government has, therefore,
consistently questioned and continues to question the
constitutional basis of the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories. It was for this
reason that my delegation was unable to vote for the
renewal of the Committee, and abstained on this vote.
275. So much for the views of the United Kingdom
Government on the constitutional aspects of this
question. I hope I have made these clear. But there is
also a practical side of the matter. We have always
re«:ognized and continue to recognize that it has been
the wish of the majority of Members of the United
Nations that a Committee of this kind should exist and
we have 'given due weight to this wish in spite of our
objections onprinciple and constitutional grounds to the
establishment of this Committee. We have, of course,
taken into account the fact that, as one of the Administering Members with the ~dest responsibilities in the
field of Non-Self-Governing Territories, the United
Kingdom was in the position and, if I may say so,
continues to be in the position to make a substantially
practical contribution to the work of the Committee.
276. For that reason, we have been prepared to
participate fully in the Committee's work: on certain
understandings, namely that the Committee's composition, period of appointment and terms of reference
should be as they have been, and that the Committee
should not go outside its terms of reference, either in
practice or as a result of decisions of the General
Assembly requiring it to go outside them.
277. That continues to be our position inpractice and
I am glad to say that on the basis of the resolution just
adopted by the Assembly, and so long as the understandings I have mentioned continue to be fulfilled, we
shall be prepared to continue to participate fully in the
Committee's work for a further three years. Ibelieve
that other delegations will agree that our representatives and experts 1:1 the Committee on Information in
past years have made a valuable and constructive
contribution and that we have also been constructive in
our approach to the debates of the Fourth Committee
on the reports of the Committee on Information.
278. The attitude which we have adopted in both these
bodies has been dictated by our respectfor the General
Assembly, our desire to meet the views of other Members as far as we can, and our belief that the experience which we have been able to gain in economic,
social and educational matters, in our partnership with
the people of Non-Self-Gov6ming Territories, maybe
of some value in the international discussion of these
matters.
279. Mr. WALKER (Australia): I desire· to explain
Australia's vote only on certain resolutions, namely
resolutions n and m and VIn.
280. On resolution n, dealing with the Economic
Commission for Africa, Australia abstained, not of

. 585

course out of any kind of opposition whatever towards
the important workofthatCommission. We endorse the
principle of international collaboration in Africa and
we welcome the establishment of the Economic Commission for Africa. but we do not feel that it is appropriate to conSider, under item 36 of the agenda, a
matter relating to the association of Trust Territories
in Africa with the Economic Commission for Africa.
281. This matter should have been considered under
item 13, which is the item dealing with Trust Territories. It would indeed be a most unfortunate development if the adoptionofresolutionnwere to be regarded
as a precedent in the .future for the fusion of distinct
items of the agenda of the Fourth Committee or as a
precedent for breaking down the real distinctions, so
well defined in the separate chapters of the Charter,
distinctions between Non-Self-Governing Territories
and Trust Territories.
282. As regards resolution m, the Australian delegation supports the basic principles of that resolution,
confident in the knowledge that the Australian Government does not encourage racial discrimination in its
Non-Self-Governing Territories. We accordingly voted
for the preamble and for the operative paragraphs 1 and
2, whose implementation would achieve the objectives
of the resolution. We were not able to support paragraph 3 of this resolution because of the presence in it
of phrases which are inconsistent with the express
terIils of Article 73 e of the Charter.
283. Article 73 e of the Charter requires Members:
"To transmit regularly to the Secretary-Generalfor
information purposes, subject to such limitation as
security and constitutional considerations may require, statistical and other information of a technical
nature relating to economic, social and educational
conditions in the territories for which they are
respectively responsiNe•••"
There is no provision, as seems to be ~mplied by the
drafting of paragraph 3, for Members to supply annual
reports under Article 73 e or to i"lclude in any such
reports information regarding their actual administration of the territories. These ideas are entirely
foreign to Article 73 e, and for this reason we could
not vote in favour of that paragraph. The adoption of
operative paragraph 3 cannot extend any obligation
imposed by Article r/3 e, and we had to make e}~licit
our opposition to it by a negative vote on that paragraph.
284. The reservations which we have expressed led
the Australian delegation, along with othar considerations, to abstain in the vote on resolution vm for t.'le
renewal of the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories.
285. We have co-operated very fully with this Committee on Non-Self-Governing Territories. We have
regularly transmitted information relating to the NonSelf-Governing Territories of Papua and the Cocos
(Keeling) Islands. In this and other matters the Australian Government has, in a spirit of co-opgration,
gone far beyond what the most liberal and gem:lrous
interpretation of Article 73 e could possibly demand of
us.
286. While I am not conceding that the Charter accords the General Assembly the right to discuss the
information we transmit to the Secretary-General

_.~._._._~ .,~~,J

586

General Assembly - Thirteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

under Article 73 e, the Australian Government has in
the past fully participated in the work of the Committee
on Information. While we might have been disposed to
vote for the renewal of the Committee on Information,
without abandoning our juridical reservations, we
nevertheless felt obliged to abstain in the vote on this
occasion.
287. Our abstention in this vote is to be understood as
designed to afford the Australian Government an opportunity of considering its attitude to the Committee
on Information, having regard to a number of developments that have lately takenplace.lrefer in particular
to the express wish of certain delegations to telescope
the consideration of matters relating to Non-SelfGoverning Territories and Trust Territories, to extend without justification the functions of the Fourth
Committee in relation to certain matters, and to disregard the explicit provisions of the Charter, to disregard the order of the Assembly's business, to disregard the General Assembly's allocation of items to
its Committees, and not least of all, to disregard the
rights and responsibilities of Member States.
288. The PRESIDENT: It seems that no Member
wishes to speak in explanation of his vote.
289. Under rule 80 of our rules of procedure it is not
possible for us to discuss or act on the draft resolution
presented jointly by the delegations of Iraq, Liberia,
Morocco and Mexico [A/L.259]. Perhaps the repre-

sentative of Iraq is ready to explain this draft resolution, but in any event, according to rule 80, we cannot
discuss it or act on it tonight. I therefore suggest to
the representative of Iraq that the consideration of this
draft should be deferred until tomorrow. The text has
been distributed and certain observations have already
been made on it. I referred to it at the beginning of
my statement. In any event, we must postpone our
decision on this draft resolution until tomorrow.

GEl'
ASS

THIRTEE

Official}

ApDda itel

fnformatl

AGENDA ITEM 38

transmi

reports

Election, If required, to fill vacancies In the membership ofthe Committee on Information from Non-SelfGoverning Territories

mfttee

Terrltol
C!) Intorn
tlU Intorn

f2) GeneTI
and ex
@ Metho(

REPORT OF THE FOURTH COMMITTEE (A/4063)
290. The PRESIDENT: The Fourth Committee, acting
on the Assembly's behalf, elected the Dominican Republic, Ghana, India and Iraq as Members of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories for a period of three years. If there are no
objections, I shall aSSume that the Assembly wishes
to confirm this election.

tion co
report
(§) Report

COnnec

GoVBrll

V

It was so decided.

The meeting rose on 13 December, at 1.5 a.m.

nomic

Offers
luUon l
the Sec

,~

Item

Qq,8t:fon of

IJY Report

WestAf

IJ!IE'I e c tl 0 I

South W

ae·ports 0

CommH1

·~ftem 4
~aUonofl

of Somalii
.&b1opla: ;
Ilmd of ltal,

Report of i

~D COnOE

. item 4:
e:rnental
Ieport oft:

.~~ Rem 5fi
~fc Infor.t1

report of th
Ibns Public

~tions

~rt ofU
~

lteDl 50

tilalJnJ.atratio
ftte U n.ite d J

tlIpOrl of thl

~. aod Bud
~rt of thl

U:exn 85:

NatIons

III east eBtim

Ieport of thE

--...:--~---1

er•• ,der

Litho. in U. N.
77001-April 1959-2,200
