UNITED NATIONS

..‘I?’
I^
. ,;:
: ;I,.,
.‘*I ;
THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

,, 2
__,
,,

,~.I
i

,.‘Iji(/

.,, ,“.’
,I”

th
MEETING:

13 JANUARY

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2327) . . . . . . . . , ,. . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(n) Resolution 497 (1981);
(h) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821) . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2327

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Srrppierlzcrlts of the Official Rccor~L~ of the Spcunity Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
crnd
Drcisiom
c>f flte Security
Cou&l.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date,

2327th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 13 January

1982, at 3.30 p.m.

Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Prrsidcnt:

Pwsc’nt: The representatives of the following States:
China,
France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama,
Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2327)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(n) Resolution 497 (1981);
(h) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821)

of the agenda

Adoption of the agenda
The ngcndcr IW.S ctdoptcd.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Resolution 497 (1981);
(h) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821)
I . The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
,f?om Russion):
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings [2322nd to 2325th meetings], I invite the
representative
of Israel and the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic to take places at the Council
table: I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Bangladesh,
Bulgaria, Cuba, Democratic
Yemen, the German Democratic Republic, Greece,
Hungary, India, Iraq, Kuwait, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mon-s
golia,
Morocco,
Nicaragua,
Pakistan,
Portugal,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sri Lanka, the Sudan,
the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Viet Nam,
Yemen and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber; I invite the
representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization to take the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.
At the invitcrtion of the Pwsidetzt, Mr. Blutn (Isrcrel)
and Mr. El-Futtctl (Syrian Atuh Repttblir) rook plcrc~s
~tf thr Coltnc~il tub/e; Mr. Zcr~iJ’(A.f~hcnnistctn), Mr. Bpdjctorti (Algeria), Ms. Kctiser (Bcmgl~tdesh), Mr. Tsvelkw
(Bttlgatia),
Mr. Rocr Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Ashtcrl (Detno-

2. The PRESIDENT
(infetpretation
fiotn Russiun):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Burundi,
Czechoslovakia,
Indonesia,
Mauritania,
Oman and the United Arab Emirates in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
conformity with the relevant provisions of the Chartel
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the itwitcrtion
of the Ptvsidetat, Ms. Bwctkisu
(Burundi),
Ms. St!@ (Czct~hoslo~~rrkitr),
Ms. Qjrrlcrl
(Mcrurirrrtzitr),
(Indonesicr),
Ms. Ottld Sid’Ahnwd
Ms. Sultritnurz (Otntrn) ond Ms. Al-Qasirni (United Artrb
EtnisutljS) took thr plcwes se.srr~r~c~dfo~~than crt the sidr
qf the Cotrnc’il ~hcrtnber.

3.

Mr.

de PINIGS
(Spain) (intesptvtcrtion
.fiotn
Mr. President, you have already presided
over the Council in the past and therefore the fair,
balanced and sound way in which you have been
directing our deliberations comes as no surprise to us.
You are an expert in diplomacy, and I should like to
reassure you of the support of the Spanish delegation
in the discharge of your responsibilities,
given the
cordial relations that exist between our two countries.

Spunish):

4. I should also like to extend a special greeting to
the President of the Council for the month of December, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for whose qualities and
skills there has been repeated praise in the Council.

,
*

I would venture to predict that, given his youth, he
has a very brilliant future in the long career that I wish
him. My delegation wishes to congratulate the new
members of the Council and in particular the representatives of Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo and
Zaire and to welcome them to the Council. They can
count on our support and co-operation.

to flee, so that the population has been substantially
reduced, But in any event, reduced as it may be-and
it seems that it amounts to some 9,000-those
left
do have a right, in conformity with the norms of international conduct enshrined in the fourth Geneva
Convention to which 1 have already referred, to continue to be governed by their own law.

5. No one will be surprised that I should be dedicating a deserved tribute to my distinguished friend the
Secretary-General,
Mr. Javier P&rez de CuCllar, a
Peruvian of ancient ancestry, an expert diplomat, a
skilful negotiator, a humanist and a person dear to us
all, whose election is the result of his personal attributes and of the high esteem in which he is held by us
all. We extend our most cordial congratulations and
best wishes to him and his country. The new SecretaryGeneral may be assured that Spain will spare no efforts
to help him in the successful discharge of all the duties
of his onerous and lofty post.

9. For the Government of Israel to state that it is
prepared unconditionally
to negotiate with Syria to
achieve lasting peace and for it in the meantime to
apply its own legislation is nothing more than an
attempt to exert additional
pressure to the military
occupation of the Golan Heights.
IO. The Council is duty-bound to act. That is why
we unanimously adopted resolution 497 (1981). The
Council cannot remain inactive because that would
be opening the door to Israel’s acting again in another
territory, also applying its legislation as a means of
additional pressure as it is doing now in the Golan
Heights.

6. My delegation spoke in the debate in the Council
on 16 December 1981, when it was considering the
complaint of the Syrian Arab Republic concerning the
annexation by the State of Israel of the Golan Heights.
At the end of our statement we pointed out:

I I. My delegation is prepared to support those
measures that may compel the State of Israel to rescind
the decisions it has adopted in connection with the
G,olan Heights and require Israel to withdraw from the
territories it has been occupying since June 1967. Of
course, resolution 242 (1967) refers to secure and
recognized boundaries, but in order to achieve those
boundaries the first thing required is withdrawal from
all the territories
occupied, including
the Golan
Heights, Jerusalem, the West Bank of the Jordan and
the Gaza Strip. Once that withdrawal takes place,
once the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian
people are recognized, we shall be on the way to
achieving a just and lasting peace in the Middle East,
a peace to which we must all aspire and in the attainment of which the Council has a primary responsibility.

“My delegation believes that the Council, acting
now as speedily as the case requires, must bear in
mind fully its responsibilities
as the guardian of
international peace and security, which have once
again been threatened by Israeli actions, and must
give serious consideration to the consequences of a
possible rejection of its request with a view to future
action by the Council.
“My delegation hopes that, after the adoption of
a resolution and a certain amount of time allowed to
await the Israeli Government’s reaction, if there is
a negative response, necessary measures will be
taken speedily by the Council to force the Government of Israel to rescind and revoke all the measures that it wishes to apply to the Golan Heights.”
[23/7th mmting, puras. 66 und 671

12. The PRESIDENT
(irztcrpretution from Rrrssim):
The next speaker is the representative of Czechoslovakia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
13. Mr. SUJA (Czechoslovakia) (inte~prPtatio/z~o/n
Rlrssicrn): Mr. President, I should like first of all to
express my appreciation to you and to the members
of the Council for offering me this opportunity to speak
on this item. Our delegation is particularly glad that
this body that has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance and strengthening of international peace
and security should have begun its work this year
under the able and competent guidance of the representative of the fraternal Soviet Union, a country
which has so actively, consistently and as a matter of
principle
struggled to attain a relaxation of international tension and has so well defended the vital
interests and rights of peoples,

7. The explanations given us by the representative
of Israel, which are contained in the report of the
Secretary-General
[S//4~?221, prrra. 31, neither convince us nor seem acceptable, The action of applying
Israeli laws, jurisdiction and administration is equivalent to a pure and simple annexation of the Golan
territory; it is a violation of international law, a breach
of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949’ and of
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and a
defiance of the decisions adopted by the Council.
8. There is no legal basis whatsoever to affirm that,
because 15 years have elapsed since the six-day war,
Israel has a right to apply its legislation in the Golan.
As the representative of Syria told us the other day, out
of a population of 200,000 that used to live in those
Heights, some have been expelled and others have had

14. At the same time, we should like to express OUI
appreciation to Mr. Otunnu of Uganda, who so ably
presided over the work of the Council last month.
2

15. I should also like to welcome the new nonpermanent
members of the Council and express
appreciation to the outgoing members for the work that
they did here.

peace with their neighbours and that they are not
interested in attaining a lasting and just settlement
in the Middle East. The fact that the passing of the
law on the annexation of the Golan Heights followed
the annexation of the Arab part of Jerusalem and the
well-known fact that this new annexation had been
prepared for some time are glaring examples of the
typically callous approach taken by Israel to the
vitally important issues of relations with the neighbouring Arab States and the maintenance of international peace.”

16. On behalf of my country and on my own behalf,
I should like sincerely to congratulate and welcome
Mr. Plrez de CuCllar, the new Secretary-General,
an
outstanding diplomat who has earned broad international respect.
17. I also take this opportunity to pay due tribute to
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, who has now completed his term
in that post.

The statement also emphasizes that:
“The United States also bears full responsibility
for the annexation of the Golan Heights.This new
act of aggression is a direct consequence of the
policy of separate deals and the anti-Arab Camp
David accords. This is a consequence of the United
States-Israeli deal on ‘strategic co-operation’. The
suspension by the United States of the validity of
that deal in no way alters this fact. The Israeli Covernment could not have carried out its anti-Arab
expansionist policy without comprehensive American support and assistance.”

18. The situation in the Middle East is in our view
deteriorating daily. As Israeli aggressiveness grows, so
does military danger in the region. The main reason
for the persistence of this situation is the continuing
illegal occupation of the Arab territories by Israel and
its systematic policy of annexation.
19. Today there can be no doubt that the arrogance
of the aggressor and its disregard for the decisions
. ,taken by this body, primarily its flouting of the legitimate rights of other peoples, are the main features
of the Israeli policy which has now been manifested
in the annexation of the Golan Heights. This is a policy
that is a challenge to any hopes for attaining a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. There is no
doubt but that that policy is aimed at an increased
concrete fulfilment of the aims of Israeli expansionist
acquisitions.

22. Against the backdrop of reports that the Pentagon plans to increase credit for Israeli arms purchases
by $300 million, can anyone still have any doubt that
the recently established military-political
alliance has
in fact existed for a long time and still does? One gets
the impression that the various modified manoeuvres
putting distance between Israel and its strategic ally
are intended only to calm an indignant international
public. In fact, Israel’s policy of expansion and annexation is fully in accord with Washington’s new strategy
designed to ensure that it takes over the exclusive right
to control the natural resources of the region and the
approaches to it, and along with that to strengthen
its military presence there.

20. The fact that Israel has not complied with the
Council resolution adopted three weeks ago [resolutiorr 497 f/Y8/)], that it has not heeded the voice of
reason of the international community and that it has
not rescinded its illegal decision to annex the Golan
Heights unfortunately bears witness to the absence of
political farsightedness. Clearly such a policy cannot
lead us to an improved situation in the Middle East.
On the contrary, it simply exacerbates the already
explosive situation in that part of the world, which
has already suffered so much.

23. Czechoslovakia
strongly condemns the Israeli
aggressive attacks against neighbouring Arab States.
We. express our support for and solidarity with the
people of the Syrian Arab Republic, with which my
country has traditionally maintained close and friendly
relations. At the top-level meeting of the representatives of the two countries in May 1979, it was emphasized that:

21. The position of principle of my country on the
.annexation is reflected in the following statement
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czecho-*
Slovak Socialist Republic dated 22 December 1981:

“A just and lasting peace in the area can be
achieved only through a comprehensive settlement
of the Middle East problem on the basis of a withdrawal of Israeli forces from all Arab territories
occupied in 1967 and the exercise of the inalienable
national rights of the Arab people of Palestine.”

“Israel’s conduct is another link in the continuing
chain of hostile actions against the Arab countries
and primarily
against the sovereign Syrian Arab
Republic. It is a very gross violation of the Charter
of the United Nations, of international law and of the
resolutions of the Security Council dealing with a
settlement in the Middle East. This illegal act of the
Israeli Government has once again confirmed that it
considers a flouting of international
law to be an
integra1 part of its policy. Israel’s ruling circles have
once again confirmed that they do not wish to live in

24. We would join those countries which have here
stated that in circumstances where Israel is refusing
to abide by a resolution of the United Nations-in
this
case, Security Council resolution 497 (1981)-the
Council can and must deal firmly with this item and
3

32. ln its resolution 497 ( 1981). the CllLlncil filrtkr

must call the aggressor to order, It is time to P’ft an
end to the continuing policy of annexation in the Mtddle
East-all the more so in that it is now evident that
simply appealing to Israel is inadequate. We therefore fully support the demand made by the majority of
delegations which have spoken in the Council on this
item that those measures provided for in Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations must be applied
to Israel.

declared the Israeli decision in respect of the Gtrlirn
Heights to be null and void and without internatiluX&
legal effect; in paragraph
2 it demanded that lsri&rescind
forthwith its decisirw
the occupying Power,
Israelys reply to that demand, contained in documena
S/ 14821, rejects resolution 497 ( 198 I) in tone, spirit irn
text.
33. This Israeli attitude is neither new nor Partic*
surprising.
The sustained disregard and trl’rrbgance
with which Israel reacts to United Nations rehtae
lutions is a well-known fact.
ularly

25. The PRESIDENT
(interpretrrfion
from
Russiort): The next speaker is the representative of Oman.
1 invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

34. The international community
has grown imp+g*
tient with the two-pronged policy of Israel: the ruth*
less infliction of monumental injustice on the PalC*tinian people,
the expropriation of Arab land and ntn~
the annexation of the Golan Heights, on the one handand total disregard for United Nations res~~luti~~t\~.
on the other.

(Oman): Sir, I should like first
26. Mr. SULAIMAN
of all to extend to you my delegation’s sincere congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month,
27. At the same time I should like to pay a tribute
to your predecessor, Mr. Olara Otunnu of Uganda,
for the skill, wisdom and clarity with which he conducted the work of the Council last month.

35. Now the Security Council is meeting in accor&
ante with paragraph 4 of resolution 497 ( 198 1). It muxl
consider the consequences of non-compliance
b?Israel and decide which of the appropriate meilsurl’~
provided for in the Charter of the United Nations in
will take.

28. I take this opportunity also to congratulate the
new members of the Council and to welcome the new
Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuillar, and to wish
him every success in his onerous task. I should like
also to pay a tribute to the outgoing Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for his genuine contribution and
devotion to the causes of peace and justice.

36. Israel’s refusal to implement
Council resolutions in the past and the inability of the Council to take
appropriate measures against it have paved the way Ir*
tragedy and lawless actions by Israel. To mention ;!
few: changing the physical character, demographiL*
composition and institutional structure of the HoI!
City of Jerusalem; expropriating land and building new
settlements in the West Bank and Gaza; torturing
prisoners and inflicting collective
punishment
urn
whole villages; deporting Palestinians and demolishing
innumerable homes; killing more than 3,000 civiliun++
and displacing well over 500,000 in Lebanon; bombing’
the Iraqi nuclear installation.

29. Once again, in a new mood of aggression, Israel
on 14 December 1981 decided to impose its laws,
jurisdiction and administration-this
time in the
occupied Arab territory of the Golan Heights. This
Israeli decision augments an ongoing act of aggression and occupation begun in June 1967.
30. The indignation at that illegal Israeli action is
universal. The position of Oman in this regard was
expressed on 15 December 1981 in an official statement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in which the
Sultanate of Oman vehemently condemned the Israeli
Government’s decision to annex the Golan Heights,
expressed the opinion that that decision coupled with
its utter disregard for the resolutions of the Council
showed the aggressive and expansionist nature of
Israel, and calfed upon the international community
to take the necessary steps to stop that blatant aggression.

37. In the face of all those violations of the lxlsic
norms of international law and the Charter, no\\
manifest in Israeli non-compliance
with resolution
497 (l98l), we believe it to be the urgent responsibilit>
of the Council to go one step further than a repetition
of condemnation. What is now required
is for
rhc
Council to take actionunder Chapter
VII
ofthe
Chap
ter. Only the application of mandatory sanctions under
Chapter VII will compel Israel to put an end to thi\
lawless and aggressive behaviour,

31. The prompt action by the Council and the unanimous adoption of resolution 497 (1981), which reiterates the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force, were indeed commendable
and gratifying, especially since the Israeli action was
a clear projection of the imagined and mythical “greater
Israel” whose territory would be created through a
gradual take-over of Arab lands.

38, Under Article 39 of the Charter,

the Council is
empowered to consider Israel’s non-compliance
with
resolution 497 (1981) to be a threat to or breach elf
Peace- Moreover, Article 25 creates a legal obIigatic)n
on the Part of the Members to accept and carry out
the decisions of the Council. Rejection of this legal
obligation is very grave indeed.
4

c
,

39. Application of the mandatory sanctions provided
for in Article 41 will redeem the credibility
of the
United Nations and prove the effectiveness of the
Security Council in maintaining
peace and security
in the world, ensuring the territorial
integrity and
political independence
of Syria, a Member State of
the United Nations.
40, The PRESIDENT
(intc,pretcrtionfi.om
Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Indonesia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
41. Mr. DJALAL
(Indonesia): First of all, Sir, my
delegation wishes to extend its warm greetings to you
and to congratulate
you upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this first month of the
new year. We are confident that under your wise and
able guidance the Council will fulfil its responsibilities
before the international
community
and reach a
meaningful conclusion to its deliberations.
42.

I should also like to join preceding delegations
admiration
for the previous President,
‘Mr, Otunnu, for his invaluable contribution
to the
work of the Council.
in voicing

43. My delegation
would also like to express its
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to the members of the Council for affording us this opportunity
to speak on a matter of grave concern to all States.
44. When, four weeks ago, the Council began its
deliberations on this new and most ominous development in the Middle East, the international community
expressed its collective shock upon learning of Israel’s
annexation of the Golan Heights. During that debate
my delegation had the occasion to address the Council: we expressed our solidarity with Syria and made
clear the position of the Government of Indonesia.
In its formal communiquk
condemning the annexation
of the Golan Heights,
my Government declared that
that provocative
act would predictably escalate the
tension in the Middle East and further endanger international peace and security [2.3/9tlz t?leeting, para. 101.
45. As has been stated by many delegations, this
illegal unilateral act by Israel, far from being an isolated development,
is another blatant example of
Israeli aggression and further evidence-if
any more
was needed-that
it has never sincerely desired nor is
it willing to seek a comprehensive and peaceful solution to the Middle East question, the basis of which
-as reflected in the relevant United Nations resolutions-has
been and remains the unconditional return
of all the occupied Arab territories.
46, Council resolution
497 (198 1) unambiguously
expressed the unanimous
will of the international
community.
It declared the annexation of the Golan
Heights to be null and void. It established a specific

time frame within which Israel was to rescind its decision. Furthermore, it entrusted the Council with the
responsibility of ensuring that the unanimous will of
the United Nations was implemented in the event that
Israel refused to abide by the provisions of the resolution.
47. As representatives are aware, on the same day
that the Council adopted resolution 497 (1981), the
General Assembly, in its resolution 36/226 B, supported by my delegation, also took strong exception
to this illegal action by Israel and requested the Council to invoke Chapter VII of the Charter if Israel refused
to rescind its decree of annexation.
48. My Government is satisfied with and lauds the
Council for its unanimous adoption of resolution 497
(1981). It is our considered view that the provisions
of that resolution can form the basis for further unified
action by the members of the Council with a view to
compelling
Israel forthwith to implement
resolution 497 (1981), thereby demonstrating to the world
the Council’s resoluteness about achieving a just
solution of this problem, a solution based on the relevant United Nations resolutions.
49. The feeling of the international community has
been clearly expressed in the General Assembly resolution to which I referred earlier and in the joint communiqui of the non-aligned movement of 5 January
1982 [S//4829, rrnrwx]. My delegation is therefore
deeply disappointed and seriously disturbed at Israel’s
defiance and rejection of the Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. There is no doubt that the
international community at large, including my delegation, will rally behind the Council with regard to any
actions that it decides to take in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter, including
the application of Article 41, to force Israel to rescind
its annexation of the Golan Heights as a prelude to
meaningful steps towards a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question.
50. The PRESIDENT
(ilztp/pr’ctrrtion f,.otn Russitrnj:
The next speaker is the representative of Mauritania.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
5 I. Mr. OULD SID’AHMED
(Mauritania) fir&+
pwtcrtion .fiom Fwtwh): I wish to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month and to express to you and
the members of the Council the sincerest thanks of the
Mauritanian delegation for allowing us to participate in
your deliberations on a question which is of concern
to us.
52. May I be allowed also to pay a well-deserved
tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Olara Otunnu, the
representative of Uganda, for having throughout the
past month-a
month particularly rich in events of
great significance for the United Nations-conducted
the Council’s work with tact and authority.

“The Mauritanian
people,
its Military
Com. .
mittee of National Recovery and its Government on
this occasion address an appeal to all Arab peoples
to realize the true meaning of the painful situation
of our Arab nation, set aside secondary differences
and place all their human and material means at the
service of the decisive struggle against Zionism and
colonialism until final victory is achieved.”

53. Lastly, my delegation would like to express
wholehearted congratulations to Mr. PCrez de Cuillar
for the well-deserved confidence placed in him and to
assure him of our full support in the discharge of his
difficult responsibilities.
54. The Government
of the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania has already expressed its official position
on Israel’s annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights. On
the very next day after the announcement
of that
decision, my Government issued the following communiquC:

I
,I
1
!
:
1

56. Today the Council is meeting to take note once
again of Israel’s refusal to comply with its resolutions
-even those adopted unanimously-and
to draw the j
conclusions arising from that refusal. The report in
document S/l4821 submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with resolution 497 (19811, which
was adopted on 17 December last by the Council. and ’
the official statements made the same day and on other
occasions by the representatives of the Zionist entity I
can leave no doubt as to the categorical refusal of 1
Israel to accept-still
less to comply with-resolution
i
497 (1981). In that resolution, the Council stated !
unequivocally
that Israel’s decision to impose its
laws, jurisdiction
and administration
in the Syrian
Golan Heights was null and void. It therefore demanded that Israel rescind that decision forthwith.

authorities
“Once
again, the Israeli Zionist
have taken a further step in their expansionist and
hegemonic policy by annexing an internationally
recognized part of Syrian territory. This is an act
that demonstrates,
if any demonstration
were
needed, the true designs pursued covertly but
methodically by Zionist authorities against the Arab
nation.
“The Government of the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania
vigorously condemns this illegal act
and considers it to be not only null and void but
also a rejection of the cease-fire with Syria, with
all the consequences that that can have for the
region and the world. It addresses a pressing appeal
to the friendly Arab brothers to close their ranks
in order to take up this intolerable challenge and
harmoniously to co-ordinate their efforts and solidarity in action, to the African countries to realize
the treachery of the action taken by Israel lately in
Africa and to understand that more than ever their
Arab brothers must count on their resolute support,
to the international community at large forcefully to
condemn this irresponsible act and, before it is too
late, to take the measures against the Israeli authorities demanded by the seriousness of the situation.”

57. In the face ofthis defiance, my delegation believes
that the least the Council can and must do is to draw
the serious consequences arising from the refusal by a
Member State to comply with its decisions and take
the appropriate
measures provided for under the
Charter of the United Nations.
58. Over and beyond the future of the Syrian Golan
Heights and the political, economic and social consequences of the act of aggression committed by the
Zionist entity against the Syrian Arab Republic, the
Council is also considering, as a background to its
agenda, the serious threat to its own authority posed
by the acts of the Zionist authorities in Tel Aviv. In
fact for the Council what is at stake is maintaining and
reinforcing its own credibility and that of the United
Nations as a whole in the face of the tireless efforts of
certain pirate States. Israel and South Africa indeed
spare no effort to discredit the Organization by deliberately trampling under foot the ideals and values that
it represents. In that task, they benefit from the complicity or complaisance, as the case may be, of certain
Member States-and
not the least important among
them. They think that whatever their crimes and
misdeeds, they will always be able to escape the verdict of the international community thanks to political
support and economic and military resources generously offered them by their protectors.

55. At the same time as that communiquC
was
published, the Chairman of the Military Committee
of National Recovery, head of the Mauritanian State,
addressed the following message to Mr. Hafez AIAssad, President of the Syrian Arab Republic:
“Information
has reached us about the decision of
the Israeli Zionist authorities-a
decision which
falls within the framework of their aggressive
policy-to
annex the Golan Heights, internationally
recognized as part of Syrian Arab territory.
“We strongly condemn that decision,
which
violates all international laws and norms, We declare
our firm support for the fraternal Syrian Arab
people and are convinced that those people, who
have written with the blood of their children one of
the most glorious pages in the history of the Arab
struggle against Zionist colonialism,
imperialism
and expansionism,
will be able to face this further
escalation of Zionist aggression.

59. The constant danger to international peace and
security caused by co-operation between the Pretoria and Tel Aviv racist &gimes was the subject of
a message recently addressed by the head of State of
Mauritania
to the acting President of the Organization of African Unity and to all other African heads
6

of State. In that message, the Mauritanian
State said:

head of

to be the only course of action capable of bringing
Israel to its senses and sparing the international community an ordeal with catastrophic consequences.

“At a time when the State of Israel is reaching
the illegal and warmongering decision to annex the
Syrian Arab territory of the Golan, I have the honour
of drawing your attention to the seriousness of the
new situation thus created. By defying the rules of
international law, raising permanent aggression to a
principle of conduct in international
relations and
taking force and occupation as bases of legitimacy,
Israel in many respects reminds us Africans of the
racist illegal regime of South Africa. Israel and
South Africa are in fact two bastions of imperialism,
the one at the heart of the Arab nation, the other at
the southern opening of the African continent. It is
more than ever necessary to undertake the same
struggle against them. Just as we do not accept the
reign of the crpwthcid regime in Namibia and Azania,
we do not accept a Palestine dominated and Arab
territories occupied by Israel. The decision to annex
the Golan demonstrates,
if further demonstration
were needed, that Israel is not in any way seeking
peace. On the contrary, it is clear that the Zionist
entity remains, as it has been since its creation,
based on constant aggression, territorial
usurpation and racial oppression, in defiance of the rules
of international
law. Africans and Arabs alike, in
the face of identical manifestations of racism and
violation of the most basic rules of the rights of
peoples, must be aware of how similar their struggle
is. Towards that end,“-the
head of State concludes, in addressing his African brothers--“1
ask
you, as in the past, to provide your support to the
Arab cause by firmly condemning the illegal and
unacceptable decision by Israel to annex the Syrian
territory of the Golan.”

62. Aware of its responsibilities and of the extreme
seriousness of the situation created by the Israeli
authorities in a region which has already undergone
too much suffering, the Council, we are certain of this,
will find no difficulty in reaching such a decision.
Moreover, a look at recent events in the region must
dispel any doubts that may exist regarding Israel’s
defiance of the Council’s decisions and its resolve to
make State terrorism and constant aggression the
golden rules of its behaviour. The policy of settlements.
the annexation of the Holy City of Al-Quds, the premeditated attack against the Iraqi nuclear installation, the bombardments of civilians in Lebanon and,
more recently, the violation of the airspace of Saudi
Arabia and Iraq are only a few links in a long and
varied chain of crime and aggression. My delegation
has enough confidence in the wisdom and authority
of the members of the Council not to despair of
achieving redress of a situation so fraught with danger
for the entire international community.
63. Mr. IRUMBA (Uganda): Permit me, Sir, from the
outset to congratulate you most warmly on your
assumption of the high office of President of the Council for the month of .January. Your diplomatic skills,
your ability as a negotiator and your spirit of cooperation are qualities which are recognized by all. We
are confident that under your guidance the Council
will make a positive contribution in meeting its obligations, The Soviet Union and Uganda enjoy most
cordial and fruitful relations. Coming from Africa,
I am aware and appreciative of your country’s contribution to the decolonization
process and to the
liberation struggle. You can count on our co-operation in your work.

60, The Council must today meet the challenge posed
by Israel. It must react, react severely and forcefully,
because the measures recently adopted by the Zionist
authorities in Tel Aviv mark, thanks to the impunity
they have enjoyed until now, the beginning of a new
episode in the constant chain of crimes committed for
over 30 years now against the Palestinian people and
other Arab peoples. Lack of action or inappropriate
action on the part of the Council can only be interpreted by Israel as encouragement to pursue its policy
of expansion and genocide.

64. It gives my delegation immense satisfaction to
express our warm welcome and congratulations to
Mr. Perez de CuelIar, the new Secretary-General.
That he comes, as he does, from Peru, a third world
country, gives my delegation greater cause for satisfaction. His experience in diplomacy and his involvement in complex negotiations on a number of international crises give us confidence that he will succeed
in meeting the challenges of his new role. On behalf
of my delegation, I wish to,pledge Uganda’s support
for him in his endeavours.

61. Following
the recent aggression against the
Syrian Arab Republic, there can be no doubt-even
in the minds of the most unconditional
supporters of
Israel-about
the bad faith and arrogance of the
Zionist entity. The patience and persuasive ability of
the Council have been challenged for far too long and
too severely by the rash actions of the Zionist authorities in Tel Aviv. My delegation feels that the time has
come for the Council to use the means provided it by
the Charter to safeguard international peace and security. The imposition of binding sanctions against Israel
pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter seems to us

65. I wish to speak a word of welcome to my brothers
the representatives of Togo and Zaire. My delegation has had the privilege of working with both of them
in the Group of African States and the General Assembly, where they have made a most useful contribution. Equally welcome to the Council are the representatives of Guyana, Jordan and Poland. Their
wealth of experience in the United Nations will be
helpful in the Council’s deliberations. I wish to assure
them of Uganda’s co-operation and solidarity in our
common task.
7

73. In 1980, East Jerusalem

was
annexed togr:tht’~
with a large area of the West Bank adjoining it, which
was then proclaimed
by the Israeli occupiers to LV
part of that city. Prime Minister
Begin then declar-t=J
it to be the eternal capital of Israel. The clear intentirm
of the Tel Aviv authorities was not only to annes th;ib
city, but also to extend Israel’s territory t0 cover much
of the West Bank.

66. I wish also, on behalf of Mr. Otunna to thank
a]] delegations which have paid a tribute to him.
Mr. Otunnu will, in due course, be expressing in Person
his gratitude for the kind words said about him and
for the co-operation he received from the Council.
67. On Monday, 14 December 1981, hmd,
with
utter disdain for world opinion, extended its jurisdiction and administration to the Syrian Golan Heights.
The world community was outraged and, indeed, the
Council could not remain indifferent in the face of this
brazen affront to international law.

74. The Council, in its resolution 476 (1980). hi&cl
warned Israel not to proceed with enacting the “hrl~ii
law” on Jerusalem. Despite the warning, Israel przbceeded to enact the “basic law”. The Council, indiynant at this flagrant challenge to its authority,
CL”~sured Israel in resolution 478 (1980) and detcrminecl
that the law was null and void and must be rescinded
forthwith, To date that resolution has not been hc?noured by Israel. This is yet another indication of tllr:
disdain with which Israel treats the Council’s re%+
lutions and its obligations under the Charter of tht’
United Nations.

68. The Council, on 17 December, determined that
the Israeli decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction
and administration in the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights was null and void and without international
legal effect; that Israel, the occupying Power, should
rescind forthwith its decision; and that the 1949 Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War’ was applicable to the Syrian
territory occupied by Israel [resolution 497 ff 981)].

75. We are all aware of Israel’s intentions with rega~rct
to Lebanon, which have resulted in constant acts oh
aggression against that country. The clear aim of fll~’
Zionist leaders is to destabilize Lebanon, then ta cJi~member it through the instrumentality of that renegatic.
Major Haddad, and finally to annex southern I.,e~~anon. To this end, in utter contempt for Council rew*lution 425 (197% Israel has unleashed incessant
terror and unprovoked attacks against Lebanon, I.;CNE
year we witnessed the carnage of Beirut, when 1sruc”li
aeroplanes carried out a massive bombardment
of ttl;tilt
city and southern Lebanon, causing the loss of the live%
of hundreds of Lebanese civilians: hundreds of thulrsands were rendered homeless. The Council ]l;r<
adopted numerous resolutions censuring Israel and
calling upon it to desist from its acts of aggressir.lal.
None of these resolutions has been complied with.

69. The Council is meeting today not to debate the
legality of the Israeli annexation of the Golan Heights.
The illegality of the Israeli action was determined on
17 December, when the Council gave Israel a grace
period within which to comply with the Council’s
resolution.
70. We are meeting precisely because Israel refused
to comply with the Council’s resolution in the time
stipulated. Paragraph 4 of resolution 497 (198 1) requires
us to “consider taking appropriate measures in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations”, The
work of the Council is thus to address itself to the
question of what measures to apply against Israel until
it complies with the resolution.
71. When we consider what measures to take, the
annexation of the Golan Heights has to be looked at in
the context of Israel’s persistent aggressive acts in
the region. The annexation is an integral part of the
.&mist
programme, which includes the permanent
oppression of the Palestinians, the dismemberment
of
Lebanon, the domination of the entire Arab world
and the expansion of Israel’s borders, which up to now
remain undefined.

76. We also saw last year an unprovoked attack &,>
Israel on the Iraqi Osirak riuclear research stztirrn.
The Council adopted a resolution censuring Ist-a~1
[~esol~ifiorz#87(/98/)], but instead of heeding that rear Ilution, Israel swore to repeat its actions. Uniterl
States Senator Mark Hatfield, commenting
on thit
attack, summed up the Israeli attitude as follows:
“There is an enormous and dangerous arroguncu
which surrounds the unilateral decision to use Unit4
States-made weapons to attack an Iraqi nuc]@s%r
reactor on Sunday, an arrogance which has resulted
in one of the most provocative, [ill-timed]
and intcrnationally illegal actions taken in that nation”%
history”.

72. Another factor to take into account when considering what to do is Israel’s flagrant and persistent
violations Of Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. For the last 14 years, Israel has been consolidating its hold on the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip and subduing the Palestinian people with a view
to annexing those territories, Arab lands have been
expropriated and massive Israeli settlements have been
set UP. Systematic terror and collective punishment
have been used as a way to force the Arab population
to leave the occupied territories. The Israeli leaders
have not hidden their ambition to use the settlements
as a means of extending the borders of Israel.

The annexation of the Golan Heights falls in the s:l~lic!
category of acts as that to which Senator Hatfield \n-;sh
referring.
77. That is the background we should take itltcl
account when we consider what measures to take.
8

i
1

~

The pattern of Israeli behaviour culminating in the
annexation of the Golan Heights constitutes a threat
to international
peace and security, a breach of the
peace, an act of aggression against the Arab people,
all within the purview of Articles 39 and 41 of the
Charter.

liberation? No: it was aimed precisely at frustrating
that liberation struggle and efforts of the international
community to bring peace to the people of Namibia.
Was it aimed at persuading South Africa to abide by
Council resolution 435 (1978)? No: it had the purpose
of encouraging South Africa’s intransigence in its
illegal hold on the Territory.

78. We have already invoked Article 40 by asking
Israel to desist from the dangerous and illegal course
it has hitherto been pursuing. It is quite clear that Israel
will not respond to such calls. We have on several
occasions appealed to, called upon and censured
Israel. But all this has been to no avail, It is incumbent on the Council to assume its obligations under
the Charter and to act to ensure compliance.

84. It was a visit that gave encouragement and
comfort to South Africa in its aggressive acts against
Angola and other front-line States. Indeed, at the end
of the visit, the Israeli Minister advised that South
Africa needed more weapons. These weapons can
only be meant for use in the fight against the liberation
forces and those opposed to South Africa’s illegal
occupation of Namibia.

79. The fact that Israel has got off lightly without
effective measures being taken against it for the
most blatant violation of the Charter has encouraged
.its arrogance and spurred it to ever more reckless
adventures.

85. That, then, is the record which the Council
should take into account.
86. It has already been established here on numerous
occasions that both Israel’s and South Africa’s international conduct, their relations with their neighbours,
are characterized by threats to peace, breaches of the
peace and acts of aggression, the redress of which
calls for nothing short of the application of Chapter VII
of the Charter.

SO. It is therefore not surprising that after the annexation of the Golan Heights Prime Minister Begin had
the audacity to state the following:
“As to the future, kindly inform the Secretary of
State that the Golan Heights Law will remain in
force. There is no power on earth that will bring
about its repeal,”

87. Uganda has maintained, and continues to maintain, that position. We submit that the gravity of the
matter now before the Council demands and dictates
that appropriate action be taken.

81. We hardly need to remind ourselves of the
enormous amount of time devoted by the Council to
addressing, time and again, the serious danger posed
to international peace and security. The twin brothers
in the furtherance of racism and aggression-namely,
Israel and uptrrtheiti South Africa-have
persistently
and arrogantly flouted numerous resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly.

88. We advocate that the principles of international
law governing relations among nations must be applied
and must be seen to be applied in equal measure to
all nations. In case of any breaches of those principles,
such international sanctions which are relevant under
the law must be invoked, without selectivity, in the
interest of international peace and security.

.82. The behaviour of Israel is akin to that of racist
South Africa. Indeed, these two have in the past acted
in concert in their designs to breach international
peace and security and subvert international law. As
was reported in The New York Times of 14 December
1981:

,.

89. Should the Council fail yet again to adopt punitive
measures against Israel for its acts of aggression against
Syria, the credibility of this body, which under the
Charter is the repository of international peace and
security, would be further called into question. The
Council would be failing in its duty to fulfil the obligations imposed on it by the Charter.

“The military relationship between South Africa
and Israel, never fully acknowledged by either country, has assumed a new significance with the recent
IO-day visit by Israel’s Defence Minister, Ariel
Sharon, to South African forces in Namibia along the
border with Angola.”

The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

83. What, then, was the purpose of the visit of
Israel’s Defence Minister to the front line of occupied
Namibia? Was it to further the cause of peace and

NOTE
1 United Nations, T,ertr~l

9

SetV~s,

vol.

75. No. 973, p. 287.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aup&
des ventcs,
New York ou Gen&ve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES NATIONS

sont en vcnte dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York
o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS NAClONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

j

UNIES

et les agences
;i : Nations

dCpositairesdu
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas,

88-60989-April

1989-2.050
