X
RESOLlITIONS ADOPTED ON mE REPORTS
OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE
RESOLlITIONS ADOPI'EES SU:i:t LES RAPPORTS
DE LA DEUXIEME COMMISSION

198 (III). Economic development of
under-developed countries

198 (III). Developpement economique
des pays insuffisamment develop-

pes
L'A8sembUe genbak,

The General A,sembly,
1. Comiderinc that the low standards of living
existing m Member States have bad economic and
social effects in the countries directly concerned
and on the world as a whole, and create conditions
of instability which ar.e prejudicial to the maintenance of peaceful and friendly relations among
nations and to the development of conditions of
economic and social progress,

1. Cons·frlerant que les bas niveaux de vie qui
existent darn, certains Etats Membres entratnent
des consequences economiquement et socialement facheuses pour les pays directement interesses et pour le monde entier, et causent une
instabilite qui constitue un obstacle au maintien de relations paisibles et amicales entre les
nations et au developpement des conditions
ner.essaire~ au progres economique et social,

2. Recalling that the Charter of the United
Nations binds Member States individually and
collectively to promote higher standards of
living,

2. Rappelant que la Charte des Nations Unies
engage les Etats Membres, tant conjointement
que separ~mJnt, a favoriser le relevement des
niveaux de vie,

3. Recommends that the Economic and Soi:ial
Council and the specialized agencies give further
and urgent consideration to the whole problem
of the economic development of under-developed
countries in all its aspects, and that the Economic
and Social Council include in its report to the
next regular session of the General Assembly
(a) a statement on measures already devised by
the Economic and Social Council and the specialized agencies, and (b) proposals for other measures designed to promote economic development
and to raise the standards of living of underdeveloped countries;

3. Rerommande au Conseil economique et
social et aux institutions specialisees de proceder
d'urgence a un nouvel examen de !'ensemble du
probleme du developpement economique des
pays insuffisamment developpes, sous tow ses
aspects, et au Conseil economique et social de
faire figurer, dans son rapport a la prochaine
session ordinaire de l' Assemblee generate, l'expose : a) des mesures deja envisagees par le Conseil
economique et social et les institutions specialisees; et b) des autres mesures proposees pour
favoriser le developpement economique et relever
le niveau de vie des pays insuffisamment developpes;

4. Endor,e, resolution 167 (VII), E 1, of the
Economic and Social Council in which the Council
expresses its hope that the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development will take
immediate steps to adopt all reasonable measures
to facilitate the early realization of development
loans, particularly those in areas economically
under-developed.

4. Fait nenne la resolution 167 (VII), E, du
Conseil economique et social1, aux termes de
laquelle le Conseil exprime l'espoir que la Banque
internationale pour la reconstruction et le developpement prendra des mesures immediates
afin d'adopter toutes mesures appropriees en vue
de faciliter la prompte realisation d'emprunts
destines a favoriser le developpement, notamment dans les regions dont l' economie est encore
insuffisamment evoluee.

Cent-soixante-dixie1118 ,eane,e plenim,
le 4 dkembre 1948.

Hundred and seventieth plenary meeting,
4 December 1948.

1
•See. R11olutiona adof·IBd by th, Ecorn,mic and Social Council
during 1ts aeventh session, page 69.

I Voir lea .R.olutiona adoptk, PIJt' I, Conml konomiqw ,, HC14l
pendant sa septieme session, page 69.

37
