UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/13
20 May 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3882nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 20 May 1998, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Sierra Leone", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council condemns as gross violations of international
humanitarian law the recent atrocities carried out against the civilian
population, particularly women and children, of Sierra Leone by members of
the Revolutionary United Front and the deposed military junta including
widespread rape, mutilation, and slaughter. It calls for an immediate end
to all violence against civilians. The Council, in this regard, expresses
grave concern about reports of military support being provided to the
rebels. It calls on all States to observe strictly the provisions of
resolution 1132 (1997) and to avoid any action that might further
destabilize the situation in Sierra Leone.
"The Security Council deplores the continued resistance to the
authority of the legitimate Government of Sierra Leone and calls on all
rebels to cease their resistance, lay down their arms, and surrender to
forces of the Military Observer Group (ECOMOG) of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) immediately. It again commends ECOWAS and
ECOMOG for the important role they are playing to restore peace and
security in Sierra Leone. The Council reiterates its call for States to
provide technical and logistical support to assist ECOMOG to continue to
enhance its ability to carry out its peacekeeping role and contribute to
bringing an end to the atrocities being committed against the people of
Sierra Leone.
"The Security Council expresses deep concern for the plight of all
those affected by the continuing insecurity, including the tens of
thousands of refugees and displaced persons. It urges all those concerned
to continue humanitarian assistance and underscores the importance of a
comprehensive response by United Nations agencies in coordination with the
Government of Sierra Leone and with the support of ECOMOG. The Council
also recognizes the important role played by the international community,
including the Organization of African Unity and relevant non-governmental

98-13985 (E)

200598

/...

S/PRST/1998/13
English
Page 2

organizations, to provide humanitarian assistance to civilians in dire need
in Sierra Leone. The Council commends the Governments of neighbouring
countries for their reception of refugees and calls upon all States and
relevant international organizations to help them in responding to the
refugee crisis.
"The Security Council expresses concern for the safety of all
humanitarian personnel working in Sierra Leone. It calls on all parties
concerned to facilitate the work of humanitarian agencies. The Council
urges the parties to protect displaced persons seeking refuge, as well as
United Nations and humanitarian aid workers.
"The Security Council welcomes the efforts made by the democratically
elected Government since its return on 10 March 1998 to restore peace and
stability and to reestablish effective administration and the democratic
process in Sierra Leone. It encourages ECOWAS to renew its political
efforts to foster peace and stability and urges all parties in the country
to embark on the tasks of national reconstruction, rehabilitation and
reconciliation. The Council urges all parties concerned to respect fully
international law, including human rights and humanitarian law.
"The Security Council urges States and other parties concerned to
contribute to the trust fund to support peacekeeping and related activities
in Sierra Leone, and to humanitarian assistance efforts.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to keep it
advised on the situation in Sierra Leone.
"The Security Council will remain seized of this matter."

-----
