United Nations

A/RES/56/116

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 January 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 108

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/56/572)]

56/116. United Nations Literacy Decade: education for all
The General Assembly,
Recalling that in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 2 and the Convention on the
Rights of the Child 3 the right of every individual to education is recognized as
inalienable,
Recalling also its resolutions 42/104 of 7 December 1987, by which it
proclaimed 1990 as International Literacy Year, and 54/122 of 17 December 1999,
in which it requested the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the DirectorGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and
Member States and with other relevant organizations and bodies, to submit to the
General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session a proposal for a United Nations literacy
decade, with a draft plan of action and possible time frame for such a decade, on the
basis of the outcome of the World Education Forum and the special session of the
General Assembly for the five-year review of the World Summit for Social
Development,
Reaffirming its resolution 49/184 of 23 December 1994, by which it
proclaimed the ten-year period beginning on 1 January 1995 the United Nations
Decade for Human Rights Education and appealed to all Governments to intensify
their efforts to eradicate illiteracy and to direct education towards the full
development of the human personality and to the strengthening of respect for all
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 2001/29 of 20 April
2001 on the right to education, 4

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
Resolution 44/25, annex.
4
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2001, Supplement No. 3 (E/2001/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2

01 48139

A/RES/56/116

Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration of 8 September 2000 5 in
which Member States resolved to ensure that, by the year 2015, children
everywhere, boys and girls alike, would be able to complete a full course of primary
schooling and that girls and boys would have equal access to all levels of education,
which requires a renewed commitment to promote literacy for all,
Recalling also the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development 6 and the
Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social Development 7 and the
outcome document of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly,
entitled “World Summit for Social Development and beyond: achieving social
development for all in a globalizing world”, 8
Convinced that literacy is crucial to the acquisition, by every child, youth and
adult, of essential life skills that enable them to address the challenges they can face
in life, and represents an essential step in basic education, which is an indispensable
means for effective participation in the societies and economies of the twenty-first
century,
Affirming that the realization of the right to education, especially for girls,
contributes to the eradication of poverty,
Acknowledging the activities undertaken at the national and regional levels for
the Education for All 2000 assessment of progress towards achieving the goals of
education for all, and stressing further the need to redouble efforts in order to meet
the basic needs of people of all age groups, in particular girls and women,
Recognizing that, despite the significant progress in basic education, especially
the increase in primary school enrolment coupled with a growing emphasis on the
quality of education, major problems, both emerging and continuing, still persist,
which require even more forceful and concerted action at the national and
international levels so as to achieve the goal of education for all,
Deeply concerned about the persistence of the gender gap in education, which
is reflected by the fact that nearly two thirds of the world’s adult illiterates are
women,
Urging Member States, in close partnership with international organizations,
as well as non-governmental organizations, to promote the right to education for all
and to create conditions for all for learning throughout life,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization entitled “Draft proposal and plan
for a United Nations literacy decade”; 9
2.
Proclaims the ten-year period beginning on 1 January 2003 the United
Nations Literacy Decade;

_______________
5

See resolution 55/2.
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
7
Ibid., annex II.
8
Resolution S-24/2, annex.
9
See A/56/114-E/2001/93 and Add.1.
6

2

A/RES/56/116

3.
Reaffirms the Dakar Framework for Action adopted at the World
Education Forum, 10 in which commitments were made to achieve a 50 per cent
improvement in levels of adult literacy by 2015 and to improve the quality of
education;
4.
Appeals to all Governments to redouble their efforts to achieve their own
goals of education for all by developing national plans in accordance with the Dakar
Framework for Action, setting firm targets and timetables, including gender-specific
education targets and programmes, to eliminate gender disparities at all levels of
education, to combat the illiteracy of women and girls and to ensure that girls and
women have full and equal access to education, and by working in active
partnership with communities, associations, the media and development agencies to
reach those targets;
5.
Also appeals to all Governments to reinforce political will and develop
more inclusive policy-making environments and devise innovative strategies for
reaching the poorest and most marginalized groups and for seeking alternative
formal and non-formal approaches to learning with a view to achieving the goals of
the Decade;
6.
Urges all Governments to take the lead in the coordination of the Decade
activities at the national level, bringing all relevant national actors together in
sustained dialogue on policy formulation, implementation and evaluation of literacy
efforts;
7.
Reaffirms that literacy for all is at the heart of basic education for all and
that creating literate environments and societies is essential for achieving the goals
of eradicating poverty, reducing child mortality, curbing population growth,
achieving gender equality and ensuring sustainable development, peace and
democracy;
8.
Appeals to all Governments and to economic and financial organizations
and institutions, both national and international, to lend greater financial and
material support to the efforts to increase literacy and achieve the goals of education
for all and those of the Decade through, inter alia, the 20/20 initiative, as
appropriate;
9.
Invites Member States, the specialized agencies and other organizations
of the United Nations system as well as relevant intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to intensify further their efforts to implement effectively
the World Declaration on Education for All, 11 the Dakar Framework for Action and
the relevant commitments and recommendations to promote literacy made at recent
major United Nations conferences and at their five-year reviews with a view to
better coordinating their activities and increasing their contribution to development
within the framework of the Decade in a manner that is complementary to and
coordinated with the ongoing education for all process;
10. Decides that the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization should take a coordinating role in stimulating and catalysing the
activities at the international level within the framework of the Decade;
_______________
10

See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World
Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal, 26–28 April 2000 (Paris, 2000).
11
Final Report of the World Conference on Education for All: Meeting Basic Learning Needs, Jomtien,
Thailand, 5–9 March 1990, Inter-Agency Commission (UNDP, UNESCO, UNICEF, World Bank) for the
World Conference on Education for All, New York, 1990, appendix I.

3

A/RES/56/116

11. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the Director-General
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to seek and
take into account comments and proposals from Governments and the relevant
international organizations on the draft plan for the Decade in order to develop and
finalize a well targeted and action-oriented plan of action to be submitted to the
General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-seventh session a
question entitled “United Nations Literacy Decade”.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 2001

4
