S/PV.9123

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9123rd meeting

Tuesday, 6 September 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Biang
Mr. Anyanah
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-58126 (E)
*2258126*

S/PV.9123

United Nations peacekeeping operations

prioritize the areas that are most critical to addressing
challenges faced in the area of peacekeeping.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in French): I should also like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Ambassador Zhang Jun,
Permanent Representative of China, for his service as
President of the Council for the month of August 2022.
I am sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Zhang
and his team for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I am very honoured
to be given the opportunity to brief the Security Council
on resolution 2378 (2017), as well as the progress and
challenges concerning the implementation of the Action
for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative and, more recently,
the Action for Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+) initiative.
(spoke in English)
Four years ago (S/PV.8218), before the Council,
the Secretary-General launched A4P to make our
missions stronger, safer and more effective. He invited
Member States and relevant international and regional
organizations to endorse the Declaration of Shared
Commitments, as a clear commitment to work with us
towards those objectives.
Two years on, we took stock of the progress made
and remaining gaps. Based on research and strategic
reviews of our missions, we decided to focus on seven
priority areas in order to make tangible improvements to
our impact. That led to the Secretary-General launching
A4P+ in March 2021, not to replace A4P but rather to
2/20

06/09/2022

Today is an opportunity to update Council members
on the highlights of our efforts and results so far. I hope
that the A4P+ reports distributed to all Council members
serve as a resource to provide a more detailed overview.
We look forward to continuing to provide such updates
on a regular basis, but I would like to emphasize that,
as in everything we do, our own collective efforts and
those of Member States are required for success.
(spoke in French)
The environments in which peacekeepers are
deployed are complex and difficult. As we know all
too well, the world today is facing many overlapping
crises. We are facing the largest number of violent
conflicts since 1945, with growing geopolitical tensions
and phenomena such as the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the destructive impact of the effects of
climate change.
In the middle of all of that, United Nations
peacekeepers remain on the front lines and strive to
prevent the spread and escalation of the scourge of
war in the areas in which they operate. They protect
civilians, support ceasefires, participate in national
capacity-building, promote human rights and bring
communities and countries together. They are facing
unprecedented risks, including by being targeted by
violent extremists. Challenges of that scale will be
overcome only by working together in order to find
political solutions to conflicts in accordance with
our A4P+ priority involving coherence underlying a
political strategy.
With regard to the increasingly complex geopolitical
environment, I would like to stress two points.
First, we must do everything possible to preserve
the space needed for United Nations peacekeeping
operations, which continue to visibly manifest a
multilateral system in action on the ground. Secondly,
we must stay the course in supporting peacebuilding
in complex mission contexts — for example, in Mali
and Lebanon — within the context of the extreme
difficulties that have been encountered and have been
exacerbated by the global situation. Our impact depends
on the coordinated efforts of peacekeeping operations
and our partners that together are trying to prevent,
mitigate and resolve conflicts.
22-58126

06/09/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In line with the second A4P+ priority — strategic
and operational integration — 11 out of 12 missions
currently have integrated mission plans in place or
results frameworks for the Comprehensive Performance
Assessment System. Most of those plans take into
account gender considerations and the women and
peace and security agenda. Of course, we can fulfil
our mandates only if the missions have the appropriate
capacities at the right time, at the right place and with
the right mindset — our third priority.
In that regard, I thank all Member States for their
continued support, particularly at the meeting on
peacekeeping at the ministerial level held in Seoul in
2021. Since then, we have made significant progress to
be more proactive, agile and flexible, as seen particularly
in the strategy in strengthening of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the
reconfiguration of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the force adaptation plan
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
I call for the support of Council members to fill
the critical gaps that we continue to face in the area
of capacities, especially with regard to utility and
armed helicopters. Work is under way with the Heads
of missions to ensure that our staff members have the
necessary mindset, and, in that regard, we have come
up with performance standards, which concern both
individual officials and the contingents of the formed
military units.
Our fourth priority concerns our responsibility
vis-à-vis our personnel and the need to ensure their
safety and security. Despite enormous efforts, the
annual decrease in the number of losses of our
peacekeepers has increased. We saw a positive trend
between 2007 and 2020. However, in 2021 the number
of deaths from malicious acts doubled as compared
with the previous year, from 13 to 25. Unfortunately,
that trend is continuing, with 21 deaths from malicious
acts as of the end of August 2022.
(spoke in English)
Attacks on peacekeepers utilizing explosive
ordnance and improvised explosive devices (IEDs)
persist and are tracking at levels as high as those of
2021. While MINUSMA remains the most dangerous
peacekeeping mission, MINUSCA and MONUSCO

S/PV.9123

are facing a sustained and ongoing threat. In a
presidential statement in May 2021 (S/PRST/2021/11),
the Council requested that the Secretary-General
conduct an independent strategic review of United
Nations peacekeeping operations’ responses to the
threat of IEDs, and we are currently implementing its
recommendations. We have made significant progress
so far in improving capabilities to counter IEDs
in missions where that threat is evolving. We will
continue to take forward the recommendations of the
review. However, we need Member State support to
fully address the recommendations.
In line with resolution 2518 (2020), we are
developing an integrated base defence strategy that
will improve the integration and interoperability of
existing defence systems across mission components,
a policy that is expected to significantly improve threat
responses. We also seek the support of Member States
in that context, particularly through their expertise
on base defence and its exercise in high-threat areas.
Accountability for peacekeepers remains a critical
priority as we seek to better assess performance and
recognize and remedy issues as necessary. In relation to
the ongoing challenge of sexual exploitation and abuse,
the trust fund in support of victims has established a
project in South Sudan to offer psychosocial, medical
and legal support. The Secretariat will engage with
Member States to discuss concrete commitments to
resolve paternity-recognition cases and child support
for victims. We are making progress in the development
of a confidential mechanism to allow Member States
to access information about allegations against their
personnel more easily.
Our sixth priority is strategic communications,
which have become more important than ever in
securing the support needed for missions in the face
of a surge of misinformation and disinformation, a
challenge that impedes mandate delivery and threatens
the safety of both host communities and United
Nations peacekeepers. To address it, we are proactively
communicating on the tangible impact of peacekeeping
in a compelling, human-centred way. We are harnessing
the power of many platforms, including social media,
to ensure maximum audience engagement, and using
United Nations-operated radio networks to provide
news to remote and vulnerable populations. We are
also working to provide tools, guidance and training for
missions. Given the increased importance of strategic
communications, as reflected in the Security Council

22-581263/20

S/PV.9123

United Nations peacekeeping operations

open debate on the issue in July (see S/PV.9090),
as well as the subsequent presidential statement
(S/PRST/2022/5), we are working to fully integrate it
into planning and decision-making. Our efforts to step
up cooperation with host States continue apace. As
requested by resolution 2518 (2020), we are making
progress systematically in documenting violations of
status-of-forces agreements, commonly referred to as
SOFA violations, including through the creation of a
mechanism that can track and report such violations
across missions.
Turning now to the subject of women and peace
and security, women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in peacekeeping remains a key priority that
is being mainstreamed throughout our A4P+ efforts. As
of June, except for military contingents, most targets
set in the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy have
been met and in fact surpassed. Women now account
for 21 per cent of military observers and staff officers,
31 per cent of individual police officers and 43 per
cent of Government-provided justice and corrections
personnel. We are also continuing to work to create more
gender-responsive working and living environments,
including through camp design. However, in order to
address the remaining gaps in uniformed gender parity,
we must intensify our concerted efforts to enhance
the recruitment, training and career development of
women in national security institutions. Missions
have also prioritized gender analysis in informing
decision-making. For example, the transition planned
by MONUSCO is one of the most gender-responsive
transitions planned to date. The missions continue to
be constrained, however, by inadequate resources and
personnel, including a shortage of gender advisers. We
are implementing projects to strengthen tech-enabled,
data-driven peacekeeping, including some aimed
at enhancing situational awareness and leveraging
technology for uniformed peacekeepers.
In conclusion, we have made notable progress
in addressing the priorities outlined in the A4P+
initiative. As I already emphasized, we continue to
need extensive support from our Member States.
First, I would like to call for stronger and more united
support from the Council for advancing the political
efforts of our operations. Such support is a prerequisite
for our efforts to promote sustainable peace where we
have mandates from the Council to do so. I also need
the Council’s ongoing support for our missions when
they face undue restrictions and obstacles from the
4/20

06/09/2022

parties to the conflict, including SOFA violations. We
continue to conduct regular reviews of the mandates of
our missions and their capabilities to ensure that they
remain fit for the rapidly evolving conflicts in which
they are deployed, but we need the Council’s support
to make the recommendations of such reviews a reality.
For United Nations peacekeeping to act effectively, all
of us need to act for peacekeeping with equal vigour.
Allow me, finally, to reiterate our gratitude to
Member States for the commitment shown to our work
in all A4P areas. I trust that we can continue to count on
their steadfast support.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Anyanah (Ghana): At the outset, Mr. President,
let me wish you and the French delegation the best of
success during your presidency of the Council for this
month. I also congratulate Ambassador Zhang Jun and
the Chinese delegation on their excellent leadership of
the Council last month.
We have listened carefully to Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations,
and thank him for his briefing, which highlights various
initiatives being undertaken to improve the effectiveness
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. Ghana
recognizes the important role of United Nations
peacekeeping in maintaining international peace and
security and providing stability in various parts of
the world. We have continued to support all efforts to
improve the performance of peacekeeping by enhancing
its effectiveness for every historical era.
Since 1960, when Ghana first contributed troops
to the United Nations Operation in the Congo, we
have actively followed peacekeeping’s evolving
nature and adaptation to the changing dynamics of the
conflict settings where peacekeepers are deployed.
By comparison to the past, today peacekeepers are
called on to do more and usually in a multidimensional
context where the parties concerned may themselves
not welcome their presence. We therefore appreciate the
discussions that have ensued since the 2015 report of the
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
the Secretary-General’s follow-up report (S/2018/623)
and actions, including the Action for Peacekeeping Plus
initiative, which have defined our shared commitments
22-58126

06/09/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

regarding addressing the challenges of peacekeeping,
such as protracted conflicts, the elusive nature of
political solutions and broad and complex mandates
that are difficult to achieve.
However, there are several other challenges that
must also be tackled by the peacekeeping stakeholder
community in order to make peacekeeping fit for
purpose and effective in achieving its objectives. Some
of them relate to mandates, while others are in the area
of performance, and ensuring the safety and security
of peacekeepers continues to need improvement. Ghana
looks forward to working in that context to support the
priorities set out in the Secretary-General’s review of
the peace and security architecture, and especially in
ensuring that conflict prevention, sustaining peace and
sustainable development are treated with the urgency
and importance they deserve.
First, with regard to peacekeeping mandates,
Ghana continues to be concerned about the insufficient
emphasis on the primacy of politics in some
peacekeeping missions, which continues to prolong
a number of conflicts. Also, despite the fact that
mandates for some missions, such as the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), include the
creation of rapid intervention brigades, the structure
and focus of current peacekeeping arrangements make
them inappropriate instruments for counter-terrorism,
and the Council itself lacks an established mechanism
for dealing with extremist groups. We believe that
mandates and resolutions could also be more concise
and focused. There is therefore a need for the Council
to refocus the formulation and implementation of
mandates on the primacy of politics and to tap into
the partnership opportunities provided by regional
arrangements, such as those with the African Union
(AU), in addressing the threats to international
peace and security that United Nations peacekeeping
missions are unable to respond to, especially as they
relate to terrorists and extremist groups. That would of
course require us to constructively embrace the report
expected from the Secretary-General on the question of
the adequate, predictable and sustainable funding for
Council-mandated AU-led peace operations, especially
through assessed contributions.
Secondly, concerning the performance of
peacekeeping operations, while we welcome the
implementation of the Integrated Peacekeeping
Performance and Accountability Framework, we

S/PV.9123

believe that we need to strengthen its use in a way that
ensures that the performance of individual troop- and
police-contributing countries and individual mission
staff members meets the expectations of mandates.
In significant instances where such performance
expectations are not met, it will be important for
the Secretariat to bring them to the attention of
the appropriate working group of the Council in
order to enable systemic concerns to be redressed.
We believe it is essential to involve the relevant
Member States systematically in implementing the
Framework. We also emphasize the importance of
prioritizing capacity-building for all categories of
United Nations peacekeepers in order to enhance their
operational effectiveness.
Thirdly, with regard to the safety and security of
peacekeepers, we continue to be worried about their
deliberate targeting, which has resulted in a surge in
the number of fatalities in peacekeeping operations.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute to all Blue Helmets personnel who have
paid the ultimate price in the line of duty and to
commend peacekeepers for their selfless contributions.
We believe that where it applies, we should enhance
predeployment training in countering improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) in order to address the threat
of extremist groups’ increasing use of IEDs against
peacekeepers, as we have been witnessing in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.
We also urge for strategic communications to be
strengthened in order to counter the significant increase
in disinformation and misinformation, which has
become systematic, synchronized and orchestrated on
an industrial scale and is negatively affecting the efforts
of peacekeepers, shaping the conflict environment
and negatively influencing public opinion about most
United Nations peacekeeping operations, especially on
the African continent. In some instances the perceptions
that have been created have led to hostile reactions from
local populations, culminating in riots, vandalized
United Nations property and casualties among United
Nations personnel and the local population, something
we saw recently in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I should not conclude without mentioning the
emerging challenge that United Nations peacekeeping
is facing with regard to host Governments’
implementation of their status-of-forces agreements,

22-581265/20

S/PV.9123

United Nations peacekeeping operations

as well as restrictions on peacekeeping personnel’s
freedom of movement and the rotation and resupply of
troops, with negative effects on their performance and
attainment of mandates. While we acknowledge the
fact that the demands for United Nations peacekeeping
missions throughout the world are greater than ever
before, overstretching the available resources and
existing capacities, we are mindful that fulfilling
mandates for sustaining peace is critical and requires
the commitment of all peacekeeping actors.
I reiterate Ghana’s unflinching support for every
initiative that helps address the myriad of contemporary
challenges affecting United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We also underscore the need for improved
planning and adequate resources for transitions, as well
as for considering post-mandate-period implications so
as to ensure that the hard-won gains of peace operations
and mandates are safeguarded.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to thank everyone for their kind
words addressed to the Chinese delegation and to take
this opportunity to congratulate France on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of September. We will work closely with you and your
colleagues, Mr. President. I am confident that under
France’s excellent leadership, the work of the Council in
September will be successful. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have made
important contributions to maintaining international
peace and security, from the Balkans to the Congo
River basin to the Sahara desert and the South Asian
subcontinent. Nearly 90,000 peacekeepers have braved
hardships and dangers in fulfilling their duties and
carrying out their mission under the banner of the
United Nations, bringing peace and stability to conflict
areas and highlighting peace and hope in the world. I
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to all
the Blue Helmets and express my sincere gratitude to
the troop- and police-contributing countries.
The world is entering a period of turbulent change
and instability. Factors promoting destabilization
and uncertainty are on the rise and international and
regional peace and security have been increasingly
challenged. In those circumstances, the important role
of peacekeeping operations, as well as Member States’
expectations of them, is growing more prominent. To
respond to these evolving situations, peacekeeping
6/20

06/09/2022

operations need to constantly improve, better position
themselves, strengthen their weak areas and do a
better job of serving Member States and the wider
international community. China would like to highlight
the following four points regarding the performance of
peacekeeping operations over the past year.
First, we must strengthen the overarching structure
of peacekeeping operations in order to serve the central
task of maintaining peace and security. Peacekeeping
mandates have continued to grow over the decades,
expanding from the traditional monitoring of
ceasefires to the protection of civilians, from the area
of traditional security to the humanitarian and human
rights fronts, and in some cases to the areas of natural
resources and sanctions. Some of the new mandates are
designed to respond to changing dynamics and some to
meet the legitimate needs of the countries concerned.
Others, however, have arisen out of reasons of so-called
political correctness, and some may even risk becoming
tools for exerting pressure on the countries concerned.
The unchecked expansion of mandates interferes
with the Council’s core mission, strains peacekeeping
resources and raises excessive expectations for missions.
Some mandates exceed missions’ capacity, interfere in
the internal affairs of host countries and undermine the
mutual trust between the two. In August, the Security
Council adopted a presidential statement on capacitybuilding in Africa drafted by China (S/PRST/2022/6),
requesting that the Secretary-General submit a report
within one year to assess peacekeeping mission
mandates and make recommendations for adjusting
them or formulating exit strategies. We hope that the
Council will take this opportunity to streamline and
optimize the mandates of peacekeeping operations so
that missions can focus on fulfilling their core tasks.
Secondly, we must eliminate the trust deficit and
rebuild good cooperative relations with the countries
concerned. Relationships between some missions
and the countries concerned have been a serious
problem for some time, so much so that peacekeepers
have even paid the ultimate price in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Abyei region, which
is extremely distressing. Strengthening cooperation
with host countries has always been an important part
of peacekeeping reform and should be given greater
priority in future. In performing their duties, missions
should listen to the views of the countries involved, take
their concerns into account and seek their support. In
resolution 2650 (2022), adopted in August, on extending
22-58126

06/09/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (see S/PV.9121), some Council members
included language that weakened the coordination
between the Force and Lebanon, which is not conducive
to consolidating mutual trust with Lebanon.
Human rights issues have often been a complicating
factor in missions’ relationships with host countries,
particularly in Mali and South Sudan. Missions with
human rights mandates should fact-check with the State
concerned when reporting on a human rights situation
and seek its consent when investigating human rights
violations. The United Nations should strengthen
strategic communications with host Governments
and peoples in order to promote their understanding
of and support for a mission’s mandate and the way it
works. That is the best way to combat misinformation
about missions. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has recently been communicating with
the various sectors of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo through multiple channels, which deserves
full recognition.
Thirdly, we must strengthen partnerships and
mobilize all States and stakeholders to advance
peacekeeping operations. In recent years, regional and
subregional organizations have rapidly increased their
willingness and capacity to maintain peace and security
in various regions, in particular in Africa. The need
for autonomous peace operations in Africa continues
to rise and the Sahel is a prime example. Cooperation
with autonomous peace operations in Africa should be
an integral part of United Nations peace operations in a
broad sense. The two sides have accumulated a wealth
of experience in that regard. The African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, which has played
an important role in restoring peace and stability in the
area, has been successfully withdrawn. In Somalia, the
multi-stakeholder model, in which the African Union
provides the troops, the United Nations the logistical
support and the European Union the funding, has
generally worked well and has helped to improve the
security situation. The United Nations and the African
Union should further strengthen their communication
and consultation, resolve the legal and resource-specific
challenges in their cooperation creatively and play to
each other’s strengths.
Fourthly, we must ensure peacekeepers’ safety
and strive to reduce the security risks of peacekeeping
operations. Physical threats and challenges to

S/PV.9123

peacekeepers have been growing for some time.
There have been seven serious attacks this year on
the missions in Mali and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, resulting in the death or injury of dozens
of peacekeepers. Member States and the Secretariat
should work together to enhance missions’ emergency
response and early-warning capabilities, strengthen
rescue and medical support systems and properly use
new technologies to improve equipment and security.
As we speak, China is sending a unit of unmanned
aerial vehicles to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, which we
believe will help ensure personnel safety and improve
peacekeeping performance.
As co-Chair of the Group of Friends of the Safety
and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers, China,
together with Brazil, Indonesia and Rwanda, co-hosted
a meeting on casualty evacuation last month that yielded
positive results. China will continue to lead and to work
with other parties on various United Nations platforms
to promote the issue of the security of peacekeepers and
make efforts and contributions to ensure the safety of
our Blue Helmets.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate France on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to thank you,
Sir, for taking the initiative to hold today’s debate on
peacekeeping operations at a time when that tool is
crucial to the role and visibility of the United Nations.
We are at a crossroads as we confront the challenges we
face on the ground. It is therefore a timely discussion.
As we determine the strengths and weaknesses of
peacekeeping operations, we must not be biased or
complacent if we are to provide concrete, fitting and
specific solutions for every situation on the ground.
Needless to say, I want to congratulate China on its
excellent efforts in guiding our work in August. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for
his informative briefing.
Since the Organization’s creation, peacekeeping
operations have been at the heart of United Nations
strategies for ending conflicts and promoting
reconciliation. In more than a dozen countries,
including Sierra Leone, Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire and
Liberia, the efforts of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations have made a genuine difference. The United
Nations has offered key security guarantees and
facilitated political transitions. It has helped to set up
new institutions for fragile States and has helped to

22-581267/20

S/PV.9123

United Nations peacekeeping operations

curb instability in several countries that have been able
to return to a normal path of development, despite the
remaining challenges in peacebuilding. However, in a
number of other cases, United Nations peacekeeping
efforts and the response of the international community
as a whole have fallen short of expectations and have
been severely criticized, for example in Somalia,
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia at the beginning of
the 1990s.
In cases that are still current, the presence of
peacekeeping operations has coincided with an increase
in chronic conflict. The terrible sight of Blue Helmets
hunted by people and heckled for their inability to
protect civilians in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is intolerable for several reasons. Such reversals
should lead the international community to reflect on
the reasons for them, draw lessons and improve the
calibration of the mandates and deployment of United
Nations peacekeeping operations as tools for restoring
and maintaining international peace and security.
Our collective security system was conceived and
established 77 years ago, and the world has changed since
then. The nature of conflicts has changed. New threats
emerge every day and help reshape the international
order, and yet the way in which we approach crises,
and the representation at our Organization, along
with its tools for maintaining international peace, are
from another era. Africa, which hosts the majority of
the peacekeeping operations and has always featured
heavily on the Council’s agenda, has never had its
rightful place at the table and is considered more
of a challenge to be met by the great Powers than a
stakeholder in its own right in international governance.
That anachronistic situation clearly falls far short of our
current reality and does nothing to ease the suffering of
our peoples, in particular women and children, in warprone regions. Given the current complex environment
and the proliferation of inter-State conflicts, the United
Nations must constantly reinvent itself if it is to provide
a response to its security challenges. The Council must
not just ensure that peace operations are effective but
also that their mandate is adapted to the situation and
the needs on the ground.
Beyond an inclusive approach that must take into
account the internal regional narrative in crisis areas, the
effectiveness and success of peacekeeping operations
depend on key factors in responding to challenges,
including clear, credible and realistic mandates,
as well as personnel and logistical and financial
8/20

06/09/2022

resources. Secondly, they depend on the consent of
host countries and on impartiality and respect for the
terms of the mandate. Thirdly, they depend on their
legitimacy and credibility, especially in the eyes of the
local population; the promotion of national and local
ownership in the peace process in the host country;
the commitment of the host country to refraining
from undermining United Nations operations and to
guaranteeing missions’ freedom of movement; the
constructive involvement of neighbouring countries and
regional actors; an integrated United Nations approach;
effective coordination with other stakeholders on the
ground; solid communication with the authorities
and the population of the host country; considerable
tact with regard to the host population and respect
for professional norms of conduct and the highest
professional standards on the part of Blue Helmets.
Another aspect that the efficiency and effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations depend on is their
connection to regional dynamics. In that regard,
enhancing cooperation between the African Union and
the United Nations, particularly in resolving crises on
the African continent, is key. The experience of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and the African Union Mission in Somalia, in
particular, demonstrate that with the help of predictable
funding and adequate logistical support, the African
Union can conduct peacekeeping operations even in the
most difficult circumstances. We should be mindful
of that example with regard to the new mission in
Somalia — the African Union Transition Mission in
Somalia — and the Group of Five for the Sahel, which
will be under African leadership. In a regional context
increasingly marked by the threat of terrorism, a
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union, supported by adequate funding, is essential.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the support
of my country for the Action for Peacekeeping Plus
initiative, which calls for an accelerated implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. Crosscutting concerns include priority areas, such as the need
to develop an effective communications strategy. I would
also like to reiterate our support for the Strategy for the
Digital Transformation of United Nations Peacekeeping
and the United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action
on Hate Speech and call for greater consideration of
multilingualism in peacekeeping operations.
22-58126

06/09/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
for his informative briefing.
For decades, peacekeeping has been the backbone
of the work of the United Nations in maintaining peace
and security and has had a direct impact on the lives of
millions of people. There are intense hopes placed on
peacekeeping operations, as they are expected both to
address urgent challenges and contribute to the longterm resolution of crises. The changing nature and
specifics of conflicts and the dangerous conditions in
which missions operate, often compounded by dire
humanitarian and socioeconomic situations, dictate the
necessity of adapting peacekeeping mechanisms. That
is why Member States and the Secretariat are focused
on optimizing peacekeeping missions and improving
their effectiveness, as well as ensuring the security of
Blue Helmets and civilian personnel.
One of the key prerequisites for peacekeeping
operations’ effective implementation of their tasks is
constructive interaction with host States, which have
the primary responsibility for protecting their civilian
populations, addressing the root causes of conflict
and dealing with post-conflict reconstruction. The
role of ensuring cooperation between the mission, the
Secretariat and the host country authorities is a top
priority that neither civil society nor non-governmental
organizations can replace. Triangular cooperation
between the Security Council, troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat is also just as important
in strengthening a spirit of partnership, collaboration
and mutual trust.
Ensuring effective interaction between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
based on Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, clearly adds value in enhancing the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping, as
demonstrated by the productive cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union. We see good
potential for developing partnerships between the United
Nations, the Collective Security Treaty Organization
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which are
expanding their political authority and contributing to
strengthening regional and international security.
Clear and realistic mission mandates that take into
account the views of host States, the specific causes of
each conflict and the current situation on the ground help
to improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping activities.

S/PV.9123

We believe it is essential to reduce peacekeepers’
secondary and non-core tasks, especially those on the
human rights, social and gender fronts, which distract
peacekeepers from their primary functions and require
considerable funding. The Blue Helmets’ efforts should
focus on high-quality, painstaking assistance aimed at
reaching a political settlement and the achievement of
national reconciliation, which would address the root
causes of conflicts as well as the symptoms. However,
the imperative must remain unconditional respect for
the sovereignty of host States, strict compliance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter and the basic
principles of peacekeeping — the consent of the parties,
impartiality and refraining from the use of force except
in self-defence and to protect the mandate. We cannot
accept flexible interpretations of those principles even
on the noblest of pretexts.
Those basic principles, including the protection of
civilians where mandated, must govern every aspect of
the work of missions. Peacekeepers must not rattle their
sabres and become a party to the conflict. Obsessing
over force mandates and involving peacekeepers
in offensive and counter-terrorist operations could
undermine Blue Helmets’ neutral status, turning them
into active participants in conflicts with a concomitant
increase in threats to their life and health.
We fully share the view that the security of
peacekeepers should be improved. We believe that
this can be achieved by improving their material
and technical equipping and professional training.
In Russia, the training centres of the Ministry of
Defence and the Ministry of Internal Affairs provide
high-quality training for both Russian and foreign
peacekeepers. For example, in October 2021, the United
Nations Secretariat certified the training programmes
for the United Nations military observer course at the
Military Training Centre of the Ground Forces of the
Russian Federation in Naro-Fominsk.
We believe that the main thrusts of United Nations
peacekeeping activities should be determined in an
intergovernmental format. In that regard, the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the General
Assembly is a unique platform in which a majority
of the Member States of the Organization, including
troop-contributing countries and host States, have an
opportunity to develop common approaches to the
parameters for peacekeeping activities that should
guide the Secretariat and missions on the ground. Only
unconditional respect in practice for the agreements

22-581269/20

S/PV.9123

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and obligations reached in an intergovernmental format
can ensure the necessary level of trust among all parties
concerned and thereby contribute to the effectiveness
of peacekeeping missions and their ultimate success.
We believe that solidarity among States with regard
to the principles of the functioning of peacekeeping
operations will make it easier to resolve other related
issues as well.
We would like to take this opportunity to commend
the military, police and civilian personnel of United
Nations peacekeeping missions for their unwavering
commitment to their noble duty in extremely difficult
and dangerous circumstances and at a daily risk to
their lives.
In conclusion, I would like to note that our efforts
in support of United Nations peacekeeping have been
met with blatant opposition from the United States. Just
last week, the third United Nations Chiefs of Police
Summit took place, and a delegation from the Russian
Ministry of Internal Affairs, headed by Internal Affairs
Minister Vladimir Kolokoltsev, was invited to attend.
However, as a result of United States actions, the
Russian delegation was not able to participate in the
summit — the representatives were simply not issued
visas. That is yet another blatant violation by the United
States of its obligations under the United Nations
Headquarters Agreement. In that regard, we would like
to stress once again that granting visas to members of
delegations is an international legal obligation for the
United States, not a privilege. Failure to grant visas
to representatives of individual States is contrary to
the principle of sovereign equality and hinders their
effective participation in the work of the Organization.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for his very useful and informative
briefing this morning. I would also like to join others
in congratulating France on its forthcoming presidency
and thank China for its very successful leadership
last month.
Ireland is a strong supporter of the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) agenda. This
agenda, coupled with the Action for Peacekeeping
Plus (A4P+), is central to successful mandate
implementation and to enhancing the safety and
security of peacekeepers and the civilians they protect,
and will help to create the conditions necessary for
successful peace processes. That said, this work is far
from complete and must continue to evolve to meet new
10/20

06/09/2022

operational challenges. It is imperative that both A4P
and the catalytic A4P+ continue to drive the formulation
of effective and integrated political strategies, enhance
partnerships and coherence, support the development of
capabilities and improve leadership, accountability and
performance. Successful and effective peacekeeping
reform has never been more necessary, particularly as
missions navigate increasingly complex political and
security environments. I would like to highlight four
areas that Ireland considers particularly relevant to the
implementation of the A4P and A4P+ priorities.
First, peacekeeping operations cannot be successful
unless they have clear, credible and realistic mandates,
coupled with realistic and adequate resources.
Mandates must be informed by needs on the ground and
nested within a broader political strategy in pursuit of
a sustainable peace.
Secondly, we must continue to enhance the links
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.
Ireland led on the development and adoption of
resolution 2594 (2021), which aims to ensure that as
a United Nations peace operation draws down, it does
so in a way that supports peacebuilding objectives and
ensures that peace gains made are not lost.
The Secretary-General’s recent comprehensive
report on transitions in United Nations peace operations
(S/2022/522), based on a critical analysis of ongoing and
recent transitions, recognizes the need for proactive and
integrated transition planning, the critical importance
of national leadership and ownership, including on
the protection of civilians, and the importance of
adequate resourcing. These findings are fully in line
with the provisions of resolution 2594 (2021). The task
for us now is to continue to support and implement the
provisions of the resolution. Put simply, transitions will
not just happen; they will require sustained political
support and attention.
Thirdly, I would like to highlight the importance of
the safety and security of our peacekeepers. We know
that to be effective, peacekeeping operations must be
agile, peacekeeping- and intelligence-led, data-driven
and technologically enabled. The development of the
Strategy for the Digital Transformation of United
Nations Peacekeeping is a key enabler in that regard. It
is increasingly important that peacekeeping operations
be capable of addressing emerging threats, such as the
weaponization of new technologies, misinformation,
disinformation and hate speech. As a State transformed
22-58126

06/09/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

by the digital revolution, Ireland supports the Strategy
and has provided funding to a project with a view to
bolstering the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Ireland’s strong
support of the women and peace and security agenda
as a cross-cutting priority. We should all support
the efforts being put in place by the Secretariat to
break the barriers to participation and leadership for
women peacekeepers at every level. Ireland has taken
on the role of an A4P women and peace and security
champion and developed a series of recommendations
with members from across regional groupings. We
must be extremely ambitious in ensuring that the A4P’s
call for the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in peacekeeping operations is fully addressed
and realized.
To truly contribute to peacekeeping reform, we
must keep all those deployed in peacekeeping operations
and the populations they protect at the forefront of our
efforts. Let us strive to make peacekeeping better for
those whom it affects the most.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
France on its presidency of the Security Council this
month and to recognize China for its wise leadership of
the Council last month.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing, which is timely and informative, as always.
For more than 70 years, United Nations peace
operations have demonstrated that they can make the
difference between the persistence of conflict and
peacebuilding. We recognize the efforts and bravery
of the personnel involved in those operations, who
constantly face adverse conditions. I wish to express
our condolences to the families of peacekeeping mission
personnel who have fallen in the past year, as well as
our wishes for the full and speedy recovery of those
who have suffered physical or psychological injuries.
In that regard, we note in particular the efforts of the
Department of Peace Operations to design a strategy
that also addresses the mental health and psychosocial
well-being of those personnel.
Recent studies show that rates of post-traumatic
stress disorder and other mental health problems
is very high among those who have participated in
United Nations peace operations. That, of course, has
consequences for the performance of the Organization,

S/PV.9123

but more importantly for the health and well-being of
personnel who volunteer their lives for peace. In order to
ensure that peacekeeping operations are more effective
and successful, Member States and the Security Council
have an obligation to address all aspects of the physical
and mental security challenges facing peacekeepers.
To that end, we propose four actions to be undertaken.
First, we must give greater visibility to mental health
issues in peacekeeping operations. Secondly, we must
provide better training and professional support to
recognize symptoms of conditions affecting mental
health in a timely manner. Thirdly, we must foster a
culture of care and psychosocial support during the
operational deployments of all missions. Finally,
we must ensure that deployed personnel receive the
required psychosocial support.
During the Seoul United Nations Peacekeeping
Ministerial, in addition to joining the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative, Mexico
announced a series of commitments to strengthen our
contribution to peace. They mark my country’s move
to a new stage of greater participation in peacekeeping
missions. In that regard, I am pleased to share that,
in recent weeks, Mexico presented the company
of engineers that will represent the first Mexican
contingent to be deployed in a peacekeeping operation.
In addition, a psychiatrist from the Mexican Ministry
of Defence will participate in the advisory committee
in charge of designing a mental health strategy for
peace contingents.
We also made progress in the contribution of
equipment to operate unmanned aerial vehicles as
part of our commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda, and I would also like to highlight
Mexico’s participation at the ministerial level in the
United Nations Chiefs of Police Summit, held last week.
I reiterate the invitation to troop-contributing
countries to participate in the activities of Mexico’s
Joint Peace Operations Training Centre, which offers
courses certified by the United Nations. We thank the
Department of Peace Operations for the advice it has
provided us in the design and execution of those courses.
In conclusion, I reiterate that my country attaches
great importance to combating trafficking in small arms
and light weapons. Resolution 2616 (2021), promoted
by Mexico, recognizes that peace operations can assist
in disarmament and illegal-weapons collection.

22-5812611/20

S/PV.9123

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Likewise, when considering the renewal of the
mandates of peace operations in places where an
arms embargo has been imposed, the Council should
consider the possibility of such operations assisting
national authorities in combating the illicit transfer and
diversion of arms in violation of that embargo. This is
a timely opportunity to call for the full implementation
of that resolution.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Like others, we wish
France all the best for their presidency of the Security
Council in the month of September, and we thank
China for its professional leadership during the month
of August.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing on the status of United Nations peacekeeping
reform. Peacekeeping is the Organization’s most
powerful tool to be used in the maintenance of
international peace and security. But with that tool
comes responsibility. As members of the Council,
we have an obligation to ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping operations are adequately planned and
equipped so that mandates can be executed in the best
way possible.
The Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
(A4P) initiative reflects and frames that responsibility.
Since the launch of A4P, most Member States have
committed to that reform initiative. We welcome the
concrete actions taken to improve the implementation
of mission mandates. That includes advancing lasting
political solutions, strengthening the protection of
civilians, including children, ensuring the safety
and security of our peacekeepers and monitoring
the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
Our commitment is essential if United Nations
peacekeeping is to remain an effective tool for helping
countries torn by conflict to transition to lasting peace.
However, commitments and initiatives are nothing
without implementation. In the few years since A4P was
launched, we have learned of several challenges to its
progress, including the increasingly difficult security
situation in many host countries, which in some cases is
further complicated by the presence of foreign security
personnel. The differing views among Member States
on how missions should deal with such situations add
to the challenge.
Norway is very supportive of the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+) initiative. It is well designed
12/20

06/09/2022

for driving the reform process forward. The focus
should be directed at translating priorities into concrete
action. In that respect, Norway is disappointed that
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
was not able to conclude a consensus report this year,
as many important concrete recommendations were
agreed to.
I would like to highlight some Norwegian reform
priorities. Ensuring a coherent strategy in support
of political solutions must be at the core of all
peacekeeping. Women must be included for peace to be
sustainable. As members of the Council, we should do
our part to support peace processes by putting aside our
differences, whatever they may be.
For missions to be effective, efforts must continue to
strengthen strategic and operational integration between
civilian staff, United Nations police and military
components. All Member States must ensure that both
women and men are available for recruitment to all
peacekeeping functions at all levels. All peacekeepers
must be trained, prepared and willing to fulfil their
designated task. That is particularly important when it
comes to the protection of civilians, including children.
Peacekeepers must be provided with the equipment
needed to stay as safe as possible and to perform as
expected. The focus on strategic communication must
be maintained. That is key to creating trust among local
communities and countering the increasing challenge
of mis- and disinformation and hate speech.
Finally, I would like stress Norway’s support for
the A4P+ ambition of moving towards data-driven and
technology-enabled peacekeeping. We will continue to
contribute financially to the new Strategy for the Digital
Transformation of United Nations Peacekeeping, which
has been described as a game changer.
Let me conclude by reiterating Norway’s
commitment to the reform of United Nations
peacekeeping and to our continued work to ensure the
effective implementation of all peacekeeping mandates.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
join others in thanking our Chinese colleagues for a
successful and well-run presidency during the month of
August and in congratulating France on its assumption
of the presidency in September. We wish you all the
best, Sir, and assure you of our support. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing and
continued leadership of United Nations peacekeeping.
22-58126

06/09/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.9123

On behalf of the United Kingdom, I want to pay
tribute to those peacekeepers who lost their lives
this year. Peacekeeping relies on the dedication of
our personnel. We must do all that we can to support
them, including by providing the necessary training
and equipment, improving awareness of threats and
ensuring appropriate medical provision.

to protect United Nations personnel and comply with
status-of-forces agreements.

The United Kingdom continues to play its
part, training thousands of peacekeepers every
year. As a top contributor of extrabudgetary funds,
having donated more than $3.5 million in 2021, we
support key reforms in areas such as peacekeeping
intelligence and situational awareness and tackling
sexual exploitation and abuse. We provided expertise
to support the review of approaches to dealing with
improvised explosive devices, which Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix referred to earlier today. Since 2020,
United Kingdom peacekeepers deployed to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali have demonstrated the value of new,
proactive approaches to the protection of civilians,
reconnaissance and civilian-military coordination.
We are encouraged by the ongoing implementation
of the Integrated Peacekeeping Performance and
Accountability Framework, which should underpin
higher standards of safety and security and mandate
delivery. We continue to support evidence-based
assessments of mission performance and integrated
planning through the Comprehensive Performance
and Assessment System. We also remain committed
to advancing the participation of women through the
United Kingdom’s support for the Senior Women Talent
Pipeline and the Elsie Initiative Fund, to which we have
contributed $7.5 million to date.

Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, we wish France every success
in managing the Council’s work this month and stand
fully ready to provide every necessary support. We also
thank China for its effective management of the work of
the Council last month.

In the past year, peacekeeping operations have
faced challenges that hamper mandate delivery and
threaten safety and security. Thanks to Brazil, in July
we discussed the increasing threat posed by anti-United
Nations disinformation campaigns in contexts such as
Mali and the Central African Republic following the
deployment of the Kremlin-backed Wagner Group,
as well as in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(see S/PV.9090). We have seen numerous examples of
restrictions on freedom of movement and violations
of status-of-forces agreements in Mali, Abyei and
elsewhere. As Under-Secretary-General Lacroix said,
the United Nations should help address rising levels of
distrust through better strategic communication, but
host Governments must also uphold their responsibilities

The United Kingdom will remain a strong supporter
of the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) agenda and the
A4P+ priorities. We call on all stakeholders to play
their part in making United Nations peacekeeping the
best it can be.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this annual discussion, as well as
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing on the progress made in the
implementation of the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. I want to take this opportunity
to commend the countries that have contributed troops,
police and civilian employees working in difficult and
dangerous environments, far from their families, to
implement the Security Council’s mandates for the sake
of international peace and security. We also honour
and pay tribute to the more than 4,000 personnel who
have lost their lives in the line of duty under the United
Nations flag. In that regard, I would particularly like
to point to the critical and extraordinary contributions
of women in the field of peacekeeping and their ability
to overcome many obstacles in order to carry out their
responsibilities. We sincerely congratulate Ms. Alizeta
Kabore Kinda of Burkina Faso on receiving the 2022
United Nations Police Officer of the Year award.
Today nearly 78,000 peacekeepers from more than
125 countries are deployed in the efforts to implement
the first commitment of the Charter of the United
Nations, to saving succeeding generations from the
scourge of war. That requires peace operations to be
resilient, effective and appropriately resourced in order
to be able to fully implement their mandates. We are
all aware that the circumstances in which peacekeeping
operations operate have grown increasingly complex
and dangerous in the past few years, thanks to a lack
of political solutions, deteriorating security situations
and the evolving threats posed by various active groups
in conflicts, especially considering that many of them
have been able to access advanced weaponry.
The Action for Peacekeeping initiative itself
recognizes that the effectiveness of peacekeeping

22-5812613/20

S/PV.9123

United Nations peacekeeping operations

depends on designing political processes that produce
sustainable solutions. As a number of Council members
have said, the Council must focus on political processes
and reject the tacit acceptance of managing conflicts
rather than resolving them, which means that it is not
enough for peace operations merely to support and
facilitate political processes that remain the Council’s
priority, because gaps between the reality and
expectations of peace operations will emerge. Delays
in reaching solutions breed frustration, resentment and
a lack of trust, which can be conveniently exploited by
actors advancing their own nefarious agendas, to the
detriment of the United Nations and those it is meant to
serve. It is therefore important to promote confidence
between host communities and peacekeepers while
addressing misinformation and disinformation by
highlighting the noble goals of peace operations.
Although a recommitment to conflict resolution
would certainly help address those challenges, it is not
the only available measure. A tailored and dynamic
approach to mandate design and mission resourcing
will help to build and promote trust in missions in a
sustainable manner.
The report of the High-Level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) and before it, the
Brahimi Report (S/2000/809), suggested the idea
of prioritizing and sequencing Council mandates
as a measure to save heavily mandated peace
operations. Despite ongoing efforts in that regard, past
recommendations are still relevant today and it falls
to us Council members to start implementing them.
As we all know, designing better mandates requires
strengthened triangular cooperation between the
Security Council, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat on the one hand, and improved cooperation
between missions and host communities on the other, in
addition to enhanced cooperation between those actors
and regional organizations, especially in Africa. We
also emphasize the importance of direct and regular
engagement with host communities, which would
contribute to more responsive mission decision-making
and resource allocation. We should ensure inclusivity
in that approach, particularly by engaging women and
young people.
It is time to look at peacekeeping as a partnership
among all actors that support peace operations, a
partnership that is a realistic example of multilateralism.
It is therefore important to design mandates in a
streamlined manner that can adapt to changes. That
14/20

06/09/2022

will be an essential element in preserving the future
of peacekeeping in the light of the current global
polarization. For its part, the United Arab Emirates
remains committed to supporting peace operations and
their reform and to enhancing their effectiveness.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I join others in congratulating
China on its successful presidency during the month of
August and would like to assure you, Sir, of Kenya’s
cooperation during your presidency in September. We
wish you every success. I thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peace Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
for his briefing on this important subject. Kenya salutes
all the gallant women and men serving in the various
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We also pay
tribute to and honour the memory of those who have
paid the ultimate price while serving in peacekeeping.
The current peacekeeping environment is
increasingly unpredictable, fluid and insecure. It
exposes peacekeepers to new and complex threats.
And yet peacekeeping remains relevant today as one
of the cardinal tools available to the United Nations
in the pursuit of sustainable peace and the protection
of civilians. The evolving nature of threats to peace
support operations calls for enhanced partnership
and cooperation with host communities and States,
as well as regional security mechanisms, in order to
gain an in-depth understanding of their operational
environments, including conflict dynamics and
expectations on the ground. That is particularly the
case in Africa, where peacekeeping operations have not
been functioning optimally, due to multiple challenges.
One of the emerging and formidable challenges
is the apparently increasing tension between local
populations and peacekeeping missions. It should be
a matter for grave concern when civilian populations
mistrust and in some cases turn against peacekeepers
whom they should be looking to for protection in
the first place. Clearly, there is an urgent need for
peacekeeping missions to win back the trust and
confidence of host countries and local communities.
They can do that by listening keenly to their views with
the aim of recalibrating their operations in a way that
meets people’s expectations. Operations must be seen to
respond to actual political and security dynamics more
than to the interests of external actors. In addition, by
robustly engaging in the protection of civilians within
the context of their relevant mandates, peacekeeping
missions can earn the trust and confidence that they
so badly need from the local populations. That and
22-58126

06/09/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

other confidence-building measures will lead to
strong partnerships between peacekeeping missions
and local communities in addressing their common
safety and security concerns. As a troop-contributing
country, Kenya unreservedly supports every measure
guaranteeing the safety and security of peacekeepers,
which should be pursued without compromising the
protection of civilians. We appreciate only too well
that by its nature peacekeeping comes with a degree of
exposure to risks. And that demands that every troopcontributing country should deploy nothing less than
properly trained peacekeepers who fully understand
their operating environment and are committed to
operating in it.
Needless to say, United Nations peacekeeping
missions best fulfil their mandates when they are fully
supported financially and politically. We therefore
cannot overstate the continuing need for resourcing
them adequately, predictably and sustainably in every
aspect. Also indispensable is the imperative for strategic
partnerships with regional security mechanisms,
particularly the African Union, given that it is Africa
that hosts the largest number of peacekeeping missions.
Such partnerships enable the United Nations to tap
into the knowledge and expertise of local and regional
actors whose political and community-level ideas and
perspectives are more suitable than externally imposed
one-size-fits-all approaches.
Kenya fully supports the Secretary General’s
Action for Peacekeeping and Action for Peacekeeping
Plus initiatives and all their provisions, including the
performance of peacekeepers and their accountability
to others as well as others’ accountability to them, and
especially the importance of increasing the numbers
of women peacekeepers at all levels. In addition,
Kenya places great value on training to ensure the
continued exemplary work of peacekeepers, including
in peacebuilding and reconstruction. Under the
Triangular Partnership Project, in partnership with
other Member States, including Brazil, Germany,
Japan and Switzerland, Kenya continues to support
peacekeeping by training peacekeepers in various
areas. We have offered training and mentorship to more
than 5,000 South Sudanese civil servants including
in the areas of public administration, immigration,
policing and civil aviation. We have also supported
Burundi and Somalia in rebuilding their governance
and public service institutions. More recently, we have

S/PV.9123

offered the Democratic Republic of the Congo training
in our State institutions.
We have also strengthened our training capacity
to detect, identify and defeat improvised explosive
devices (IEDs), which have become a major threat to
the safety and security of civilians and peacekeepers.
Notably, Kenya’s Humanitarian Peace Support School
recently underwent a training recognition process
through the United Nations Integrated Training Service
and United Nations Mine Action Service as a counterIED institution, for which we received a certificate of
recognition, the first of its kind in the world. These
facilities are available for the training of humanitarian
and peacekeeping personnel, whether civilian or
uniformed, from all over the world.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank China for its successful stewardship
of the Security Council presidency last month and to
extend warm wishes to France as it begins its Council
presidency. Given the importance of peacekeeping to
international peace and security, this is a fitting meeting
with which to begin the month. I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing.
The United States is deeply committed to United
Nations peacekeeping. To ensure the success of
peacekeeping operations, it is clear that all stakeholders
must fulfil their responsibilities. In order to further the
capacity of peacekeepers to effectively implement the
mandates given to them by the Council and promote
their safety and security, the United States continues
to work both within the United Nations system and
bilaterally to promote peacekeeping leadership,
performance and accountability across missions.
Improving peacekeeping performance is an integral
part of the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
and Action for Peacekeeping Plus agendas. Security
Council resolution 2436 (2018) shows that it is a priority
for the Council as well.
One of the most important responsibilities of today’s
integrated and multidimensional peacekeeping missions
is the protection of civilians. We welcome the fact that
the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping and
Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiatives prioritize the
protection of civilians as well as performance and
accountability, conduct and discipline and women and
peace and security initiatives. Those efforts further
a mission’s ability to be as efficient and effective
as possible and to identify and secure appropriate

22-5812615/20

S/PV.9123

United Nations peacekeeping operations

resources, training, equipment and personnel to carry
out the mandates authorized by those of us around this
table. All of us can play a part in enhancing peacekeeper
safety and effective mandate implementation by
giving peacekeeping missions realistic and achievable
mandates. We can also support efforts to ensure that
missions have the necessary resources and capabilities
to fully carry out their mandated tasks in complex,
fragile environments. Robust training and equipment
are, of course, necessary, but not sufficient on their
own to improve performance and effectiveness.
It is essential that all United Nations personnel
meet United Nations performance standards while
maintaining the highest standards of conduct, and
that especially means adherence to the SecretaryGeneral’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse. Those who do not meet such standards
should be held accountable, including by the relevant
troop- and police-contributing countries. Those who
have been victimized deserve to know that those
responsible will face consequences for their actions.
Accountability, however, is a two-way street, and the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative reminds us that
we are also accountable to peacekeepers and, to that
end, we must do everything possible to improve their
safety, security and well-being. Improved performance
across the board provides safety and security to
peacekeepers everywhere and is in everyone’s interest.
We are deeply concerned about the fact that
countries are failing to take appropriate action and
thereby putting peacekeepers at risk. We call on all
stakeholders to abide by status of forces agreements.
Host nation cooperation is critical to ensuring that
peacekeepers have the full access and freedom of
movement needed to achieve their mandated tasks
safely and effectively. Where host nation cooperation
is lacking, we owe it to the peacekeepers on the ground
and to the populations they serve to engage bilaterally
and multilaterally in search of solutions that can restore
trust and confidence.
Another growing threat to peacekeeper safety
and security, as well as mission effectiveness,
is disinformation that leads to an erosion of trust
between local populations and peacekeeping missions.
It is imperative for the Security Council to support
the integration of strategic communications into
mission planning and risk management efforts,
highlight mission successes, manage the expectations
of local populations and address misinformation
16/20

06/09/2022

and disinformation in real time. We all know the
tragic consequences for peacekeepers when such
disinformation is not strongly and quickly addressed.
We hope that all Council members will join us in strongly
condemning all actors who spread misinformation
and disinformation or incite violence against United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
The United States also welcomes the importance
of women and peace and security as a crosscutting theme of Action for Peacekeeping Plus. We
already know that women increase peacekeeping
performance and effectiveness. That is why we
have long-supported increasing the number and
meaningful participation of women in United Nations
peacekeeping and why we were pleased to co-sponsor
resolution 2538 (2020), the first standalone resolution
on women in peacekeeping. Although the integration of
women in peacekeeping has come a long way, adopting
resolutions is not enough. We must work together to
ensure those resolutions are effectively implemented.
The United States remains committed to advancing
peacekeeping reform and stands ready to work with
all stakeholders to ensure these missions have the tools
and support they need to succeed.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I would like to congratulate
France on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and wish its entire team success.
I also thank China for presiding over the Council last
month. I want to thank Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix for his briefing on this important subject.
India’s peacekeeping credentials need no elaboration.
Suffice it to say that we have proudly contributed to
United Nations peacekeeping since the 1950s through
the cumulative deployment of more than 260,000
troops and personnel over six decades. That tradition
continues, as India remains one of the largest troopand police-contributing countries, currently providing
more than 5,700 Indian peacekeepers deployed in 9 of
the 12 peacekeeping missions of the United Nations. A
total of 177 Indian peacekeepers — the most from any
troop-contributing country — have made the ultimate
sacrifice while serving in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. I take this opportunity to pay homage to all
the valiant peacekeepers who have laid down their lives
in defending the highest ideals of the United Nations.
United Nations peacekeeping is becoming
increasingly challenging today in the face of growing
violence across conflict theatres, with a diminishing
22-58126

06/09/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

focus on the political process. It is therefore critical to
reassess the Council’s approach to peacekeeping and
address the security and operational challenges faced
by peace operations. With those objectives in mind,
I would like to make the following 10 points for the
consideration of the Council.
First, it is important for peacekeeping missions
to be given clear and realistic mandates, as well as
commensurate adequate resources. The Council needs
to refrain from using terminology and formulations
that may generate false hopes and expectations when
crafting mission mandates. The fact that troop- and
police-contributing countries do not have a role in
the decision-making process is a major source of that
problem. That anomaly should be rectified sooner than
later. Consulting troop-contributing countries while
reviewing mandates should become a standard norm for
the Council in its crafting of peacekeeping mandates.
Second, peacekeeping missions should be
deployed prudently, with full recognition of their
limitations. Equally important is improving the
understanding of the mandates of peace operations
among the local stakeholders with regard to what a
United Nations peacekeeping mission can and cannot
do for them. An effective mission communication
strategy and coordination with the host Government
plays a critical role in that regard and would help
in addressing misinformation and disinformation
against peacekeepers, thereby enhancing their safety
and security.
Third, we should maximize our efforts to bring
the perpetrators of crimes against peacekeepers to
justice. The Council needs to call on host nations to
ensure the implementation of the measures adopted by
the Council under resolution 2589 (2021) to address
the issue of impunity for crimes against peacekeepers.
In that regard, my delegation reiterates that the least
the United Nations system needs to do is to ensure
that the proposed memorial wall at United Nations
Headquarters in memory of the fallen peacekeepers be
installed urgently and at a visibly prominent location
on the premises. India stands ready to contribute,
including financially, to that noble endeavour.
Fourth, establishing trust and ensuring smooth
coordination between the leadership of peacekeeping
missions and the host State is essential for achieving
the desired goals of peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeeping missions should encourage national

S/PV.9123

ownership of the peacebuilding process among the
various stakeholders and adhere to the fundamental
principles of peacekeeping.
Fifth, the role of women peacekeepers cannot be
overemphasized in effective peacekeeping. India takes
pride in having deployed the first-ever all-women
peacekeeping contingent in Liberia in 2007, which
inspired a whole generation of Liberian women to take
part in the country’s security sector. We stand ready to
contribute further in that regard.
Sixth, India has been a strong advocate of introducing
new and advanced technology in peacekeeping missions
to overcome security and mandate implementation
challenges. In 2021, India supported the roll-out of
the UNITE Aware platform, aimed at enhancing the
safety and security of peacekeepers, and signed a
memorandum of understanding with the United Nations
C4ISR Academy for Peace Operations in Entebbe to
meet its training and technology needs.
Seventh, a peacekeeping operation is a collective
endeavour. Therefore, while evaluating the performance
of a mission, the performance of all mission
components, military and civilian, and the leadership
should be considered.
Eighth, the need for addressing the insecurity of
civilians caused by terrorist groups cannot be ignored.
However, the primary responsibility to protect civilians
from non-State groups across its territory lies with the
host State. We should strengthen capabilities of the host
State’s security forces by providing them with adequate
training and logistical support.
Ninth, a regional approach is imperative for
the resolution of armed conflicts as well as building
collective security against transnational threats posed
by terrorist groups. The Council should support the
role of regional and subregional organizations in
mediation, the monitoring of ceasefires, assistance
for the implementation of peace accords and postconflict rebuilding.
Last, but not least, peacekeeping missions need
to factor in an exit strategy from their very inception.
There are several examples of redundant peacekeeping
missions, which continue to be a drain on the depleting
resources of the United Nations. Given the spate of
spiralling conflict zones across the global landscape,
the retention of redundancy, at the cost of minimizing

22-5812617/20

S/PV.9123

United Nations peacekeeping operations

06/09/2022

efficiency in other critical peacekeeping operations, is
uncalled for.

the mandate. One-size-fits-all models do not respond to
everyday challenges on the ground.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
success of United Nations peacekeeping ultimately
depends not just on the weapons and equipment that
troops carry, but on the moral force that the decisions
of the Security Council command and the political
process set in motion to resolve conflict. In line with its
time-tested credentials and experience in this domain,
India stands ready to support any sincere effort in
that regard.

Thirdly, we welcome the continued focus on
strengthening
performance
and
accountability
across the board for peacekeepers and peacekeeping
operations. Peacekeepers must embody the best
ethical norms in implementing their mandate with
professionalism and integrity. We commend the efforts
of the Secretariat in developing performance standards
and evaluation systems with the use of information and
communications technology so that concrete progress
on mandate delivery can be easily tracked. We are sure
that the use of transparent systems, as foreseen in A4P+,
will help the United Nations forge a bolder response
in reviewing the efficiency of each peacekeeping
operation. That is an opportunity for increasing the
transparency, effectiveness and efficiency of the
Organization across the board.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania) (spoke in French): As
this is the first meeting this month under the French
presidency of the Security Council, I would like to wish
you, Mr. President, and your team every success and
assure you of our full support in the implementation
of a very full and ambitious programme of work. I
would also like to reiterate our gratitude to the Chinese
presidency of the Council last month.
(spoke in English)
We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s meeting which, in our view, highlights the
very important role that Blue Helmets play in fostering
sustainable political solutions. I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for his update on the implementation
of the Action for Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+) initiative. I
would like to underscore the following points.
First, Albania fully supports A4P+ and its seven
priorities and cross-cutting themes. We believe that
a comprehensive approach to emerging challenges
is vital — one that recognizes and addresses the
intersectional character of those challenges, including
sustainable development and human rights. Empowered
good offices that support consensus-based political
solutions are instrumental in that regard.
Secondly, we remain of the view that providing
peacekeepers with advanced equipment enhances
their safety and ensures that their operations are more
effective in protecting civilians — a core part of any
United Nations mission. The safety and security of
peacekeepers must remain a priority. We pay tribute to
all peacekeepers who lost their lives under the blue flag.
Furthermore, continued and tailor-made training and
capacity-building play a critical role in increasing the
performance of peacekeepers. Each peacekeeper must
be able to respond to the specific context in exercising
18/20

Fourthly, we find progress on cross-cutting issues,
such as women and peace and security, human rights
and climate change, to be encouraging. More must be
done to ensure that those issues are strongly reflected
in mandate renewals as important aspects of United
Nations action on the ground.
Fifthly and finally, we support close cooperation
between peacekeeping missions and local communities,
in order to increase their effectiveness but also to build
trust and help prevent conflicts. There is also potential
for more effective involvement of United Nations
country teams and cooperation with the host country.
We all bear witness to the increased challenges
encountered by peacekeeping missions due to
misinformation and disinformation. We would like to
underscore the significance of strategic communications
for United Nations peacekeeping operations to
build trust and support with host Governments and
local communities, counter disinformation and
misinformation, enhance the safety and security of
peacekeepers and strengthen their ability to implement
their mandate. In our view, a holistic approach that
encompasses peace and security, political engagement
and justice, human rights and development and strategic
communication is the best way to implement mandates
and advance towards sustained peace.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to begin
by thanking Ambassador Zhang Jun and his team at
the Chinese mission for the dynamic leadership in the
exercise of the presidency in the month of August. I
22-58126

06/09/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

also congratulate you, Mr. President, on taking over
the presidency this month and pledge to you the full
support of my delegation.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing. I also take note
of the highly informative report on the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+) initiative.
Peacekeeping operations are often the most visible
aspect of the work of the United Nations around the
world. It is certainly one of the ways in which the
presence of the Organization is most directly felt. It
is also where real or perceived shortcomings can have
immediate consequences. It is therefore a task of ultimate
importance for the work of the Security Council.
Brazil has contributed police and troops to several
missions, from the United Nations Emergency Force
on the Sinai peninsula to the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon. In the past 70 years, Brazil has
taken part in more than 50 of the 72 peacekeeping
operations deployed thus far. Over the years, more than
55,000 Brazilian military and police personnel have
participated in missions in Africa, the Americas, the
Middle East and Asia.
As a traditional troop-contributing country, Brazil
fully supports the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, as
well as the implementation of the priorities established
for 2021 to 2023 as part of the A4P+ initiative.
Brazil also co-chairs, along with China, Indonesia
and Rwanda, the Group of Friends on the Safety and
Security of United Nations Peacekeepers.
Efficient peacekeeping must abide by the basic
principles of United Nations peacekeeping — the
consent of the parties, impartiality and non-use of force
except in self-defence and defence of the mandate. The
resolution of conflict depends on a lasting political
solution. Therefore, peacekeeping operations must
provide support for achieving this outcome.
Efficient peacekeeping also needs clear mandates
and well-defined priorities, based on realistic
assessments of the situation on the ground. It needs to
effectively communicate with the local Government,
civil society, the local population and other stakeholders.
Bearing that in mind, during the Brazilian
presidency in July, the Council held its first meeting
specifically
on
strategic
communications
in
peacekeeping missions (see S/PV.9090). We are grateful
for the support of members to a presidential statement

S/PV.9123

on the matter (S/PRST/2022/5), which highlights
strategic communications as essential for the missions
to implement their mandates, including with respect to
civilian protection, as well as for the creation of a safe
environment for peacekeepers.
Strategic communications also help manage
expectations of the host Government and local
communities.
The
importance
of
effectively
communicating with the local population has been
highlighted by the recent developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where protests
against the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
degenerated into violence against Blue Helmets.
Peacekeeping operations cannot and should not
last indefinitely. If circumstances allow, they can be
reconfigured into a special political mission. Or the
peace operation may be withdrawn altogether and the
work of the United Nations in the area concerned can be
conducted by the United Nations country team.
Such transitions, which are a normal and desirable
development, are nonetheless not free from difficulties.
Adequate planning is necessary to avoid a recurrence
of violence and to ensure that the host country is on
a sustainable path to peace and prosperity. Brazil
therefore welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
on transitions, mandated by resolution 2594 (2021),
which provides updates on recent transition settings
and offers valuable insights on the matter. In particular,
we strongly concur on the importance of coordination,
coherence and cooperation between the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The causes of each individual conflict are complex
and unique. However, it is undeniable that there can
be no lasting peace without development, and there
can be no development without peace. Security and
development are closely interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. That should not be interpreted by the
Security Council, however, as a mandate in each and
every realm of human endeavour that may have an
impact on security. Rather, it is a call for the Council to
strengthen its cooperation and coordination with those
bodies mandated by the membership to take a lead on
those issues.
Security
sector
reform,
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, community violence
reduction and strengthening the rule of law are essential
in order to build a more stable institutional framework,

22-5812619/20

S/PV.9123

United Nations peacekeeping operations

which is a precondition for economic development.
Those issues must be integral to our considerations on
peacekeeping. Strengthening international cooperation,
investing in productive capacities and combating
poverty and hunger are as essential to addressing
conflict as security considerations.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing. I would like to
stress three points.
The Action for Peacekeeping initiative has allowed
the action of the missions, the Secretariat and the
Member States to converge around clear priorities.
The United Nations has adapted to difficult theatres of
crisis. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan have been able to implement more
robust peacekeeping. They have done so without losing
sight of their political support function.
Peace operations are now facing new difficulties:
one of them is opposition by the host State, sometimes
by local communities. The presence of mercenaries,
with the weakening of the host State and the associated
abuses that accompany it, is another particularly
dangerous one. Those challenges are amplified by
the manipulation of information. In some cases, those
hostile actions have led to the death of peacekeepers,
who are becoming priority targets. France pays tribute
to them.
We are encouraged by the adaptation efforts
undertaken by the United Nations in the context of the
Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative. In particular,
the respect of the host State for its obligations is
fundamental. Any deviation from that principle
undermines the authority of the Security Council,
endangers the safety of the Blue Helmets and hinders
the implementation of their mandate.

20/20

06/09/2022

France defends an ambitious vision of
peacekeeping, which is reflected in the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. In 2022, we increased our
voluntary contributions, allocating $3.7 million to the
Department of Peace Operations and the Department
of Operational Support. In particular, we supported
the digital transformation of peacekeeping, strategic
communications and countering the manipulation
of information, as well as countering improvised
explosive devices. We are working to strengthen
the language skills of contingents and continue to
encourage the participation of women in peacekeeping
operations. I commend those women who, because of
their language skills, are on the front lines with civilian
populations. Those efforts must continue, in particular
by strengthening the human rights components
responsible for reporting on violations committed on
the ground.
We are convinced that the future of peacekeeping
lies in strengthening partnerships. I would mention the
partnership with the African Union and the financing
of African peace operations through mandatory United
Nations contributions. We hope that clear guidelines
will be defined at the African Union Summit in February
2023 so that negotiations can resume in New York.
I would also like to mention the partnership
with the European Union. States members of the
European Union deploy more than 5,000 personnel in
peace operations. European Union operations and its
financial instruments complement the actions of the
United Nations and the African Union in many theatres
of crisis. The European Union has allocated €1.5 billion
to support conflict prevention and security efforts in
sub-Saharan Africa for the period 2021 to 2027.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

22-58126
