United Nations

S/PV.5953*

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5953rd meeting
Sunday, 10 August 2008, 11.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Grauls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Kafando
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Churkin
Ms. Qwabe
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Khalilzad
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Georgia
Letter dated 9 August 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Georgia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2008/537)
Letter dated 10 August 2008 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2008/538)

* Reissued for technical reasons.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-45578* (E)

*0845578*

S/PV.5953

The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Georgia
Letter dated 9 August 2008 from the Permanent
Representative of Georgia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2008/537)
Letter dated 10 August 2008 from the
Permanent Representative of the United States
of America to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council
(S/2008/538)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Georgia, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alasania
(Georgia) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Edmund Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is

2

meeting in response to a letter dated 9 August 2008
from the Permanent Representative of Georgia and a
letter dated 10 August 2008 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America,
contained in documents S/2008/537 and S/2008/538
respectively.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, and by Mr. Edmond
Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations. I now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.
Mr. Pascoe: I would like to begin by reading out
the statement by the Secretary-General that was
released fairly late last night; some members of the
Council may not have received it at this point. The
statement reads as follows:
“The Secretary-General is alarmed by the
escalation of hostilities in Georgia which have
resulted in large numbers of casualties and
massive destruction in South Ossetia and other
regions of Georgia. The Secretary-General is
particularly concerned about violence spreading
to areas outside the zone of the GeorgianOssetian conflict.
“The Secretary-General is profoundly
concerned over mounting tensions in the Abkhaz
zone of conflict, including the bombing of the
Upper Kodori Valley and the ongoing military
build-up along the security zone. In the context of
the announcement by the Abkhaz de facto
authorities of a military operation in the Upper
Kodori Valley which could be dangerously
destabilizing, he calls for the exercise of
maximum restraint by all concerned as well as the
guarantee of the safety and security of the
unarmed United Nations military observers.
“The Secretary-General urges all parties to
immediately end hostilities and to engage,
without delay, in negotiations to achieve a
peaceful settlement. In this regard, the SecretaryGeneral welcomes international efforts to assist
the parties in resolving the situation. The
Secretary-General believes that for the success of
this endeavour, all armed contingents which are
not authorized by respective agreements on South
Ossetia should leave the zone of conflict. The
Secretary-General urges all parties to respect the
principle of the territorial integrity of States

08-45578

S/PV.5953

enshrined in the Charter and to refrain from
actions that could undermine efforts to settle the
longstanding conflicts in Georgia. The SecretaryGeneral also calls for immediate steps to be
undertaken in order to address the humanitarian
crisis.

(IDPs) from South Ossetia have arrived in collective
centres near Tbilisi and Gori, and many others are
staying with relatives. The UNHCR expects up to
20,000 IDPs in the final analysis. The UNHCR
believes that 5,000 have crossed into North OssetiaAlania.

“The Secretary-General strongly believes
that a lasting solution can only be found by
peaceful means.”

Today, early in the morning, Russian aircraft
resumed attacks on strategic and military targets
outside the zone of conflict, including a military
airport, which includes a military aircraft repair
factory, and a tank repair factory near Tbilisi, the port
of Poti and targets near Gori. The bombing of the
military airport situated 70 kilometres from Tbilisi has
been confirmed by UNOMIG. Russian military
officials confirmed the loss of two aircraft over Gori.

Today, what I shall do is give a short briefing on
the general issues that builds on the briefing that
Assistant Secretary-General Mulet gave yesterday in
the Security Council’s consultations, and then
Mr. Mulet will brief on the Abkhazia issue. That will
be our division of labour.
As Mr. Mulet noted yesterday, the United Nations
has no first-hand information from the area of the
conflict in South Ossetia and largely relies on media
reports. Since most of the Georgian Internet sites are
blocked, the information therefore comes mostly from
Russian media and other international sources.
Over the past few days, there has been a sharp
escalation of hostilities in Georgia, which has spread to
areas beyond the Georgian-Ossetian conflict.
The exact situation in Tskhinvali and other areas
in South Ossetia remains difficult to ascertain due to a
lack of United Nations or other international presence
on the ground. In the afternoon, Georgian officials
repeated an earlier announcement that Georgian troops
have withdrawn from most of South Ossetia, including
Tskhinvali. The Georgian side denied defeat and said it
had to address a humanitarian catastrophe. According
to news reports, the withdrawal was disputed by
Russian military sources, who said that there are still
Georgian military units and that sporadic fighting
continues. Russian military sources have also said that
there have been no contacts with Georgian military
officials.
The media report ongoing clashes south of
Tskhinvali. The Georgian authorities claimed that the
Russian troops were moving towards Gori in Georgia
proper, and Georgian troops started taking defensive
position around the city. Interlocutors from the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) informed United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) that approximately
2,000 ethnic Georgian internally displaced persons

08-45578

The United Nations Resident Coordinator has
recommended international staff to evacuate. At this
moment, however, no international staff members have
as yet left Georgia.
And in the past hour the Georgian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs reported that the Russian Embassy in
Tbilisi had been given a note verbale containing the
information that that Georgian forces are participating
in a ceasefire in South Ossetia; it also states that all
Georgian forces have left the zone of conflict, that they
have created a humanitarian corridor to allow the
evacuation of civilians and that they are ready for
immediate talks with the Russian Federation.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pascoe for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Edmond Mulet,
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations.
Mr. Mulet: I will brief the Council on events
related to the mandate and area of responsibility of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG). I would like to recall some information
about the Mission itself. We have 136 military
observers; we have 18 United Nations police personnel
on the ground, and 311 civilians, in different sites. The
key mandated tasks for this Mission are to monitor and
verify the implementation by the parties of the 1994
ceasefire agreement, to contribute to the creation of
conditions conducive to return of internally displaced
persons and refugees, and to promote a political
settlement of the conflict.

3

S/PV.5953

The situation in Abkhazia remains of extreme
concern, with a military build-up continuing on the
Abkhaz side of the zone of conflict, as well as
bombings of the Upper Kodori Valley. Over the past
two days, the Abkhaz side has moved troops and heavy
weapons into the zone of conflict. Such movement was
initially prevented by the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) peacekeeping force, but their
commander, General Chaban, yesterday informed
UNOMIG that they could no longer stop the Abkhaz
from moving weapons and personnel into the zone.
UNOMIG has confirmed that the CIS peacekeepers did
not attempt to stop such deployments. Abkhaz troops
and heavy weapons are now present all along the
ceasefire line.

in and near the zone of conflict. UNOMIG observed a
Russian airborne battalion move towards the zone of
conflict this morning. UNOMIG also reports that a
number of Ilyushin-76 transport aeroplanes have
landed at Sukhumi airport, beginning yesterday
evening. It also appears that a number of Russian ships
belonging to the Black Sea fleet have moved close to
the coast of Abkhazia. Abkhaz forces and heavy
weapons have been moved to the administrative border
with Georgia across the entire zone of conflict.
Bombings have taken place in the vicinity of the
Georgian city of Zugdidi, causing panic among the
local population, many of whom are trying to seek
protection at the UNOMIG regional headquarters
located there.

Yesterday morning, the Abkhaz de facto deputy
defence minister requested that UNOMIG withdraw its
observers from the Upper Kodori Valley, as their safety
could no longer be guaranteed. UNOMIG then
withdrew all 15 observers that had been present in the
Upper Kodori Valley. Following the request for
UNOMIG to leave the Upper Kodori Valley, the
Abkhaz de facto authorities announced a decision,
taken by de facto president Bagapsh, to push the
Georgian armed forces out of the Upper Kodori Valley.
Beginning yesterday afternoon, UNOMIG has reported
ongoing aerial bombardments of Georgian villages in
the Upper Kodori Valley. The Mission also observed
the movement by the Abkhaz side of substantial
numbers of heavy weapons and military personnel
towards the Kodori Valley.

As a result of the increasing tension and the
bombings in the Mission’s area of operations,
UNOMIG has had to scale down its operations and is
now conducting only essential patrols. The Mission
continues to liaise with the sides and with the CIS
peacekeepers. For the time being, UNOMIG has not
observed major movements of troops or weapons into
the zone of conflict on the Georgian side. So far, the
only actions observed have been reinforcements for
existing positions along the ceasefire line.

Earlier today, Abkhaz de facto president Bagapsh
gave a press conference, where he announced that their
operation in the Upper Kodori Valley was proceeding
according to plan. He stated that Georgian civilians and
armed personnel had both been given an ultimatum to
leave the Upper Kodori Valley. Bagapsh also stated
that his side was coordinating their activities with the
CIS peacekeeping forces in order to restore order in the
peacekeepers’ area of responsibility. He said that
Sukhumi had requested Russia to take measures to
strengthen the Abkhaz maritime border. Negotiations
with Georgia, he said, were only possible after the
current Abkhaz operations were completed.
UNOMIG has received information from multiple
sources that most of the civilian population of the
Upper Kodori Valley has left. Throughout last night
and today, UNOMIG has obtained information on an
ongoing build-up of forces, both Abkhaz and Russian,

4

Overall, with the exception of the bombing of the
Upper Kodori Valley and of targets near Zugdidi,
including the Senaki military base, no direct
confrontations appear to have broken out as yet in our
area of operations. UNOMIG has requested that the
CIS peacekeepers provide security for its regional
headquarters in Gali and Zugdidi.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Mulet for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Georgia.
Mr. Alasania (Georgia): For the past 12 hours,
the inhuman and indiscriminate aerial bombardment of
Georgian territory has continued. The scale of the
devastating destruction and loss of innocent life has yet
to be assessed. An armed invasion by Russian ground
troops has already been transformed into a full-scale
occupation of parts of Georgian territory. The process
of exterminating the Georgian population and
annihilating Georgian statehood is in full swing: a
6,000-strong Russian occupying force with 100 tanks,
115 armoured military vehicles and 300 mortars has
entered the Tskhinvali region from the Russian

08-45578

S/PV.5953

Federation. A Russian regular military unit comprising
4,000 servicemen has been deployed in Ochamchir, a
city close to the Upper Kodori that is under the control
of the Abkhaz separatist regime. Villages in my
country, most of them located well outside either zone
of conflict, have been attacked several times. Three
bombs have been dropped on the aviation plant in
Tbilisi; as a result, it has been totally destroyed. The
airfield located in western Georgia, at Kopitnari, has
also been attacked. Russian jets have attacked Zugdidi.
In addition, Gachiani, in the Gardabani district, 20
kilometres south-west of the capital and also outside
the conflict zone, has been bombed; it is close to the
Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline.
The Russian air force continues to bomb Gori,
located 60 kilometres north-west of Tbilisi. The city of
Oni, in the western part of the country, has been
bombed several times. The port of Poti, located on the
coast of the Black Sea 360 kilometres west of
Tbilisi — which is, of course, outside the conflict
zone — has been heavily bombed. The Russian navy
has prevented a humanitarian cargo ship carrying
wheat from entering the Poti port; the ship was forced
to go back. Other Russian battleships have been
deployed in order to enforce the blockade against
Georgia.
One of the pilots detained has testified that pilots
in general have been instructed to carry out an
unlimited number of overflights and indiscriminate
bombardment, which clearly reflect elements of war
crimes. Russia is forcing Abkhaz separatists into the
conflict, compelling them to open up another warfront,
as described by the Secretariat. Attacks on Uta confirm
that they are seriously preparing for an assault on
Kodori. Russian planes have bombed the villages of
Avadhara and Bilisi, in Upper Abkhazia. There are
signs that the attacks will continue, and, as noted by
the Secretariat, the claims made by the de facto Abkhaz
authorities have been translated into reality. The
Russian air force has bombarded Chkhalta, the
administrative centre of Abkhazia. Four thousand
Russian troops from Sebastopol have landed at the port
of Ochamchira, on the Black Sea.
All of this means that Russia is continuing its
full-scale offensive. As a result of deliberate inaction
on the part of the Russian peacekeeping forces, a
military unit has passed through the conflict zone, as
has already been stated here. That fact was confirmed
today by the Secretariat. The population of the Upper

08-45578

Kodori Valley is facing an imminent threat. We
strongly urge all members of the Security Council to
advise the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) to find a way to resume its monitoring of
Upper Abkhazia, because that is the only way to save
the civilian population there.
As stated numerous times yesterday by the
Russian leadership and in diplomatic circles, it appears
that Russia has its own justification for an all-out
invasion. First, we have heard repeatedly that the
Georgian side violated agreements. From the same
point of departure, the Russian assertion is that they
are engaging in peacemaking, or so-called peace
enforcement. That is truly in the category of absurdity
and nonsense. The actions of the Russian side have no
foundation, either in existing agreements or in
international law. The question is being asked whether
Russia is trying to replace the Security Council, when
in reality it is an aggressor in this conflict.
As has been stated here, the Georgian leadership
reached out overnight to the Russian political
leadership. Unfortunately, the President of the Russian
Federation refused to directly engage with his
Georgian counterpart in dialogue. In order to visibly
demonstrate the seriousness of our ceasefire offer, the
Georgian Ministry for Foreign Affairs in Tbilisi, as
indicated here, conveyed a note verbale to the envoy of
the Russian Federation indicating that the President of
Georgia had issued a declaration to cease all military
activities in South Ossetia. All Georgian troops have
been withdrawn from the conflict zone, and the
Georgian side has opened a humanitarian corridor
south of Tskhinvali to allow the peaceful population
and the wounded peaceful population to leave the
conflict zone. During the ceasefire, Georgian forces
have been bombed many times and prevented from
making a full withdrawal.
Georgia calls upon this institution, the highest
legitimate international authority in the world, for an
immediate diplomatic and humanitarian intervention to
protect Georgia from the ongoing Russian aggression
and occupation. We should all act immediately to
prevent further loss of human life.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United States.
Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States has asked for this emergency meeting in

5

S/PV.5953

view of dramatic and dangerous developments over the
past 24 hours in and around Georgia.
First, there has been an intensification of Russian
military activity in the South Ossetian region. This
includes an influx of many thousands of troops beyond
the several hundred Russian peacekeepers present
when this crisis began. Military operations against
Georgian forces in the conflict zone have escalated
dramatically.
Secondly, the conflict has expanded. A Russianbacked military offensive has been launched in the
Abkhazia region of Georgia. This was preceded by a
demand from the Abkhaz for the peacekeeping
presence of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) to be withdrawn from the Kodori
Valley, which has since been bombed. This is a direct
challenge to the mission mandated by the Security
Council. Let there be no confusion about the
significance of this point. Some Abkhaz officials have
stated their intention to drive Georgia militarily out of
the Upper Kodori Valley. Moreover, Russia has been
attacking villages and cities elsewhere in Georgia,
including threatening the Zugdidi region and launching
air attacks against Tbilisi airport. Russian military
attacks have also destroyed critical Georgian
infrastructure, including seaports, airports and other
facilities.
Thirdly, the result of this escalation against a
sovereign State that has not posed a direct threat to
Russia has increased the number of casualties and the
humanitarian suffering of the people of Georgia,
including in South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
Fourthly, against this backdrop of heightened
violence, the Russian forces are actually impeding the
withdrawal of Georgian forces from South Ossetia.
This is an unconscionable effort to continue the
conflict and prevent the Georgians from taking
concrete steps to de-escalate the situation.
Fifthly, we continue to face the intransigent
rejection by Russia of efforts to stop the violence.
Georgia has offered a ceasefire and a restoration of the
status quo of 6 August, but Russia rejects this
reasonable position.
Finally, Russia continues to resist efforts by the
international community to mediate this conflict, which
is now clearly and unquestionably one between Russia
and Georgia.

6

In view of this deteriorating situation, we need to
ask ourselves what the Council can do to stop the
violence, to stop the aggression and to return to the
status quo of 6 August.
First, we have to draw the appropriate
conclusions about what this conflict is and what it is
not. Russia has claimed that these military operations
were intended to protect its peacekeepers and the
civilian population in South Ossetia. Yet its reaction
goes far beyond any reasonable measure required to do
so. Indeed, its escalation of the conflict has been the
immediate cause of increased loss of innocent life and
humanitarian suffering. Since Russia is impeding
Georgian forces from withdrawing, rejecting a
ceasefire and continuing to carry out military attacks
against civilian centres, its claims of a humanitarian
purpose are clearly not credible. Similarly, its
expansion of the conflict to another separatist area in
Georgia and attacks on the areas around Georgia’s
capital, Tbilisi, suggest other motives and objectives.
Secondly, we must condemn Russia’s military
assault on the sovereign State of Georgia and the
violation of that country’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, including the targeting of civilians and the
campaign of terror against the Georgian population.
Similarly, we need to condemn the destruction of
Georgian infrastructure.
Thirdly, the Council must do what it can to
ensure adherence to the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and take actions to address this threat
to international peace and security. That means respect
for Article 2, paragraph 4, which calls for all States
Members of the United Nations to refrain from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State.
Therefore, we believe that the Council needs to
take urgent action calling for an immediate ceasefire
and the withdrawal of all forces to the status quo of
6 August. This applies particularly to Russian combat
forces that have been brought in over the past week.
We cannot remain indifferent to this point. We have
begun consulting with others in the Security Council
and expect that a draft resolution calling for an
immediate ceasefire will be introduced shortly.
Fourthly, I urge the Russian Federation to
carefully consider the implications of this aggression
against the sovereign and democratic State of Georgia.
Russia’s relations with the United States and others in

08-45578

S/PV.5953

the international community will be affected by its
continued assault on Georgia and its refusal to
contribute to a peaceful solution of this crisis.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
give the floor to those Council members who wish to
make statements.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I would like to express my thanks
for the briefings given by Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe and Assistant Secretary-General Mulet.
Unfortunately, I have to point out that the content of
the briefing by Mr. Pascoe shows that the Secretariat
and its leadership have not been able to adopt an
objective position showing a thorough grasp of the
substance of this conflict, as should be expected from
the leadership of such an authoritative international
organization.
Over the past three or four days, we have held
four meetings of the Security Council, three of which
were open, because of the situation that arose due to
the aggression by Georgia against South Ossetia. I
would like to recall the fact that this series of meetings
began with a meeting held at the initiative of the
Russian Federation. We not only proposed that
meeting, but we insisted that it be an open meeting,
because we had something to say about what is taking
place. Today’s meeting, as the President has said, is
taking place on the joint initiative of Georgia and the
United States of America, which is in no way
surprising. We all know how close the relations
established between the leaders of those two States in
recent years are.
In one of our previous meetings, the Permanent
Representative of Georgia named seven of supposedly
Russian citizens who are allegedly working in various
capacities in South Ossetia and presented that as some
sort of proof that Russia was governing the whole of
South Ossetia. According to my information at least
127 advisers from the United States Department of
Defense alone are working in Georgia at the present
time. I cannot give their names. Most likely, the
Permanent Representative of Georgia knows the names
of those advisers, to say nothing of other types of
advisers.
On 7 August — precisely the day on which
Georgia subsequently launched its military attack
against South Ossetia — a large-scale joint AmericanGeorgian military exercise concluded involving some

08-45578

1,000 American troops. Tellingly, the name of this joint
exercise was “Immediate response”. So our Georgian
colleagues, trained and to a considerable degree armed
by our American colleagues, have immediately put to
use the training that they had received.
What is taking place now is far from unexpected.
As members will recall, on many occasions the Russian
Federation drew attention to the dangerous situation
that was evolving around Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
On many occasions the Russian Federation drew
attention to the fact that Georgia was building up its
weapons, including offensive weapons, at an increasing
rate. Georgia is the world record holder in the increase
of its military budget, which over recent years has
grown thirtyfold. Now we understand what the purpose
of all that was.
I shall now return to the events that we are
discussing today. Let me recall that everything began
on the night of 7 August, but I shall return to that
theme later. When I speak of the close cooperation
between the United States and Georgia, we should not
like to believe or to think that the United States gave
the green light to the adventurist military action by the
Georgian leadership. We are in close contact with the
United States, and despite what Ambassador Khalilzad
said with regard to our cooperation and our
cooperation with other partners in the international
community, that cooperation will, of course, continue,
so as to return peace to Georgia.
Allow me to return to the events that we are
currently discussing. The Georgian aggression against
South Ossetia began on the night of 7 to 8 August.
When it began, our military forces contacted the
Georgian
Defense
Ministry.
The
Georgian
representative stated that they were beginning a war
against South Ossetia, and the commander of the
Georgia peacekeeping contingent, Mr. Khurashvili,
publicly explained that Georgia was undertaking a socalled restoration of constitutional order in South
Ossetia. So, they were resolving a conflict that had
lasted longer than 15 years by military means.
Georgian military forces started firing against South
Ossetia with artillery including Grad multiple rocket
launchers. These systems were used in a barbaric way,
since, as everybody knows, they do not have accurate
targeting systems; they are used to fire at large areas.
Therefore, there was a large loss of civilian life.

7

S/PV.5953

At the same time, the military action by Georgia
began when they started to attack our peacekeepers and
to seize the camps where our peacekeepers live. They
attacked with tanks, aircraft and heavy artillery. As
members know, there have been deaths and casualties
among our peacekeepers: 12 of our peacekeepers died
on the first day.
So how can we describe this action by the
Georgian leadership? It has been said that aggression is
only when one party attacks another. But if the
aggression is carried out against your own people, is
that in any way better? What legal terms can be used to
describe what has been done by the Georgian
leadership? Can we use “ethnic cleansing”, for
example, when, over a number of days, nearly 30,000
of the 120,000 people of South Ossetia have become
refugees who have fled to Russia: more than a quarter
of the population. They went across the border from
South Ossetia to the North at great risk to their lives. Is
that ethnic cleansing or is it not? Should we describe
that as genocide or not? When out of that population of
120,000, 2,000 innocent civilians die on the first day, is
that genocide or is it not? How many people, how
many civilians must die before we describe it as
genocide?
Today, as President Saakashvili did yesterday on
television, the Permanent Representative of Georgia
spoke sorrowfully about the death of innocent civilians
in Georgia, and of course the death of any civilian is
naturally a cause of great concern and regret. But why
were they not saddened when Tskhinvali was wiped
from the face of the Earth, along with 10 villages on
the border between South Ossetia and Georgia? How
should we react to all of that? How should we and the
international community react when, despite all the
international agreements that exist — and let me recall
that our peacekeepers are in South Ossetia in
accordance with the Dagomys agreement of 1992,
which was signed by Georgia and South Ossetia —
they are attacking directly and are trying to annihilate
civilians, most of whom are Russian citizens? What did
they expect? Did they expect our peacekeepers to run
away, as some peacekeepers ran away from
Srebrenica? We could not allow that to happen. We
could not leave the civilian population in South Ossetia
in dire straits or leave our peacekeepers without
protection. So, additional troops were sent to Georgia,
and they are still engaged in the task of removing
Georgia from South Ossetia. Let me say that we are not

8

occupying territory that does not belong to South
Ossetia.
There has been talk today of the area of action
and of the appropriateness and reasonableness of our
action. Well, our action was appropriate for 16 years
according to the Dagomys agreement. We operated
perfectly well as peacekeepers when the Georgian side
was behaving properly. Now, tell me, was the Georgian
side acting properly when it committed this act of
aggression? Let us all behave properly, and then we
can start talking about what constitutes proper
behaviour.
Any military person knows — and not only
military people, I think — that when such an operation
is conducted, places are targeted not only within the
immediate zone of conflict, but sometimes also beyond
that area: those areas that support military action are
targeted. We have seen that on many occasions in many
situations.
If we look at Kosovo, nobody there limited
themselves by any definitions of what Kosovo was.
They simply started to bomb Belgrade and bridges over
the Danube that were many miles from the area of
conflict. I categorically reject the suggestion that we
are conducting military operations in an indiscriminate
way. Mr. Alasania ventured to make a reference by way
of argument to a “statement” that allegedly was made
by a Russian prisoner of war pilot when being
interrogated in Georgia, that he had allegedly been
instructed to fire indiscriminately. Such comments are
absolutely outrageous and unacceptable at an open
meeting of the Security Council.
The statement made by Ambassador Khalilzad
with regard to terror against the civilian population is
absolutely unacceptable, particularly from the lips of
the Permanent Representative of a country whose
actions we are aware of, including with regard to
civilian populations in Iraq, Afghanistan and Serbia. So
if indeed we would like to find a solution to this armed
conflict, then let us try to find serious political
solutions, and not indulge in propaganda, even if
perhaps some of their politicians would like them to
engage in propaganda activities in the Security
Council.
I would like to turn specifically to two issues.
With respect to the Kodori Valley, the simplest thing
would be to invite the Abkhaz representatives. On
many occasions, we have said that the representatives

08-45578

S/PV.5953

of Abkhazia should come here and explain their
position. Now they are making public statements, and,
of course, they could have clearly explained the
situation here. Now, in Abkhazia, how do you think the
Abkhaz feel when South Ossetia is being wiped off the
face of the Earth, in a similar conflict on Georgian
territory? Did we not draw attention to the
unacceptable situation in the southern part of the
Kodori Valley. That was in contradiction to the
Moscow agreements of 1994, and many resolutions of
the Security Council. So why are people so surprised
now?
With regard to the activities of the Black Sea
fleet, I can inform the Council that indeed ships of the
Black Sea fleet of the Russian Federation have started
to patrol the sea along the coast of Abkhazia near the
zone of the armed conflict in South Ossetia. A note has
been sent to the Georgian authorities in that regard.
The aim of that operation is to ensure that we protect
Russian citizens who are in that region, to provide
support to the Russian peacekeeping contingent if there
should be a military attack against them, and also to
provide humanitarian assistance to the civilian
population who are in the zone of conflict.
With the aim of preventing armed incidents in the
area patrolled by Russian ships, we have established a
security zone. These actions do not seek to establish a
maritime blockade of Georgia. Force will be used only
in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter, in
exercise of the right to self-defence by the Russian
Federation.
Now, what about the way forward? What
decisions should be taken? What can the international
community do? First of all, we heard the strange
statement that the Russian Federation was rejecting all
international efforts. Of course, it is not: the fact is that
President Medvedev had good talks with President
Bush yesterday or the day before; our Minister for
Foreign Affairs is in constant telephone contact with
the Secretary of State of the United States — I think
they have had five or six conversations over the past
36 hours, the most recent of them, within the past few
hours, of 45 minutes in duration. We are talking to
everyone, and we are explaining everything to
everyone. We are listening to everyone, including
representatives of the European States and the
representatives of many European institutions. So, the
international community can indeed play an
appropriate role here.

08-45578

With respect to the Permanent Representative of
Georgia’s outrage that our President had refused to
speak with the President of Georgia. Excuse me, but
what decent person would talk to him now? For years
we have been explaining to him that any attempt to
resolve the conflict by military means would be suicide
for Georgia and that we would not permit South
Ossetia and Abkhazia to be wiped off the face of the
Earth or its people chased out of the Republic of
Georgia. That has been clear from the first contact
between President Saakashvili and the Russian
President right to this very moment. He assured us —
and stated publicly to the international community —
that he had no intention whatsoever to use force against
his own people.
But this, of course, does not mean that we are
evading any contacts with our Georgian colleagues.
Such contacts are continuing at a wide variety of
levels. For example, the most recent was just a few
hours ago: a lengthy telephone conversation between
our Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Georgia. What, then, is the problem
here? Once again, we in the Security Council are
facing this issue.
For some reason, the clearest statement about a
ceasefire and peace-loving intentions was made not by
the Permanent Representative of Georgia but by the
Permanent Representative of the United States. The
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Georgia is speaking to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Russia. Our
Minister for Foreign Affairs has stated very clearly all
that I said yesterday both to my Security Council
colleagues and publicly: the Georgian military must
withdraw from South Ossetian territory, and Georgia
must state its readiness to sign an agreement on the
non-use of force in South Ossetia and Abkhazia. Then
comes the complicated process of discussing all the
other issues, including, at the appropriate time, the
attainment of a political solution. That will be made
much more difficult, of course, following Georgia’s
adventurist actions.
What do they say in response? They say, “We
have already left”. But we know that they have not left
South Ossetia: after all, they are still firing on our
soldiers. If they want to leave, I can assure the Council
that we will not prevent Georgian military forces from
withdrawing. I assure the Council that neither the
South Ossetians nor we have any use for the Georgian
military on the territory of South Ossetia. So, please do

9

S/PV.5953

not tell us that the deputy secretary of the security
council or anyone else said this, that or the other thing.
We have heard many comments from the
Georgian side, including very militaristic statements
and including a declaration of martial law and an
announcement of a general mobilization in Georgia.
Yes, we have heard all of that.
Let them state clearly: “We are ready to put an
end to the war; we are withdrawing from South
Ossetia, and we are ready to sign an agreement on the
non-use of force. This is a serious approach,
Mr. Khalilzad, not one that circumvents the Security
Council. By the way, Mr. Khalilzad said that they were
discussing this with colleagues. Perhaps he could have
discussions with Russian colleagues if he wants a
document to be adopted by the Security Council. That
would be a serious approach, rather than a
propagandistic one that might be to the liking of some
United States presidential candidate or someone else in
the United States political establishment.
Let us deal with this truly tragic situation in a
serious way. There are serious decisions that can be
taken; these can be adopted immediately — right now.
But they must first be adopted in Tbilisi. Then Russia
and, I hope, the entire international community will
help Georgia exit from the very difficult situation in
which it finds itself as a result of the adventurist
policies of its leadership.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I wish
first of all to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
and Assistant Secretary-General Mulet for their
briefings, and to reaffirm our full confidence in them
and our support for them and for all members of the
Secretariat and the Secretariat leadership.
My delegation regrets that it is obliged to note
once again that the situation in Georgia has
deteriorated. We are particularly alarmed by the
expansion of the conflict, both in intensity and in
geographical scope, including with continued air
strikes against targets outside the area of South
Ossetia, the presence of significant maritime forces
along the coast and the threat to the region of
Abkhazia.
According to the information we have received,
there have also been aerial attacks on the Kodori
Valley, a build-up of Abkhaz troops and military
equipment in the area of the line of demarcation

10

between Abkhazia and the rest of Georgia, and a threat
of major military operations by the Abkhaz side. We
are also gravely concerned at the consequences of this
deteriorating situation: an increasing number of
victims, refugees and displaced persons. In that regard,
the figures cited by Mr. Pascoe are particularly
alarming. We are also gravely concerned at the possible
implications of this deteriorating situation for the peace
and stability of the region.
Everything possible must be done to put an end to
this conflict. The priority is an immediate cessation of
hostilities. We have taken note of Georgia’s
announcement of the withdrawal of its forces from
Ossetia and of Georgia’s cessation of hostilities; that is
an important step. All parties must cease hostilities
immediately, and everything possible must be done to
achieve a lasting resolution of the situation.
I have already referred to the diplomatic efforts
undertaken by France, both in its national capacity and
as current President of the European Union. The
mediation mission undertaken by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union, with the participation of the United States, has
travelled to Georgia. The French Minister for Foreign
Affairs is to visit Moscow and Tbilisi, and the French
President has submitted a simple plan for emerging
from this crisis. It is based on three elements: an
immediate cessation of hostilities; full respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia; and
restoration of the status quo preceding the hostilities,
which would mean the withdrawal of Russian and
Georgian forces to their earlier positions.
We consider that those elements are the essential
parameters for resolving the crisis. Once we meet the
conditions for attaining those objectives, a plan for
international engagement could be put in place. It will
be necessary to fine-tune its modalities. There is no
doubt that the Security Council will be involved in that
exercise.
Before we get there, I would like to say that the
Security Council bears a significant responsibility that
it must shoulder: to support the ongoing diplomatic
efforts and to call for an immediate cessation of
hostilities, for a withdrawal of forces to their earlier
positions and for respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia.
Others have said before me, and I too would like
to emphasize, that it is important for the Security

08-45578

S/PV.5953

Council rapidly to speak out on the basis of those
elements. France plans to work actively in the coming
hours to ensure that the Security Council is indeed able
to speak out in this manner. I think the time has come
for us all to shoulder our responsibility and to end a
deteriorating process that is likely to have serious
consequences for international peace and security.

We have heard disturbing reports that there will
only be a ceasefire once the Georgians have committed
to a non-use-of-force agreement and have withdrawn
completely from South Ossetia. Meanwhile, there are
reports that other speakers have referred to of Russian
forces striking Zugdidi in Georgia proper and of
Abkhaz armed personnel movements.

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for calling this meeting today. I also
thank the Under-Secretary-General and the Assistant
Secretary-General for their briefings. The Secretariat,
the United Nations and the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) are doing a difficult
job in very difficult circumstances.

We appreciate that it is difficult to get
authoritative accounts of what is happening on the
ground, as UNOMIG has been forced to pull back and
Russian forces throughout Georgia have, through their
actions on the ground, caused international monitors to
have to leave. Our embassy is having trouble getting
access to its own premises in Tbilisi because of the
Russian actions, and we understand that there are
foreign nationals, including British nationals, who may
be trapped in parts of the conflict zone. We look to all
the combatants to protect foreign nationals and other
civilians. We will need corridors so that they can be
safely evacuated, and we hold all the combatants
responsible for the safety of our citizens.

Before beginning my remarks, I would like to
reject the allegation by the Russian ambassador that the
Secretariat, and the Under-Secretary-General in
particular, are biased. We have a convention in this
Council that we rely on the information given to us by
the Secretariat. An attack on the Secretariat is an attack
on the institutions of the United Nations. And Russia,
which is fast becoming a party to the conflict, is illplaced to make such a claim, and it does it no credit.
As others have said, we are witnessing a grave
escalation of the situation in Georgia. Further fighting
has happened over night, and there has been further
Russian bombing of Georgian territory. Russian naval
vessels have moved closer, and there are media reports
that they are tasked with preventing supplies to
Georgia; there are concerns that supplies may not get
through to other countries in the Caucasus.
Overnight, Russian bombing included an attack
on the military airfield near the civilian airport outside
Tbilisi. In a meeting on 10 August with delegations
from the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
United States, the Georgian Foreign Minister
confirmed that the Georgian side has pulled back from
most of South Ossetia and that Georgia has disengaged
from Russian forces. She also said that Russian forces
have told Georgia to negotiate a ceasefire with the
proper person. Saakashvili has tried to contact Putin,
but we understand that there has been no reply for
several hours, and we heard from Ambassador Churkin
why that is the case. I will merely make the obvious
point that if leaders are not prepared to talk to each
other, it is rather hard to see how peace efforts can
move forward.

08-45578

Ambassador Churkin says there is no military
solution, but we heard this morning from Russian
Deputy Foreign Minister Karasin that the situation
requires — and he used the present tense — a military
intervention. We also heard from Prime Minister Putin
about a “fatal blow” being delivered to the territorial
integrity of Georgia.
We are witnessing, it appears, a grave violation of
Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. Russian
forces have certainly violated respect for the
international norms of peacekeeping, and it is a gross
distortion by Russia to claim peacekeeping duties as
the reason for their actions. Those actions have gone
beyond any reasonable, proportionate response.
Instead of cold war rhetoric, we need the Russian
representative to give us answers to the following
questions: Why can Russia not support a cessation of
hostilities and a withdrawal of all armed personnel,
including their own regular and irregular forces, to
positions pertaining on 6 August? What are Russia’s
political and military intentions in respect of Georgia?
And what are Russia’s political and military intentions
in respect of Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia,
once the fighting has stopped?
What we have heard today from the Secretariat
casts doubt on Russia’s claims that their actions are

11

S/PV.5953

humanitarian or designed to uphold peace and security
in the Caucasus.

a cessation of hostilities. My Government will do
everything it can to support those moves.

I would like also to reject the equivalence the
Russian ambassador sought to establish between the
situation in Georgia and that in Kosovo in 1998 and
1999. The situations are very different, but if the
Russian actions are reminiscent of any party in that
conflict, it is certainly not NATO that their actions
remind us of.

Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I wish first of all to
reconfirm our full confidence in the impartiality and
objectivity of the Secretariat and to express our thanks
to Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and Assistant
Secretary-General Mulet for their valuable briefings.

As other speakers have said, we endorse the
strong statement of the Secretary-General last night. I
would like to echo what the French presidency of the
European Union said: we repeat our calls here in the
Chamber for an immediate and unconditional end by
all parties, irregular and regular forces, to hostilities.
We call on the Russian and Georgian sides and all the
other parties to engage with the international mediation
efforts, those led by the European Union, the OSCE
and the United States, and to withdraw to positions of
before 6 August. We call for all to respect the
principles of the United Nations Charter. We call for
Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity to be
respected. We also call for humanitarian needs to be
addressed. But that must not be used as pretext by the
Russian authorities to keep their forces on Georgian
territory or to insert further troops. We need urgently to
establish an international presence on the ground to
assist efforts at peace, monitor the ceasefire and help
protect civilians.
In respect of Abkhazia in Georgia, we express our
strong support of UNOMIG and condemn hostilities in
and around Abkhazia. These are in contravention of the
ceasefire agreement of 1994. If it is indeed the case
that Russian forces are moving on Zugdidi, then they
should leave. All parties should honour their
obligations
under
previous
Security
Council
resolutions on Abkhazia. It is extremely concerning
that there are reports of Commonwealth of Independent
States peacekeepers doing nothing to stop or inhibit
offensive movements by Abkhaz armed personnel.
That, too, vitiates the purpose of international
peacekeeping. We call on Russia to use its influence
over those in Abkhazia who are intent on broadening
the conflict.
Finally, we have heard from a couple of
delegations here this morning that they propose to
bring forward action in the Security Council to support

12

While we have clarified our position in all the
previous open meetings and consultations of the
Security Council, three or four times already, I would
like again to add our voice to support the unconditional
restoration of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia, as a first step. I would like also to call for the
immediate cessation of hostilities and the restoration of
the situation prevailing prior to 6 August. I would thus
like to call for an immediate end to all ground, air and
sea operations in the area.
From that perspective, we wish to express support
for the joint mediation efforts of the European Union
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and for the specific ideas outlined by the
French presidency of the European Union. We believe
that the extension of the hostilities to Abkhazia is a
further source of deep concern and that all parties must
immediately comply with resolution 1808 (2008) in all
its aspects.
We welcome the opening of a humanitarian area
to protect civilians from the consequences of these
events and to ease suffering in this very difficult
situation.
Finally, we believe that the gravity of the
situation requires immediate action by the Security
Council.
Mr. Skračić (Croatia): Allow me to start, like
other colleagues, by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe and Assistant Secretary-General Mulet for their
briefings.
This is the third time that we have met in this
Chamber in as many days on the situation in Georgia.
My delegation has expressed and continues to express
its grave concerns at recent developments in that
country. The situation in the conflict zone in South
Ossetia, Georgia, seems to be getting worse; reports
indicate that heavy fighting between Georgian and
Russian armed forces continues unabated. All of that
has culminated in the Georgian parliament’s
declaration of a state of war.

08-45578

S/PV.5953

Croatia is also extremely concerned by the
introduction of large numbers of Russian troops into
the conflict area of South Ossetia, Georgia, and now
into the Abkhazia region of Georgia. Let me be clear:
Croatia fully supports and respects the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Georgia and sees the
violation of its borders as totally unacceptable.
In that regard, and as we have stated on previous
occasions in this Chamber, we understand that the
Russian Federation takes seriously its obligations as a
peacekeeper in Georgia’s region of South Ossetia, and
we welcome that fact. However, we feel strongly that
its actions in the past days go far beyond the role of a
peacekeeper as foreseen in the 1992 armistice
agreement among Georgian, Russian and South
Ossetian leaders.
Moreover, Croatia is very concerned about the
escalation of the conflict and its widening to other
areas of Georgia not connected with the situation in
South Ossetia. We feel strongly that a country
purporting to act as a peacekeeper in one region of
another sovereign State should not be using its military
to target military and civilian targets in another,
completely unrelated region of the same sovereign
State, whatever the reasoning. We are extremely
concerned by the fact that efforts to de-escalate the
conflict through direct diplomatic links between
Georgia and Russia or between the authorities of the
separatist regions in Georgia are not making any real
progress.
Croatia calls once again on all sides to
immediately and unconditionally agree to a ceasefire
and to refrain from further acts of provocation. We
believe that it would be very difficult to have a return
to the situation of 6 August, before the hostilities
began, and a restoration of the status quo ante during
that time if a ceasefire cannot be agreed to. Both
Georgia and Russia need to withdraw their forces
following the establishment of a ceasefire and then to
re-engage in diplomatic and political efforts to resolve
outstanding issues.
We welcome the Georgian decision to withdraw
its forces from South Ossetia and hope that that signals
the start of talks among Georgian, South Ossetian and
Russian authorities. At the same time, we are disturbed
by reports that the retreating Georgian troops are being
fired upon. Russia needs to be a credible partner in this
process. It should not be leveraging its position to the

08-45578

detriment of any of the parties within Georgia and, in
particular, should not dictate the outcome of talks
between Georgian and South Ossetian authorities or
between Georgian and Abkhazian authorities.
We welcome the joint mission of the European
Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) that went to Georgia
yesterday and sincerely hope that through its efforts it
will be able to broker a much-needed ceasefire and
return to negotiations. We especially support the
ongoing role and activities of the OSCE in the South
Ossetian region of Georgia as an impartial mediator,
and we believe that the offer of the use of its good
offices should be taken up by all sides to the conflict.
Finally, my delegation deplores the most recent
actions taken by the de facto authorities of Georgia’s
Abkhazia region in the Upper Kodori Valley vis-à-vis
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) and the shelling of Georgian villages.
Those authorities should not be exacerbating an
already fragile situation elsewhere in the country by
pre-empting the use of force. We hope that the
authorities of the Abkhaz region of Georgia will refrain
from further hostile acts and will allow UNOMIG to
return to that region, in line with resolutions of the
Security Council and existing agreements.
One more thing: my delegation too will be ready
to support action by the Council as proposed by the
delegations of France and the United Kingdom.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank UnderSecretary-General Pascoe and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mulet for their briefings. However, I take note
of the fact that, as they said, given the prevailing
situation it is difficult to gather information
We are concerned about the continued escalation
of the hostilities in the conflict zones in the context of
the Georgian-South Ossetian conflict, which has
resulted in numerous casualties among civilians and
peacekeepers as well as in massive destruction of
public and private property. We call upon all parties
concerned to exercise the utmost restraint, to strictly
observe the agreements that they have signed and to
return to negotiations with a view to finding a mutually
acceptable solution to the conflict, on the basis of
respect for and due consideration of one another’s
legitimate interests. We strongly urge the parties
concerned to allow and facilitate humanitarian
activities to help the affected populations. Finally, we

13

S/PV.5953

continue to support international efforts to help resolve
the conflict.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by thanking Mr. Pascoe for his
statement this morning and by reaffirming my
delegation’s absolute confidence in the excellent work
that he has accomplished. I also thank Mr. Mulet and
the Permanent Representative of Georgia for their
statements.
Like other delegations, Costa Rica believes that
the Secretary-General’s statement reflects the chief
concerns of members of the Security Council regarding
this
conflict,
whose
potential
for
regional
destabilization could lead to an extremely grave
situation. The Secretary-General accurately reflects the
conviction of the overwhelming majority of Members
of the Organization that only a peaceful and political
solution, not a military one, can put an end to this
conflict. Costa Rica regrets the scale that the hostilities
have reached and deplores the fact that they have
spread beyond the conflict zone. We are convinced of
the need for moderation on all sides, including that of
the Russian Federation, whose active participation in
this conflict threatens to transform it into a crisis of
international dimensions.
We do not believe that the repetition of mutual
accusations and the use of language that is truly
aggressive in any way helps to calm spirits or open up
options aimed at restoring peace. The repeated use of
terms such as “genocide”, “ethnic cleansing” and “war
crimes” should give rise to reflection. In that regard,
we call for a more cautious approach with a use of
language that will provide more space and further
guarantees towards strengthening collective security
mechanisms.
It is time to call for moderation. In that regard,
we welcome the French Government’s initiative and
the mediation efforts undertaken by other key actors.
We call for the immediate cessation of hostilities and
the restoration of the situation prevailing before the
conflict. That is the path towards peace, and the
Security Council must follow that path in compliance
with its lofty responsibilities. We are here to strengthen
the rule of international law, the guarantees of
collective security and internationally recognized
principles, including the protection of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States, in this case of
Georgia.

14

We reiterate our call for moderation, a cessation
of hostilities and the establishment of contacts between
the parties, as that is the road towards a political
solution to the conflict, something to which we are all
committed as we shoulder the lofty responsibilities we
bear.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
First of all, my delegation would like to thank
Mr. Lynn Pascoe and Mr. Edmond Mulet for the
information they have kindly provided us on the
situation in Georgia.
This is the third time that the Security Council
has met in a very short period of time to try and find a
diplomatic solution to this grave dispute, which shows
that we are facing one of the most serious crises of
recent years.
For that reason, quite frankly, Burkina Faso is
very worried at the way events are going. We are
particularly worried and concerned by the continuing
escalation of the violence in South Ossetia, Georgia,
and by the extension of the conflict to other regions of
Georgia, particularly Abkhazia. We especially regret
the ever increasing number of victims, particularly
among the civilian population, and the continuing
worsening of the humanitarian situation. Given the
current state of the conflict and the likely
developments, there is no doubt whatsoever that the
situation has now become extremely dangerous for the
entire region, and if we are not careful, it could get
even worse. Now, under those conditions, it is essential
that other States in the region demonstrate the greatest
restraint in order to avoid the conflict taking on
broader dimensions.
We urge the international community to call upon
all the parties involved to cease hostilities immediately.
At this stage, it is essential that they commit
themselves to a ceasefire without delay, that they
renounce the use of force and respect international
humanitarian law and human rights, and that they agree
to opening a humanitarian corridor to evacuate the
wounded and refugees. We believe the best way to do
that is to engage in negotiations on the basis of the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations.
We also call upon the parties to do everything
possible not to jeopardize the presence, the mandate or
the security of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia in Abkhazia. Burkina Faso supports all

08-45578

S/PV.5953

ongoing initiatives aimed at putting an end to the
hostilities and bringing the parties to the negotiating
table.
For my delegation, given the seriousness and the
continued worsening of the situation, it is urgent and
essential that the Security Council do everything it can
to convince the parties to cease the fighting, to
renounce the use of force and to resume dialogue at all
costs. Of course, if all of this can be done through a
consensus-based resolution of Security Council, then
Burkina Faso will make its humble contribution.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Over the past few
days and on several occasions here in the Council, my
delegation has expressed its profound concern over the
escalating violence in South Ossetia, Georgia.
Today, that concern has been greatly magnified.
We do not wish to repeat what is already widely known
of the serious deterioration of conditions, as reported
by the Secretariat. We thank Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe and Assistant Secretary-General Edmond
Mulet for their briefings, which were, as usual,
important and informative.
However, we wish to underscore one fact that is
giving rise to the deepest concern, namely, the
humanitarian consequences. The lack of a collective
Security Council voice on the conflict in South Ossetia,
Georgia, must not extend to silence on such a
humanitarian toll. Indonesia is deeply moved by the
suffering being experienced by innocent civilians —
women, children and the elderly — as fighting rages
around them. We wish to impress upon all conflicting
parties that they should carry out their obligations
under international humanitarian law. That universally
recognized body of law is designed precisely to protect
civilians, in particular women and children, in times of
armed conflict. Immediate practical steps are needed to
protect those people.
We must not allow the logic of war to prevail — a
vicious cycle of violence and more violence. Instead,
we must assure the ascendancy of diplomacy and the
power of reason and argument over the use of force.
We recognize that the inherent dispute over South
Ossetia, Georgia, may not be ripe for an instant
solution. However, ultimately, dialogue is the only path
towards a comprehensive and lasting solution. In the
midst of the grave situation in Georgia, Indonesia finds
some encouragement, however tenuous, in the
diplomatic efforts being made to de-escalate tensions

08-45578

and bring the violence to an end. We strongly support
those efforts.
We wish also to emphasize the importance of
communication among Council members, especially
among the principals, in order to forge common ground
and consensus. Once again, my delegation would like
to reiterate the importance of a simple and early
collective message by the Council to all the parties,
unburdened by any other consideration except
humanitarian ones: end the violence now.
Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to express my gratitude for the briefings
that were given to us by Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe and Assistant Secretary-General Mulet.
Panama has listened very closely and with great
concern to the views expressed in this Chamber over
the past few days by the Permanent Representative of
the Republic of Georgia and by the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation and other
members of the Council.
Regarding this matter, Panama would like to state
that we are concerned by and condemn the decision
taken by the Georgian Government to seek to impose
its authority over South Ossetia through the use of
force. Panama is also concerned by and condemns the
entirely disproportionate, and therefore illegitimate,
use of force by the Russian Federation with the stated
aim of protecting its citizens and peacekeeping forces.
Panama recalls that the right of self-defence
provided for in Article 51 of the Charter has some
basic restrictions, and any abuse of these by the
Russian Federation is a violation of its fiduciary
obligations as a permanent member of the Council.
Panama issues a call for the Council to
immediately express itself in favour of a cessation of
hostilities and a return to the status quo ante. The
Council should also support the diplomatic efforts
undertaken by a number of countries and international
organizations. Panama expresses its respect for the
territorial integrity of the Republic of Georgia, and also
wishes to recognize the right to self-determination of
the people of South Ossetia. Panama is aware of the
conflict between those two principles.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): Like those who took the floor earlier, I wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and Assistant
Secretary-General Mulet for their briefings.

15

S/PV.5953

My country wishes to state its deep concern at the
escalation of violence and the very high number of
civilian casualties, displaced persons and refugees, as
well as the large-scale destruction in the capital of
South Ossetia and in other areas.
Mistaken assessments or a certain shortsightedness can unfortunately lead to disasters of this
nature. But when that occurs, the international
community, and the Security Council in particular,
must urgently shoulder their responsibilities.
We see very clearly that a serious humanitarian
disaster has beset the region, and the Council must
focus on putting an end to it. In spite of the suffering,
the dire humanitarian situation and the deteriorating
situation on the ground, the Council has shown itself to
be incapable of agreeing on common language. My
country would support any initiative whatsoever, any
efforts whatsoever, aimed at reaching consensus within
this Council. Here, we reiterate our call for an
immediate ceasefire, for a return to the status quo ante
and for respect for existing resolutions and agreements.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Belgium.
I would like first of all to thank the UnderSecretary-General, Mr. Pascoe, and the Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Mulet, for their briefings. I
would like to reiterate at the outset my country’s
confidence in the impartiality of the Secretariat of this
Organization.
Belgium expresses its very serious concern at the
disturbing evolution of events on the ground, which
have been marked by an escalation of military
operations and a territorial extension of the conflict to
areas beyond South Ossetia, in particular towards
Abkhazia. Furthermore, the events of recent days have
created a very serious humanitarian situation and have
led to considerable damage. Above all, they have taken
the lives of a large number of victims.
Belgium would like firmly to stress three
elements. First, Belgium wishes to express its
unconditional support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders. Secondly, Belgium calls for an
immediate ceasefire without any preconditions and a
return to the situation that existed on the ground prior
to 6 August. Thirdly, Belgium emphatically recalls how

16

important it is for all parties concerned to emerge from
a military approach and adopt a peaceful approach.
Only a political process can be the basis for lasting
peace in the region. We therefore support the various
diplomatic initiatives that are currently under way and
that are aimed at helping the parties to find a solution.
Finally, Belgium expresses its grave concern with
regard to the measures that led yesterday to the forced
withdrawal of military observers of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia from the Kodori Valley
and recalls its full support for that United Nations
operation.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The representative of Georgia has asked for the
floor to make a further statement, and I call on him
now.
Mr. Alasania (Georgia): First of all, let me
express our gratitude towards the majority — the neartotality — of the members of the Security Council for
their observations. I also want to express our
appreciation to the Under-Secretary-General and the
Assistant Secretary-General for their observations and
their briefings.
For a moment, I thought that Mr. Churkin did not
hear what the briefers were saying, but then I just
found everything quite logical, because all that we
were hearing here from the Russian Federation is
reminiscent of the statements and propaganda by the
Soviet Union when it invaded Afghanistan, Prague and
Budapest. The statements were not only based on false
information; they were cynical, outrageous and
inhuman.
Since when can a neighbouring country use
strategic bombers and 24-hour non-stop indiscriminate
bombing of civilian targets be called a support of a
peace operation? What are the grounds for Russia
doing something like this?
My region is familiar with Russian-style peace
enforcement. We have seen it twice in my
neighbourhood. When the Republic of Chechnya in the
north Caucasus was erased from the face of the Earth,
we turned a blind eye. We cannot do that now because
that is exactly Russia’s intention: to erase Georgian
statehood and to exterminate the Georgian people.
Unless we act together now, that is not going to be
stopped. I urgently call for the Council to take action

08-45578

S/PV.5953

today, as was proposed by the majority of Security
Council members.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked for
the floor to make a further statement, and I call on him
now.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would say that I have already responded in
my statement to the overwhelming majority of
comments and statements by colleagues; I do not think
there is any need for me to go back to them. I would,
however, like to respond to just one question that
related to the intentions of the Russian Federation. I
want to stress that our intentions are very simple: they
are rooted in history. History shows that Russia has
very close ties to the many peoples of the Caucasus —
peoples whose relations with each other, for centuries,
have, unfortunately, been very difficult and, often, not
friendly. We now see this in the relations between
Georgia and Abkhazia and between Georgia and
Ossetia.
But looking at the whole interconnected history
of this issue, I should like to make the observation that
north of South Ossetia lies North Ossetia, which is a
republic of the Russian Federation. That is something
that must be borne in mind. We have a deep sense of
responsibility vis-à-vis the peoples of the Caucasus,
and that applies — in a very positive way — to the
people of Georgia and to Georgia itself. Of course, it is
very difficult at this stage to speak of normal feelings
between Georgians and Russians, but such feelings
existed for centuries; they were very friendly feelings.
We are convinced that the time will come when those
feelings and those relationships will return.
When referring to North Ossetia, however, I must
also say that about a million Georgians live in the
Russian Federation, many of them occupying leading
roles in our country’s cultural and public life; they are,
of course, fully fledged citizens of the Russian
Federation.
Hence, the intention of the Russian Federation in
this case is to ensure that the people of South Ossetia
and Abkhazia not fear for their lives or for their
identity. We spoke today of the beginning of the
conflict and of how it has developed since 7 August.
But we must also look further back into history. We
must look back to a time when, in 1991, Georgia tried
to deny Abkhazia and South Ossetia not only their

08-45578

autonomy but also their identity, by declaring them to
be Georgian. When the Abkhaz and South Ossetians
protested against that, Georgia responded with a
military operation, which of course failed. That
certainly was a major tragedy for the peoples of
Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Georgia, and it produced
a large number of refugees. But the solution lies not in
a new operation — not in a repetition of the tragic
mistake of 1991 — as we can see now.
The solution lies in the settlement plan that was
emerging, which called for the conclusion of an
agreement on the non-use of force, the establishment of
economic contacts and the rebuilding of the social
infrastructure, followed by a move towards resolving
the political relations between Georgia and South
Ossetia.
I do not want to go into the details of this, but
Mr. Alasania was quite wrong to mention Chechnya.
Russia did not decide on Chechnya’s autonomous
status; we never declared that Chechens were Russians.
There, fortunately, everything has been sorted out. We
have a distinguished Chechen Republic within the
Russian Federation, whose citizens are citizens both of
the Russian Federation and of the Chechen Republic,
and that republic is alive and well. We truly hope that
the same situation will come about at some point with
respect to the relations among Georgians, Abkhazians
and South Ossetians.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of the United States has asked for the
floor to make a further statement, and I call on him
now.
Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I am
taking the floor to respond to what Ambassador
Churkin said in his earlier statement. We heard
Ambassador Churkin’s polemics, which did not
respond to the call we have made for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and a return to the status quo
ante. He has acknowledged his Government’s refusal to
deal with the democratically elected President of
Georgia. He has acknowledged that this situation is no
longer about South Ossetia. He has attacked the United
Nations Secretariat. He has made specious comparisons
to other conflicts.
I want to focus, however, on one point that
Ambassador Churkin made. Ambassador Churkin
referred to his Minister’s phone conversation with
Secretary of State Rice this morning. That conversation

17

S/PV.5953

raises serious questions about Russia’s objectives in
this conflict. In that conversation, Foreign Minister
Lavrov told United States Secretary of State Rice that
the democratically elected President of Georgia — and
I quote — “must go”. I quote again: “Saakashvili must
go”. This is completely unacceptable and crosses the
line.
I want to ask Ambassador Churkin: is your
Government’s objective regime change in Georgia, the
overthrow of the democratically elected Government of
Georgia?
Russia must affirm that its aim is not to change
the democratically elected Government of Georgia and
that it accepts the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Georgia.
Russia is threatening the territorial integrity of
Georgia, and this Council must act decisively to
reaffirm the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Georgia.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked for
the floor to make a further statement, and I call on him
now.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Ambassador Khalilzad’s statement was rather
polemical, and I shall not respond: I think we have had
enough polemics today. I will limit myself to a
question of substance.
First of all, it is untrue to say that I did not
respond to the appeal for a ceasefire. I explained, in
realistic terms, the formula that could lead to putting
an end to the bloodshed. I explained it very clearly: the
Georgian military should withdraw from South Ossetia
and agree to sign an agreement on the non-use of force
in South Ossetia — and, we hope, also in Abkhazia. It
should be said that Georgian representatives are always
half-hinting that they agree — so why do they not do
it? Why do they not make a proper statement on this
matter and withdraw their forces from South Ossetia.
We will not prevent that.
On Ambassador Khalilzad’s interesting reference
to a confidential diplomatic telephone call between our
Minister for Foreign Affairs and his Secretary of State,
I must say at the outset that regime change is an
American expression. We do not use such expressions.

18

But, as we know from history, sometimes there are
occasions when certain leaders are elected by their
peoples and come to power, either democratically or
semi-democratically, and become an obstacle to
enabling their own people from emerging from a given
situation. In such situations, some leaders take
courageous decisions with regard to their political
future. Sometimes, certain matters are discussed, inter
alia by diplomats. But I am encouraged by the fact that
Ambassador Khalilzad has referred to this publicly; I
suggest that this means that he finds it an interesting
idea and that he is ready to place it before the
international community for its verdict.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of the United States.
Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I am
sorry that I have to take the floor again, but I want to
restate my question to Ambassador Churkin. He did not
respond to that question. Is the goal of the Russian
Federation to change the leadership of Georgia?
The President: The representative of Georgia has
asked for the floor, and I call on him.
Mr. Alasania (Georgia): I would like to make a
brief comment. As I heard Ambassador Churkin
talking, the question asked and the answer that was
received, for me, confirm that what the Russian
Federation is seeking through this military aggression
and invasion is to change the democratically elected
Georgian Government. But I really want to seek more
clarification, as was just requested by our colleague
from the United States, from the representative of the
Russian Federation.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I believe that I gave a complete response.
Perhaps the ambassador was not listening when I gave
my response. Perhaps he did not have his earpiece on. I
believe, again, that I gave a full response to his
question.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers on my list. The Security Council has
thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

08-45578
