S/2023/406

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 June 2023
Original: English

Letter dated 2 June 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit a letter signed by the heads of the delegations to
the Dialogue Table between the Government of Colombia and the Ejérci to de
Liberación Nacional (see annex). The letter conveys the intention of the parties to
reach a ceasefire during the current round of talks in Havana, and their expectation
that the Security Council will favourably consider the possible participation of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia in monitoring and verifying the
ceasefire.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

23-10659 (E)

060623

*2310659*

070623

S/2023/406

Annex to the letter dated 2 June 2023 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
[Original: Spanish]
We are writing to you in connection with the ongoing dialogue table between
the Government of Colombia and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional, which resumed
on 21 November 2022. As you know, the dialogue table benefits from the permanent
accompaniment of the Secretary-General, through his Special Representative for
Colombia, Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and has made significant progress in the two rounds
of talks held so far, in Venezuela and in Mexico.
We are pleased to inform you that we are currently in the third round of talks,
which opened in Cuba on 2 May 2023. In this round, we are committed to preparing
and negotiating a ceasefire, on the basis of the initial principles agreed upon during
the previous round in Mexico, which envision a temporary bilateral national ceasefire,
with oversight, verification and monitoring mechanisms.
Recalling the role of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
during past experiences, and in particular during the 101-day temporary bilateral
national ceasefire of 2017, we would like to confirm that, should a ceasefire be agreed
upon, it is our joint intention that the Verification Mission be part of the oversight,
verification and monitoring mechanisms that emanate from our negotiations.
We would like to reiterate our commitment and firm intention to reach
agreement on a temporary bilateral national ceasefire at the end of the current round
of talks. Therefore, and in view of the time needed to plan for the Mission’s
participation, we trust that the Security Council will give favourable consideration to
a possible expansion of the Mission’s mandate in order to carry out activities for the
verification and monitoring of a possible ceasefire, on the understanding that such a
ceasefire will be agreed upon between the Government of Colombia and the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional as the parties to the dialogue table. In that context, we should
be grateful if you would have the present letter circulated to the members of the
Security Council.
Accept, Sir, Madam, the assurances of our highest consideration.
(Signed) Otty Patiño
Head of delegation
Government of Colombia
(Signed) Pablo Beltrán
Head of delegation
Ejército de Liberación Nacional

2/2

23-10659
