United Nations

S/PV.5344

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5344

th meeting
Friday, 13 January 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mahiga . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United Republic of Tanzania)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. Ikouebe
Ms. Løj
Mr. Duclos
Nana Effah-Apenteng
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Kitaoka
Mr. De Rivero
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Denisov
Mr. Burian
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Wolff

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan (S/2005/821)
Monthly report of the Secretary-General on Darfur (S/2005/825)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-20671 (E)

*0620671*

S/PV.5344

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Jan Pronk, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Sudan and Head of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan, and by Mr. Salim
A. Salim, Special Envoy of the African Union for the
Inter-Sudanese Peace Talks on the Conflict in Darfur.
I give the floor to Mr. Pronk.

Report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
(S/2005/821)
Monthly report of the Secretary-General on
Darfur (S/2005/825)
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jan Pronk,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Pronk to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Salim A. Salim, Special Envoy of the African Union
for the Inter-Sudanese Peace Talks on the Conflict in
Darfur.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Salim to take a seat at the Council
table.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
monthly report of the Secretary-General on Darfur,
document 5/2005/825. Members also have the report of
the Secretary-General on the Sudan, document
5/2005/821.

2

Mr. Pronk: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having given me this opportunity to
brief the Council on the current situation in the Sudan,
including in Darfur.
One year after its signing in Nairobi, on
9 January 2005, the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
between the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) stands firm. Its
implementation, although slow, remains on track and is
moving forward. The tragic death of John Garang, the
leader of the south, less than a month after he had been
sworn in as the new Vice-President of the Sudan, was a
major blow. It caused consternation and delays, but
neither party has found a reason to deviate from the
Agreement, which was his legacy. On the contrary,
parties realize that they depend on each other and that
they have to move forward.
In the space of one year two new constitutions
have been adopted — one for the Sudan as a whole and
one for southern Sudan. Two new Governments had
been formed. All of the institutions that had to be
established on the basis of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement have been established. Some have hardly
met, while others are facing political disputes.
However, the spirit of the Agreement stands tall. The
redeployment of the Sudanese army away from the
south has started. The target of 30 per cent
redeployment within one year has more or less been
accomplished. The United Nations has instructed the
forces on both sides to provide notification of all
movements seven days in advance, and so far there
have been only minor violations of those instructions.
As a matter of fact, the Joint Ceasefire
Committee — the only United Nations-led
institution — has been the most successful Agreement
institution. It started convening shortly after the
Security Council adopted resolution 1590 (2005) in
March last year mandating the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS) to monitor the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. It has met 15 times and has been
able to reach consensus on most issues regarding the

S/PV.5344

interpretation and implementation of the ceasefire
paragraphs in the Agreement. The talks between the
SPLM and the other armed groups in southern Sudan
are proceeding very well. That could pave the way for
the integration of all combatants, either into one of the
armies or into civil society.
Of course, a lot still needs to be done. The peace
process must become more inclusive, incorporating
other political parties and civil society. The security
laws must be brought into line with the constitution.
The disarmament, demobilization and consequent
reintegration of the combatants is yet to commence.
The return of displaced persons and refugees has
started, but we lack the resources to support the return.
The rehabilitation and development of agriculture in
the south, of its economy, its towns and its villages,
including water, education and health systems, has yet
to start.
The capacity of the new Government of Southern
Sudan is still limited. Disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration, return, rehabilitation and capacitybuilding all require more international financial
support. Without such support, the expectations of the
people in the south will not be met. That is a major
risk.
There is peace, indeed. Where is the peace
dividend? Conflicts emerge out of tribal disputes and
also with people returning to their villages. UNMIS,
through timely reaction in an integrated fashion, has
been able to defuse some of those conflicts with the
cooperation of the authorities. However, there will be
more conflicts. We have such concerns in Abyei, one
of the transition areas, where the Missiriya and the
Dinka on the ground have learned to live together but
where uncertainty about the future status of the region
continues to pose a threat. In the east, close to the
Eritrean border, a confrontation may arise as soon as
the SPLM withdraws to the south, as it has committed
itself to do under the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.
The Government and the eastern rebel
movements had agreed to start discussions leading to
peace talks facilitated by the United Nations in the
third quarter of last year, but thereafter the United
Nations was sidelined. The parties agreed to Libya as a
facilitator, but talks have yet to start — even though
the redeployment deadline of 9 January 2006 has
passed. This is creating a void with the potential for

new armed conflict, violating the gentlemen’s
agreement between the parties, facilitated by the
United Nations in the middle of last year, not to attack
each other.
Finally, the attacks of the Uganda-based Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) on civilians and humanitarian
workers in the south are paralysing our activities in a
considerable part of the south. The situation there
directly threatens the potential peace dividends.
The sense of optimism among the people of the
south is therefore low. They have also become
suspicious. Many are losing their belief in the north’s
sincerity regarding giving the south a chance to
develop beyond peace. The parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement have agreed that 50
per cent of oil revenues and the resulting income would
accrue to the south. However, there is no transparency.
The Khartoum authorities have been reluctant to
provide answers to all questions regarding oil. People
in the south are becoming less and less confident that
the Agreement’s essential element on the sharing of
wealth will become a reality.
The
international
community
and
its
institutions — including all countries investing in and
buying from the Sudan, along with the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) exerting its mandate to assess
economic and financial governance — have a political
and an economic interest in the full and fair
implementation of that agreement on oil. The
upcoming meeting in March of the Sudan Consortium,
to be led by the World Bank, will be a good
opportunity to discuss that, in order to settle the matter
and to avoid having possible differences of opinion
lead to a real dispute.
Matching the cynicism in the south, there are
suspicions in the north that the SPLM does not really
want to give unity a chance in the referendum to be
held six years after the conclusion of the Peace
Agreement. Making unity the attractive option is part
of the mandate that the Security Council has given to
the Mission. We are trying to do that by focusing in
particular on poverty reduction and on sustaining
peace, minority rights, human rights and constitutional
rights. In the referendum, people will be free to decide
either for unity or separation. If, six years after the
conclusion of the Peace Agreement people are less
poor, have more rights and live in peace throughout the
country in a still-united Sudan, they may consider it

3

S/PV.5344

attractive to stay together as one nation, albeit with two
systems.
The SPLM leadership would be wise to show that
they have not decided otherwise, that is, to opt for
separation whatever the developments in the next five
years. The unity option should get a real chance when
people exercise their right to vote in the referendum.
However, the Government in the north should do
everything to make that attractive. It can do so by
guaranteeing a fair share of power, resources and
income to the people of the south for expenditure and
investment in water, infrastructure, schools, jobs,
agriculture, housing and health care for all the people
who for decades were deprived of such things.
Unequal distribution of power and wealth was
also one of the causes of the war in Darfur. There is not
yet peace in Darfur. Peace is indivisible. The
continuing violence, killing, rape and human rights
violations are not only a tragedy for the people of
Darfur, they also violate the requirements set out in
resolutions of the Security Council. Moreover, they are
a threat to the sustainability of peace in the south.
The deadline set at Abuja to reach a peace
agreement on the matter of Darfur before the end of
2005 was not met. The parties have failed. The passing
of the 31 December deadline was ignored and went
unnoticed. One cannot avoid the impression that the
parties have lost all sense of urgency and do not really
care about deadlines. They talk but do not achieve
results. Chairman Salim did everything he could to get
the parties to end the talks with an agreement, but the
parties shied away.
One wonders whether negotiators really care
about the fate of the 3 million war-affected people,
more than 2 million of whom live in camps for
displaced persons and refugees. Thanks to international
assistance and the commitment of humanitarian
workers on the ground — who deserve our
admiration — malnutrition and mortality figures have
decreased considerably. However, that decrease cannot
be sustained in an environment of insecurity, which
results in less and less access for humanitarian
assistance.
All of us will have to reconsider the strategy for
achieving peace in Darfur. The parties, having missed
the 31 December deadline, will now have to commit
themselves to reaching an agreement during this, the
seventh, round of talks. At the beginning of the seventh

4

round they pledged that it would be the last and that it
would end before 31 December 2005. The least they
can do now is to stop the clock. The parties should not
adjourn for an eighth round, but should instead
conclude an agreement for the sake of the people they
claim to represent.
Parties negotiating in Darfur could learn from the
way by which the north-south Peace Agreement was
reached in Nairobi. Before everything else in Nairobi,
a sustained and lasting ceasefire was agreed upon. In
southern Sudan the fire ceased, not only on paper but
also on the ground. That made it possible to continue
negotiations for a fair distribution of power and wealth,
which is the core of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.
The same thing should also happen in Darfur.
Only when the fighting has stopped will the parties,
together with others who did not take up arms but who
have a real stake in the development of their part of the
Sudan — tribal leaders, civil society, representatives of
displaced people, intellectuals and others — be able to
reach a fair, inclusive and sustainable agreement on
governance, power, wealth, land, water and economic
development. Those who did not take up arms and have
watched the parties failing in Abuja should be given
the right to participate in a meaningful Darfur-Darfur
dialogue, which should begin soon.
Any agreement, whether in Abuja or in El Fasher,
will be sustainable only if the international community
assists in guaranteeing security. The African Union has
done an admirable job, but the African Union Mission
in Sudan (AMIS) has not been provided with adequate
resources and adequate means to prevent attacks. We
deplore the death of young African soldiers who went
to Darfur to help save the lives of innocent civilians
but who became targets themselves.
The security situation in Darfur is chaotic. The
perpetrators of the 2003 and 2004 violence have
attained their goal: many areas have been cleansed.
They have free passage in the countryside. Millions of
villagers sitting in camps are too afraid to leave. Terror
continues. At least once a month groups of 500 to
1,000 militia, on camels and on horseback, attack
villages, killing dozens of people and terrorizing
others, who flee.
Since I gave my last briefing to the Council, the
villages Aro Sharow, Tama and Abu Sorouj should be
added to Tawila, Labado, Hamada and Khor Abache —

S/PV.5344

all of which have witnessed cruel atrocities, terror,
killing and rape. It is no wonder that internally
displaced persons and refugees do not dare to return.
They do not trust anybody anymore. Only international
guarantees such as those provided by the African
Union can help.
The force which is necessary to provide such
guarantees should be big — much bigger than the
present one. It should not be on call but in place,
present everywhere where people may be attacked. It
should be strong, able to defend itself, able to deter
attacks on civilians and able to disarm militias and the
Janjaweed, which should have been disarmed by the
Government in the first place. That has not been done,
despite demands laid down in Security Council
resolutions. The force should stay long enough to
provide confidence — at least three to four years after
the reaching of a peace agreement. Its financing should
be guaranteed all along. It should have a broad
mandate — broad enough to deter non-compliance. It
should be an integral element of a unified approach
towards Darfur, with humanitarian, political, police,
legal, human rights, reconstruction and economic
development instruments. It should be supported by
sanctions — sanctions on troop movements which are
not in accordance with the agreement; sanctions on
arms deliveries; and sanctions against those who have
caused atrocities, and in particular those who have
instructed others to do so — not only foot soldiers, but
commanders and those political leaders who were
responsible for the carnage of 2003 and 2004 and who
refuse to stop the atrocities of 2005.
Many people have paid lip service to the need for
peace. Looking back at three years of killing and
cleansing in Darfur, we must admit that our peace
strategy so far has failed. All we did was pick up the
pieces and muddle through, doing too little too late.
The ultimate responsibility lies with the perpetrators,
but we should do more to stop them, to end impunity
and to offer prospects to the children of Darfur that
they can live without fear.
We hoped that there would be peace at the end of
the year. Did we do more than just hope? Hope is a
good thing, but it has its limits.
The President: I thank Mr. Pronk for his
presentation.
I now call on Mr. Salim.

Mr. Salim: I wish at the outset to express
appreciation to Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Permanent
Representative of the United Republic of Tanzania and
President of the Security Council for the month of
January, for the invitation that was extended to me to
brief the Council on the ongoing negotiations in Abuja,
Nigeria, to end the conflict in Darfur.
It is good to be back in New York and in this
Council Chamber. As I have gone down memory lane,
I cannot help reminiscing about the time, 30 years to
the month this January, when, as Permanent
Representative of my country to the United Nations, I
was privileged to preside over the deliberations of the
Security Council. The coincidence and symbolism of
being in New York when a distinguished and worthy
compatriot is presiding over the Council can only make
me hope that those fortuitous circumstances will lead
to successful deliberations by this body.
Let me preface my briefing to the Council on the
status of the Darfur peace talks by underscoring the
unparalleled commitment of the African Union (AU) to
the attainment of lasting peace in Darfur through a
negotiated settlement. Indeed, I do not recollect any
other time — be it in the history of the erstwhile
Organization of African Unity or in that of the African
Union — when a deployment of the magnitude of that
which the AU has launched in Darfur has ever taken
place under the aegis of the continental organization.
Many of us accepted the calls to join in facilitating the
process out of our honest conviction that Africans had
not only to take the lead, with the full and active
support of the international community, to put an end
to the senseless killings in Darfur, but also to address
the abuses which had become an indictment of our
collective conscience as Africans, especially after
things went dramatically wrong in Darfur.
Darfur therefore represents an exemplary and
new case of the African Union’s taking the lead as a
regional organization to tackle a complex humanitarian
emergency. The African response to the tragedy
unfolding before us in Darfur also symbolizes our
collective determination to respond effectively, as
against assuming an attitude of indifference to
problems in Africa. Such a response is totally
consistent with the letter and spirit of the Constitutive
Act of the African Union, which makes it hardly
surprising to see the overwhelming support of Africans
and the wider international community in Abuja and
Darfur itself. Let me therefore express appreciation for

5

S/PV.5344

the strong support that this Council and the
international community at large have extended to
those African initiatives.
We are now in the seventh round of the talks. I
began my current role during the fifth round in June
last year. At the end of that round, a declaration of
principles to end the conflict in Darfur was adopted.
That significant development paved the way for the
commencement of negotiations on the substantive
issues that had been identified by the mediation. It was
therefore our collective hope, after that round in July
2005, that when the sixth round was convened in
September 2005, progress would be made on the issues
of power-sharing, wealth-sharing and security
arrangements. That expectation was not realized, as the
talks could not cover much ground on account of the
deep division in the armed opposition — the Justice
and Equality Movement and the Sudan Liberation
Movement/Army (SLM/A) — where the threat of
fragmentation was more serious.
The seventh round of talks has been in continuous
session in Abuja since 28 November 2005, arising from
the stated commitment of the parties to make that
round a decisive and final one. Apart from short breaks
to celebrate Christmas and Eid El-Hajj, we intend to
ensure that the parties are continuously engaged until a
comprehensive agreement is reached on all the major
issues that separate the parties.
Prior to the convening of the seventh round,
concerted efforts were deployed to resolve procedural
issues that were impacting negatively on the progress
of the talks. Those problems included, in particular, the
division of the armed movements, especially that
within the SLM/A. Internal leadership divisions have,
of course, created their own complications. I am happy
to note that, following initiatives spearheaded by the
AU, the United States of America, Chad, Libya, Eritrea
and the United Nations, the problem has been
contained, at least for the time being. Consequently,
the SLM/A has been able to participate in the
negotiations during the current round as one
movement, with emerging joint positions, along with
the Justice and Equality Movement, on many of the
issues under the agenda of the negotiations.
We remain appreciative of all those who were
directly and indirectly involved in that and other
constructive initiatives. The net effect has been that,
even though that arrangement has led to some tension

6

for a single delegation, the task of the mediation was
greatly expedited, as negotiations began in earnest in
all three commissions, namely on power-sharing,
wealth-sharing and security arrangements. The absence
of total unity among the ranks of the movements has
resulted, in some cases, in the hardliners’ holding the
process hostage, and the results have therefore been
very mixed.
As concerns the wealth-sharing commission,
substantial progress has been made in the consideration
of its agenda. The negotiations are being conducted in
a professional and serene atmosphere. The parties are
demonstrating a high degree of cooperation, both
among themselves and with the mediation. The
discussions were facilitated by the fact that most of the
representatives are highly qualified professionals in the
relevant technical fields. So far, the commission has
considered eight out of the 10 items on its agenda, and
agreements have been reached on about 90 per cent of
the issues.
Unfortunately, the level of progress in the two
other commissions — those on power-sharing and on
security arrangements — has remained frustratingly
low, and the discussions extremely difficult.
In the power-sharing commission, the gap
between the positions of the parties remains wide and
their views extremely divergent, especially on the
following issues.
First, with respect to the status of Darfur, the
issue is whether it should become a region now, as
demanded by the movements, or whether it should
retain the status quo of three states and facilitate a
process whereby the people of Darfur can decide
whether they want a region through a referendum or
another consultation mechanism, as articulated by the
Government. While the movements and the
Government both accept the notion of a referendum,
the difference lies in the fact that the movements want
a referendum after the establishment of a region, while
the Government’s position is that a referendum should
be held to decide whether a region should be
established.
Other issues include the demand by the
movements for the post of Second Vice-President; their
demand that Darfurians control the capital city of
Khartoum, given that there is a significant population
of Darfurians in the city; and their demand to return to
the Darfur border of 1 January 1956.

S/PV.5344

The other power-sharing issues that remain
unresolved include power-sharing at the national level
during the interim period. This involves the question of
executive, legislative and judiciary appointments, as
well as representation of the movements in the civil
service, the military, police and security forces, and
transitional institutions such as the electoral
commission, the census board and the implementation
commissions established under the Naivasha
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
In the security arrangements commission, the
negotiations have been more problematic, as expected.
Security is at the heart of the problems in Darfur. Apart
from the current deterioration of the security situation
on the ground in Darfur, another set of deep-rooted
problems have combined to complicate the discussions
on security arrangements.
It has taken the parties more time, over a period
of a month, even to agree on a five-point agenda for
the negotiations. The delay was due partly to the stated
desire of the parties — mainly the movements — to put
their detailed positions on the agenda and to negotiate
those positions with the mediators. Those problems
have been compounded by the current and historical
experience of deep mistrust on the part of the
movements, arising from their perception of the
unwillingness, or inability, of the Government to
negotiate in good faith or even to implement the
agreements reached. In effect, the movements are
negotiating on the basis of their worst fears as against
their best hopes. Given such a situation, in order to win
the trust of the parties, mediation had to proceed
patiently and cautiously. Moreover, the parties are now
falling back on the decisions of the Security Council
and of the African Union Summit to either articulate or
dig in with respect to their positions, losing sight of the
fact that those decisions were intended to facilitate the
negotiations in the first place, not complicate them.
In the light of the engagements with the parties,
the mediation has been able to identify the major issues
that will have to be resolved before any realistic
security arrangements for Darfur can be agreed upon.
These include, but are not exclusively limited to, the
following.
First, the existing humanitarian ceasefire must be
enhanced. Its agreements are not being fully
implemented by the parties, thereby resulting in a
serious deterioration of the security situation on the

ground in Darfur. Here such issues as disclosure,
mapping, assembly and redeployment of forces,
creation of a buffer zone for humanitarian assistance,
safe supply routes for non-military supplies and the
enhancement of the Ceasefire and Joint Commissions
would have to be addressed.
Negotiations for a permanent cessation of
hostilities and a comprehensive ceasefire agreement
would incorporate issues such as the disarmament of
the controversial Janjaweed and other tribal militias, as
well as the status of forces of both the Government and
the movements, and the final security arrangements for
Darfur,
including,
of
course,
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.
Given the foregoing, the assessment of the
mediation could be summarized as follows.
The approach of the parties to the negotiations on
the substantive issues still leave a lot to be desired. So
far, the negotiations have been characterized by an
unacceptable level of inflexibility with respect to the
positions of the parties; suspicion; the absence of even
a minimum level of confidence; and deep distrust. In
fact, in many instances, a deliberate policy of stalling
by the movements, in the expectation of some dramatic
developments in the country and externally, could be
detected.
The movements do not appear to view the
negotiations as a strategic arena. The battlefield
remains the strategic arena, and the negotiations are a
tactical arena. This does not mean that the negotiations
are unimportant; it means that they are not yet
sufficiently important to the movements. At least, that
is the way it appears insofar as some of the movements
are concerned.
The movements might be waiting for a deal in the
power-sharing commission before negotiating in
earnest on security arrangements. That would be a
logical negotiating posture, since, in general, military
force is a means to achieve political objectives, and
security is an outcome of political arrangements.
The current estimate of the mediation is that the
Darfur process is still some weeks away from a
settlement. The parties, both the Government and the
armed movements, need to show more flexibility and
willingness to compromise if a settlement is to be
achieved. Some of the extraordinarily high
expectations and demands of the parties, especially the

7

S/PV.5344

movements, have to be addressed and reduced to more
realistic positions.
The issue and place of the Naivasha
Comprehensive Peace Agreement in the Darfur peace
process poses a unique challenge. Interestingly, the
movements have adopted an eclectic approach to the
Agreement. On the one hand, they refuse to accept its
validity as a reference for resolving the problems of the
Sudan, including the conflict in Darfur. On the other
hand, they want to pick and choose those aspects of the
Agreement that would accord them the same
arrangements as were secured by the southerners,
unmindful of the differences between the two
situations.
Given the foregoing, it may be desirable to
consider the following as the way forward and as a
means of providing fresh momentum to the Abuja
peace talks, whose pace is disturbingly, agonizingly
slow.
First, all possible efforts should be made to
ensure the effectiveness of the mechanisms established
to implement the Humanitarian Ceasefire Agreement,
notably the Ceasefire Commission and the Joint
Commission. Consideration should be given to
reorganizing and revitalizing the commissions, with
appropriate and credible sanctions for any parties that
persist in violating provisions of the Ceasefire
Agreement.
Second, the parties should be left in no doubt
that, if their approach to the Abuja talks continues to
delay progress towards a settlement, the Security
Council will hold them responsible for prolonging the
suffering of their people. In such an eventuality, the
threat and application of carefully targeted sanctions
should be credible and evident and should enjoy the
strong support of a united Security Council.
Third, the role of the neighbouring countries —
especially Chad, Libya and Eritrea — should be
recognized and commended. At the same time, there is
a strong need for greater cohesion, transparency and
coordination among the regional countries facilitating
the peace process and the mediation in order to ensure
cohesion, consistency and progress.
Fourth, other external conditions need to be
consolidated and accelerated if a peace agreement on
Darfur is to be achieved. A particularly urgent concern
is the current state of relations and the tension between

8

Chad and the Sudan. Chad’s role as a co-mediator in
the talks is in the best interest of the process, as
evidenced by that country’s initiatives and
contributions. However, there are reasons to be
concerned that an escalation of the crisis in Chad and
the crisis between Chad and the Sudan could render
any potential political settlement to the conflict in
Darfur extremely problematic, especially in the short
term.
Fifth, the international partners in the process
have continued to play a constructive and positive role
in the Abuja negotiations. That should be welcomed,
commended and strengthened. However, now more
than ever, cohesion and greater coordination between
the African Union mediation and the international
partners are most desirable as an important component
of and a sine qua non for successful negotiations. It is
most important for the international partners and the
African Union to speak with one concerted voice in
their engagements with the parties. As experience
gained from other mediation efforts clearly teaches us,
whenever the international community speaks with one
voice the chances of success are enhanced. On the
contrary, when conflicting signals are sent to the
parties, the prospects for securing an agreement are
made much more difficult. Additionally, the partners
need to enhance the level of their representation in
Abuja and, wherever possible, facilitate high-profile
visits by political leaders to encourage the parties to
reach an early agreement.
Sixth, funding for the talks remains extremely
precarious. Peace processes are, by nature, expensive
undertakings. While the contributions that some
countries have made to support the Abuja talks are
appreciated, clearly, the current level of funding for the
talks needs to be increased substantially to
accommodate the extended and final phase and relieve
the African Union of a major constraint.
Seventh, as a matter of priority, the African
Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) should be strengthened,
supported and well funded so that it can carry out its
mandate along the lines recommended by the recent
joint assessment mission, which undertook a
comprehensive review of the deployment of AMIS. In
my view it is vital that nothing be allowed to
undermine AMIS for the duration of its role in Darfur.
That is in the interest of the efforts to end that sad
conflict and in the long-term interest of future African
Union peace support operations. I realize that a major

S/PV.5344

constraint with respect to financing is the feeling —
quite justifiable on the part of those supporting the
operation financially — that there is need for greater
burden-sharing. But I believe it is not impossible to
find a way to address that concern. That is all the more
relevant given the African Union’s position of
supporting in principle a transition from AMIS to a
United Nations operation within the framework of a
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations to promote peace, security and stability in
Africa.
The African Union and those of us involved in
the mediation are actively seeking a negotiated
settlement to the Darfur conflict that is just,
democratic, sustainable and consistent with the letter
and the spirit of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
in particular its most important provisions, which were
negotiated to help stabilize the processes of
peacebuilding, security, unity, cohesion and good

governance throughout the Sudanese nation. Without
doubt, those same expectations have also motivated the
Council’s involvement and decisions, of which we are
highly appreciative.
The African Union mediation is confident that a
just and lasting settlement of the conflict in Darfur is
achievable, but such optimism needs to be guarded,
given the action of the parties and some developments
in, around and outside Darfur. For that reason, I wish
to strongly appeal to the Council to remain actively
engaged and to send very strong signals of its support
for the Abuja peace process so that a comprehensive
agreement can be concluded in the shortest possible
time.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to brief
consultations before we convene a private meeting.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

9
