S/PV.6906

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6906th meeting

Wednesday, 23 January 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Masood Khan/Mr. Tarar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Pakistan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-21446 (E)

*1321446*

S/PV.6906

Mr. Serry: Allow me to start by congratulating
the new members of the Security Council at the start
of their term. Let me also welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Observer State of Palestine,
Mr. Riad Malki, and the Permanent Representative of
Israel, Mr. Ron Prosor.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Bangladesh, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Cuba, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Egypt, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Namibia, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate
in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite His Excellency
Mr. Riad Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations,
to participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator of the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority, to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite Archbishop
Francis Assisi Chullikatt, Apostolic Nuncio, Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas,
Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Serry.

2

begin

its

We meet today against the backdrop of ongoing
events in the Middle East that could affect the peace
process itself. Israel held elections yesterday, and
Jordan is holding elections today. The United States
Administration also commenced a second term this
week.
While the process of forming a Government in
Israel could take weeks, we look forward to engaging
the next Israeli Government in the common pursuit
of peace. This is not a time to be idle. Instead, we are
entering a critical period in which concerted action
will be vital if we are to salvage the two-State solution.
The Secretary-General has repeatedly highlighted the
fact that 2013 will be a decisive year for the two-State
solution and that the parties must now show the political
will to cooperate with new renewed effort to achieve it.
I recently visited Egypt and Jordan — two key Arab
stakeholders with peace treaties with Israel — and my
interlocutors reiterated their direct interest in assisting
the parties to realize the two-State solution at long last,
and their concern over the dire regional consequences
if not movement is achieved. Regional and international
partners are increasingly alarmed that the only way to
resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict in accordance with
resolutions and international law is slipping away. They
have also questioned the effectiveness of international
efforts to bring about decisive results.
The Quartet envoys met again on 10 January in
Amman, Jordan. Everyone recognized the urgent need
for action, but I must express my genuine concern that
a clear and realistic path ahead is still lacking. The
United Nations will remain an integral part of efforts
to urgently address the dangerous political vacuum,
and we are willing to work with any initiative that will
achieve our common goal, including in the context of
the Quartet. We have also taken note of the European
Union (EU) Council decision of 10 December that
reaffirmed the EU’s vision for a way forward. We
look forward in particular to renewed United States
engagement.
No international effort alone is sufficient for
progress absent the requisite will on the part of the parties

13-21446

S/PV.6906

themselves. If they want to provide themselves and
others with the opportunity to get on track in the period
ahead, then now is not the time for actions that further
undermine mutual trust. As previously reported, after
the General Assembly accorded Palestine non-member
observer State status in the United Nations, we witnessed
developments such as a dramatic increase in Israeli
settlements announcements, including in the critical
E-1 area, and the withholding and redirection by Israel
of tax revenues it collects on behalf of the Palestinian
Authority, which have been widely deplored, including
by the United Nations. President Abbas has warned that
building in E-l is a red line and that if plans proceed he
would consider raising his opposition in international
forums, including the International Criminal Court. I
urge both sides to abstain from actions that will make
efforts to resume meaningful negotiations even harder
in the critical period ahead, and I call on Israel to restore
the timely, predictable and transparent transfers of tax
and customs revenues without further delay.
The withholding of clearance revenues has already
seriously weakened the capacity of the Palestinian
Government to meet its obligations. Key among these is
the payment of salaries to civil servants, who have only
received partial salaries since November and launched
strikes in protest since mid-December. The Government
also ended the refugee exemption from paying for
electricity, which resulted in protests and clashes with
Palestinian security on 1 January in Nablus.
In 2012, the recurrent budget deficit of
the Palestinian Authority exceeded $1 billion.
International contributions amounted to $600 million
in support of the recurrent budget last year, but
further timely disbursement of aid is essential to
sustain institution-building and prevent the disruption
of core operations. I welcome reports of the recent
contribution from Saudi Arabia and statements of
support by some Gulf States during yesterday’s Riyadh
summit, but members of the League of Arab States
have yet to provide financial assistance pursuant to
their communiqué of 9 December, and I urge them
to do so urgently and to heed to the appeals of Prime
Minister Fayyad. At the same time, we should be under
no illusion — the viability of the Palestinian Authority
will be increasingly at stake if its standing is based on
political quicksand. Ultimately, there is no future for
the Palestinian Authority without a two-State solution.
All this is taking place amid worrying events and
trends on the ground, including continued settlement

construction and increased violence. In East Jerusalem,
on 19 December plans to approve 2,600 units in the
settlement of Givat Hamatos were advanced, and
1,242 units were approved on 25 December in the
settlement of Gilo. On 19 December, Israeli authorities
advanced a plan to build 523 units in the Gush Etzion
settlement south-west of Bethlehem. On 16 January,
there were further tenders issued for construction in
Efrat and Kiryat Arba, near Hebron. The reporting
period also witnessed continued activity in Palestinian
neighbourhoods of East Jerusalem, including Beit Safafa
and related to the construction of a military academy on
the Mount of Olives. Israeli security forces demolished
105 structures in the occupied West Bank during the
reporting period, resulting in the displacement of 170
Palestinians. Settlement construction in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, is contrary to international
law and cannot prejudge the outcome of final status
negotiations. Clashes between settlers and Palestinians
in the West Bank resulted in 14 Palestinian casualties,
including one girl who was shot dead this morning near
Hebron.
The reporting period has been characterized by
increased Israeli operations — a total of 379 — and
arrests in the West Bank, both of which are up nearly
90 per cent compared to the last reporting period, as well
as increased clashes and renewed protests over the fate
of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails. There are also
continuing signs of tensions in security coordination,
including the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) arrest of one
Palestinian security officer at a checkpoint near Nablus.
As a result of the operations, two Palestinians, including
a teenager, were killed, 158 injured and 379 arrested.
Four Israeli soldiers were also injured. Increased use of
live fire by Israeli security forces has been reported in
the West Bank and is of concern.
On 1 and 3 January, undercover Israeli operations,
in one instance to arrest a member of Islamic Jihad,
resulted in clashes with civilians injured by live
ammunition. On 25 December, Israeli security forces
arrested 10 members of the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) in Ramallah and other
West Bank villages. Two of them allegedly confessed to
planning to kidnap Israelis in order to force the release
of PFLP leader Ahmad Saadat.
Palestinian attacks on Israeli security forces in
the West Bank included throwing stones and Molotov
cocktails, in one instance against an IDF post at
Rachel’s Tomb in Bethlehem on 27 December. A repeat

13-214463

S/PV.6906

attempt was thwarted by Palestinian security forces on
1 January. On 5 January, Palestinian security forces
arrested members of a Palestinian group in Hebron
that had announced a third intifada and threatened to
abduct IDF soldiers. Palestinian security forces also
intervened in several refugee camps to prevent some
members of Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades from rearming
and reverting to armed resistance. Demonstrations
in Ramallah over the alleged Israeli mistreatment of
Palestinian prisoners led to clashes with Palestinian
security forces on 20 January. We continue to be
concerned about the fate of Palestinian prisoners on
administrative detention in Israeli jails, especially
those on prolonged hunger strike.
All of these events paints a grim picture and, absent
a new perspective on the political track, I fear that such
negative trends will only worsen.
Palestinian demonstrations continued to be
organized against the barrier, which deviates from the
Green Line in contravention to the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice. On 11 January,
over 100 Palestinians and international activists moved
to the E-l area of the West Bank and established an
encampment named Bab al-Shams — or “Gateway to
the Sun” — consisting of over 20 large tents, aimed
at countering Israeli plans to expand settlement
construction there. Demonstrators were evicted in the
early hours of 13 January. On 18 January, the Secretariat
received a letter from Ambassador Prosor in which he
considered the incident as “a provocation staged against
Israel”. The Secretary-General has expressed his grave
disappointment about the announced plans for Israeli
settlement construction in the so-called E-1 area and
repeated his call that such plans must be rescinded.
The Secretary-General also stresses the importance
for protests to continue to remain peaceful and for the
right to peaceful protest to be fully respected. Another
encampment named Bab Al-Karamah — Gateway to
Dignity — was set up on 18 January in the Palestinian
village of Beit Iksa, between Jerusalem and Ramallah,
to impede the construction of the barrier on village
land. The encampment was subsequently dismantled by
Israeli security forces on 21 January.
In Gaza the calm brokered by Egypt in November
has largely held, but remains tenuous. It is significant
to report that no rockets or mortar shells landed in
Israel during the reporting period, and only one rocket
has landed in Israel since the end of November. Israeli
forces conducted three incursions into Gaza during this

4

period and fired six tank shells. One Palestinian civilian
was killed and 10 Palestinian civilians were injured by
Israeli fire, mostly while attempting to approach the
border fence. I traveled to Cairo last week to continue
our close work with Egyptian authorities to encourage
further progress on all aspects of the understanding for
the ceasefire.
As part of its commitments in the understanding
reached, Israel began to allow gravel for commercial
use through the Kerem Shalom crossing. In the
past month 551 trucks, carrying more than 38,000
tons of gravel, entered Gaza. Israel has also allowed
Palestinian farmers access up to 100 metres from the
fence with Israel, and Palestinian fishermen have
been able to access up to six nautical miles from
shore. That is important progress. However, a further
extension of the fishing limit to at least nine nautical
miles is necessary for a significant increase in the
catch of the fishermen. We also continue to call for
the unrestricted entry of all construction materials.
Assessments of damage to residential properties and
civilian infrastructure resulting from the escalation in
November 2012 highlight the urgent need to remove
the ongoing restrictions. Further measures to lift the
closure should include transfers of goods between Gaza
and the West Bank, exports to Israel and beyond and,
as needed, increased capacity at Kerem Shalom and
the reopening of the Sufa crossing. To further advance
that important agenda and address Israel’s legitimate
security interests, it is essential that efforts continue in
parallel to enforce the calm and prevent the smuggling
of weapons into Gaza.
In a new development, since 29 December, Egypt
has allowed the entry of an average of 30 trucks per
day carrying construction materials through the Rafah
crossing for a range of Qatar-funded projects.
Implementing resolution 1860 (2009) in full
also means overcoming the Palestinian divide. In
that regard, President Abbas met with Hamas leader
Khaled Meshaal on 10 January in Cairo to discuss the
implementation of previous Palestinian reconciliation
deals. On 17 January, members of Fatah and Hamas
held in Cairo the first of what is intended to become
a series of regular meetings. The Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) temporary body that includes all
PLO factions as well as the leaders of groups outside of the
PLO is expected to meet in early February. In addition,
both sides have made positive gestures, as Fatah was
permitted to hold an anniversary rally in Gaza earlier

13-21446

S/PV.6906

this month, following the Hamas anniversary rallies in
the West Bank during the previous reporting period.
Reconciliation and negotiations remain essential for
achieving the two-State solution. The peace process and
reconciliation is not an either-or proposition and must
be made compatible by advancing both in a mutually
reinforcing way. But for real progress to be made, the
time has come for Hamas to make clear where it stands
on the central issues at stake.
Turning now to Syria, I will be succinct, as the Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
will brief the Council at the end of this month.
The conflict, now in its twenty-second month,
continues unabated. Nearly 60,000 persons were
killed between 15 March 2011 and 30 November 2012.
Thousands remain in detention. Many have suffered
torture and ill-treatment, including sexual violence.
Indiscriminate shelling, armed clashes and the general
state of insecurity have driven more than 670,000
Syrians outside the country. There are now more than
18,000 Palestinian refugees displaced from Syria being
hosted in Lebanon, assisted by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, up from 10,000 in early December, as well as
3,200 in Jordan. More than 67,000 Iraqi refugees from
Syria have had to return to Iraq. Since mid-December
Yarmouk Camp, a Palestinian refugee camp in
Damascus, has been the site of fighting between Syrian
rebels and gunmen loyal to the Government, leading to
massive displacement of the camp’s population.
On 21 January, the Secretary-General and the Joint
Special Representative expressed deep disappointment
and anguish at the appalling levels of killing and
destruction carried out by both the Government and
the opposition, fuelled by outside Powers providing
weaponry to both sides. They also expressed their
consternation about the lack of a unified international
posture that could lead to a transition as agreed at
Geneva last June and put an end to the desperate
suffering of the Syrian people.
The United Nations is doing its utmost to assist all
in need inside and outside Syria. The Secretary-General
will chair a high-level donor conference in Kuwait on
30 January to support our humanitarian assistance
programmes. We are hopeful that Member States will
contribute generously to bridge the funding gap.

The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) remains volatile. Armed clashes between
the Syrian army and armed opposition take place
sporadically inside the area of separation, posing risks
to the ceasefire between Israel and Syria as well as
to the safety and security of civilians and UNDOF
personnel. That situation clearly jeopardizes regional
stability and the ceasefire between the two countries.
We have repeatedly called on both sides to respect the
Disengagement Agreement.
The situation in Lebanon has been relatively quiet
since last month’s briefing, in spite of persisting tensions
linked with the ongoing conflict in Syria. In Tripoli the
Lebanese Armed Forces continued to maintain calm
between the Sunni and Alawite communities of Bab
Al-Tabbaneh and Jabal Mohsen. There was, however,
an attack on the convoy of the Minister of Youth on
18 January, in which 11 were injured. One 11-year-old
Lebanese boy was killed by gunfire coming from Syria
on 25 December, but generally the bad weather and heavy
snow in the border region contributed to a decrease in
violence and in smuggling activity. The nine Lebanese
pilgrims who have remained in the custody of Syrian
opposition forces since May 2012 have still not been
released. The bodies of some 10 of the fighters killed in
the Tel Kalakh incident on 30 November were returned
for burial in Lebanon, and at least one Lebanese fighter
is believed to be held by Syrian Government forces.
As a result of the continued political stalemate
between the two main blocs, the session of the national
dialogue scheduled for 7 January was postponed
indefinitely by President Sleiman, who continues
to hold consultations with all parties. Members of
a parliamentary subcommittee started a series of
meetings on 8 January to discuss the different proposed
drafts of a new electoral law. It is a positive development
that the parties are working together constructively in
that manner. We hope that broad consensus will emerge
over a new law. It is important that elections be held on
time, in accordance with the Constitution and for the
stability of the country.
The situation in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon remained generally
quiet and stable. Israeli violations of the Lebanese
airspace continued on a frequent basis.
In conclusion, given internal political calendars,
we have weeks to prepare for a new initiative. Israeli
and Palestinian leaders have stated, like us, that they

13-214465

S/PV.6906

are convinced that the two-State solution is the only
path towards a durable peace. But they should realize
that, absent serious engagement, the peace process will
remain on life-support and stability on the ground will
be put at risk even further. The consequences of inaction
could be dire for everyone. The parties must therefore
not only remain open to new initiatives to overcome
the current impasse, they must also demonstrate
their seriousness. If Israel is serious about the twoState solution, it must recognize the negative impact
of continued settlement construction. Palestinian
seriousness could be demonstrated by pausing further
action in the international arena while talks begin.
Both parties must reaffirm their commitment to
a negotiated two-State solution consistent with the
Charter of the United Nations, one that would fulfil
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), resolve the
core issues — territory, security, Jerusalem, refugees,
settlements and water — and constitute the end of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and all claims related
to it. As a result of negotiations, two States for two
peoples, Israel and Palestine, will live side-by-side
in peace, security and mutual recognition of each
other’s legitimate rights, including the right to selfdetermination. Each State will ensure equal civil rights
for all its citizens and will be committed to respect for
human rights and human dignity.
That, in our view, is in essence the vision of a twoState solution endorsed by the international community
and accepted in the Arab Peace Initiative as the basis for
ending the Arab-Israeli conflict and achieving regional
peace. None of the steps to realize that vision are easy,
but we cannot afford another year without courageous
action undertaken for the purpose of achieving a twoState solution.
The President: I thank Mr. Serry for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Riad
Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Observer
State of Palestine.
Mr. Malki (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the State of Palestine, I congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your friendly country, Pakistan, on
your effective presidency and wise stewardship of the
Security Council this month. We also express our deep
appreciation to the fraternal Kingdom of Morocco for
its skilled leadership of the Council in December.
I also thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
6

Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing today and for his tireless efforts on the ground.
I also wish to extend Palestine’s warm
congratulations to the new Security Council members,
the friendly countries of Argentina, Australia,
Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and Rwanda.
We are confident of their commitment to upholding
the Charter, international law and the Council’s
resolutions, without exception, and we wish them every
success in fulfilling their great responsibilities. I also
convey Palestine’s deep appreciation to the members
whose terms ended in December 2012 — the friendly
countries of Colombia, Germany, India, Portugal and
South Africa. We are grateful for the tireless efforts
they exerted during their tenure in support of the rights
of the Palestinian people and in aiming to reach a just,
lasting and peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.
I am honoured to address the Security Council
today for the first time on behalf of the State of Palestine
following the historic decision by the General Assembly
to accord Palestine non-member observer State status in
the United Nations with its adoption of resolution 67/19,
on 29 November 2012. The overwhelming support of
Member States for that initiative is a reflection of the
strong support for the inalienable rights and legitimate
national aspirations of the Palestinian people, including
the right to self-determination and to a life of freedom
and dignity in their independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. That support clearly
represents long-overdue recognition by the Assembly
of Palestine’s statehood. A new era has begun, and we
hope it will mark a turning point for making peace and
security a reality between the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples, and in the region as a whole.
We are grateful for the principled support
demonstrated in that courageous decision taken by
Member States at this juncture in history. It is high
time that the State of Palestine take its rightful place
among the community of nations. Our hope is renewed
by that important step, which should pave the way for
the acceptance of our September 2011 application for
full membership in the United Nations. Moreover, we
are encouraged by the signs that that momentous step
will reinvigorate the international community’s longstanding, yet unfulfilled, commitment to achieving
a just and peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.

13-21446

S/PV.6906

In that regard, it is clear that support for that
resolution constituted an unequivocal reaffirmation of
the international community’s commitment to the twoState solution, based on the pre-1967 borders and in
accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
from resolution 181 (II), of 1947, to resolution 242
(1967) and all other relevant resolutions thereafter, as
well as the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the road map. The urgency of that reaffirmation
cannot be understated in the light of the two-State
solution’s severe denigration over the years and the
collective consensus that the window of opportunity for
justly and physically achieving that solution is rapidly
closing. No one in the Chamber today can deny that.
The Assembly’s adoption of resolution 67/19
must therefore be viewed as a legitimate, multilateral,
peaceful and political effort to save the two-State
solution, to reaffirm its basis and to create the proper
environment for convening substantive negotiations
between the parties — within a credible peace process
based on the well-known terms of reference and
according to a limited time frame — aimed at achieving
an end to Israel’s occupation of Palestinian territory
since 1967 and at a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace settlement that resolves all outstanding core
issues, including Palestinian refugees, Jerusalem,
settlements, borders, security, water and prisoners.

contempt, deliberately breaching international law and
disregarding the will of the international community.
That has been most starkly reflected in its
intensification of its illegal settlement campaign
and its heavy-handed, punitive measures against the
Palestinian people and their leadership in the aftermath
of the adoption of resolution 67/19. Those measures
have included the withholding of Palestinian tax
revenues, which has exacerbated the financial crisis
and compromised the functioning of our national
institutions and system of democratic governance.
That has been accompanied by Israel’s contempt for
the international community, particularly the United
Nations, as epitomized, inter alia, in the statement by
the Israeli Ambassador in the General Assembly on
29 November (see A/67/PV.44) and the remarks by the
Israeli Prime Minister on 21 December in an interview
in which he defiantly insisted on Israel pursuing its
illegal colonization programme and stated, “What the
United Nations says doesn’t interest me”.

Despite that strong message by the international
community, the period following the General
Assembly’s decision has regrettably witnessed Israeli
actions that represent the complete antithesis of the
two-State solution. The Palestinian leadership, under
the stewardship of President Mahmoud Abbas and the
Palestine Liberation Organization — the sole legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people — has
reaffirmed its commitment to the path of peace and
its immediate readiness to engage in negotiations on
the basis of clear parameters. Israel, however, has
persisted along the path of occupation, conflict and
fear-mongering.

On the ground that attitude has manifested itself in
the systematic escalation of Israel’s illegal settlement
campaign, particularly in and around occupied East
Jerusalem. We recall that in December 2012, Israel
blatantly announced its intentions to proceed with plans
for the construction of more than 7,000 units in illegal
settlements and the confiscation of hundreds more
dunums of Palestinian land throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory. At the core of that unprecedented
settlement drive are plans to establish illegal settlements
in sensitive areas to the east and south of occupied East
Jerusalem, namely, the so-called E-1 area east of the
city and a hill area between Jerusalem and Bethlehem,
both of which are integral to the continuity and viability
of the State of Palestine, as well as the settlement
activities in the Al-Khalil area and the Jordan Valley.
That provocative Israeli approach is also manifested in
continuing terror and violence by Israeli settlers against
Palestinian civilians and property, under the protection
and with the support of the Israeli Government.

Rather than reciprocating with regard to the hand
extended in peace, Israel has chosen to embark on a
destructive escalation of its illegal agenda in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem — the
territory that constitutes the State of Palestine, which it
has been illegitimately and forcibly occupying for over
45 years. As conveyed in a series of letters recently
transmitted by the State of Palestine to the Security
Council, Israel has persisted in behaving with utter

We reiterate once again before this Council that
it is abundantly clear under international law that all
Israeli settlement activities are illegal. Regardless
of whether it is one settlement unit or thousands, a
settlement or an outpost — whatever the pretext, they
are all illegal. Countless resolutions have affirmed
that, as has the International Court of Justice in its
advisory opinion of July 2004. Moreover, Israeli
settlement activities constitute grave breaches of the

13-214467

S/PV.6906

Fourth Geneva Convention, including war crimes, as
further determined pursuant to Additional Protocol I
of the Geneva Conventions and the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court.
Israel’s illegal settlement campaign also constitutes
the main obstacle to the attainment of a peace based
on the vision of two States living side by side in peace
and security on the basis of the pre-1967 borders. A
halt to settlement construction is not a precondition. It
is a legal obligation. It requires the Security Council
to assume its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations and to act in such a way as to bring
about a long-overdue solution to the conflict. We are at
a pivotal moment. We should send a clear message to
Israel to the effect that all such practices and policies
are illegal and must be stopped. Otherwise, Israel will
be held accountable for its violations and destruction of
the two-State solution.
It is a fact that Israel has never been held accountable
for its crimes. That has fostered its sense of impunity
and encouraged its rejection of the path of peace. In that
connection, it must be recalled that Israel’s hostile and
punitive behaviour following the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 67/19 was, in fact, preceded by
yet another Israeli military aggression against the Gaza
Strip, in November 2012, and repeated declarations by
Israeli officials about their preferred path, that is, the
path of war. Once again, a barrage of death, trauma and
terror was inflicted on the Palestinian people by Israel
forces, causing the death and injury of hundreds of
Palestinians, including many women and children, and
the destruction of homes and infrastructure through the
indiscriminate Israeli bombing of densely populated
civilian areas, including refugee camps.

was manifested across Palestine, in particular in Gaza,
at the beginning of the year in the huge rallies held on
4 January to mark the forty-eighth anniversary of the
Fatah movement, in support of President Abbas and
long-standing Palestinian national aspirations.
The significance of that event must be highlighted
and should serve as a clear reminder to those who
question the Palestinian people’s support for peace
and the legitimate leadership of President Abbas. In
that context, reconciliation between the Palestinian
political factions, in particular Fatah and Hamas, is
being pursued to end the division. That is one of the
demands of our people and is vital to our national goals.
In that connection, we reiterate our appreciation to the
Arab Republic of Egypt, the League of Arab States and
all other concerned parties for their efforts. We hope
that Palestinian unity will soon be achieved and that it
will be respected by the international community.
Despite Israel’s ongoing provocations and
hostilities, which increase tensions and destabilize
the situation on the ground, the developments of
29 November 2012, the ceasefire agreement in Gaza and
the popular non-violent acts of the Palestinian peaceful
resistance to the occupation, most recently seen in the
courageous establishment of the Bab Al-Shams and Bab
Al-Karamah protest villages on confiscated Palestinian
land marked for Israeli colonization and in the weekly
demonstrations against the settlements and the wall in
villages throughout Palestine, are all abundant evidence
of the Palestinian commitment to the path of peace.

That aggression, in addition to the Israeli blockade
since 2007, has led to an escalation of the human
suffering in Gaza in collective punishment of the
population. Regrettably, other than issuing a press
statement on 21 November 2012 (SC/10829) after the
conclusion of the ceasefire agreement, the Security
Council again failed to shoulder its responsibility to
put an end to that Israeli aggression and to protect the
Palestinian civilian population, in accordance with
international humanitarian law.

However, in choosing to blindly adhere to its
expansionist agenda, Israel is undermining the
contiguity and unity of the land of the State of Palestine,
threatening the viability of the two-State solution.
We are at a crossroads. Israel must choose either to
honestly engage in a meaningful political process
towards achieving the two-State solution on the basis
of the pre-1967 borders, which is a historic compromise
and the relative justice to which we committed decades
ago, or to force us into in an era in which that solution
is abandoned. The Palestinian people would enter a new
stage in their national struggle to defend and achieve
their rights through all peaceful, political, diplomatic
and legal means available to the State of Palestine.

Nevertheless, at that time the Palestinian leadership
reaffirmed, as it does now, its rejection of the path of war
and its commitment to the path of peace. Public support
for that position, which constitutes the core of the
political policy of President Abbas and his Government,

The international community has a historic
responsibility before it. Action must be immediately
undertaken, in particular by the Security Council, to
compel Israel to stop its breaches of the law and to
commit to the path of peace. Negotiations cannot succeed

8

13-21446

S/PV.6906

if they are sabotaged by an unrelenting occupation
that mocks and makes it impossible to achieve peace.
Moreover, the past years have proved that the parties,
left to an unbalanced and unfair negotiations process,
cannot achieve peace. It is also necessary to reaffirm
clear parameters for the solution and for the parties to
commit to them.
Business as usual cannot continue. Bold leadership,
in particular by those that have staked a claim in
shepherding the peace process over the years, and
a significant United Nations role, including by the
Security Council, are required. That leadership must
be consistent with the professed values of freedom,
tolerance, human dignity and justice, which are the core
elements for peace and stability in our world and our
region, without exception. Strong political and moral
will are needed to salvage the two-State solution and
to help the two parties overcome the political deadlock
in order to guarantee a successful political process for
the realization of a final peace agreement during the
critical year of 2013.
I would like to reiterate what President Mahmoud
Abbas said to day in the wake of the Israeli elections:
Palestine is willing to work with any future Israeli
Government, provided that it is committed to the latest
General Assembly resolution regarding the recognition
of the State of Palestine along the pre-1967 borders.
The Palestinian people and its leadership remain
committed to the two-State solution — as is the wider
Arab and Islamic world — as reflected in the continued
support for the historic Arab Peace Initiative since
2002. We appeal to the international community to
heed the call for peace and to conscientiously support
those who yearn for freedom, with a view to ushering
in an era of long-overdue justice and independence
for the Palestinian people and peace and security for
Palestinians and Israelis.

Government guarantees the protection of minorities,
women and gays. Our courts ensure that everyone
is accountable under the law. Our education system
teaches tolerance and peace, not violence and hate.
We long for the day when the scenes of real
elections built on the foundations of real democracy
will spread to all corners of a safe, stable and secure
Middle East. Such a day would mark a great turning
point in the history of our region. My question to the
Chamber is: How long must we wait? Today we see a far
bleaker picture in much of the Middle East. Repression,
instability and horrific violence continue to plague the
region.
More than 60,000 have been killed in Syria in
just the past two years. Al-Assad’s victims include
hundreds of Palestinians. Since we have heard so much
about the Palestinian cause this morning, let me take
this opportunity to remind the Council that Al-Assad
has used fighter jets to bomb the refugee camps
where Palestinians live in Syria and that Palestinians
are fleeing the country by the thousands. In Lebanon
more than 1 million live under the brutal oppression of
Hizbullah, which has transformed the entire south of
the country into an Iranian terror base.
The world’s most dangerous weapons are moving
within reach of our region’s most dangerous actors.
We face the frightening possibility that Al-Assad’s
vast stockpiles of chemical weapons could fall into the
hands of Hizbullah or Al-Qaida. The Ayatollah regime
in Iran threatens to combine its extremist ideology and
advanced missile technology with nuclear weapons.
The lives of millions hang in the balance.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.

Those are just a few of the great challenges that
hang over the Middle East. Once again, none of them
were prioritized for discussion this morning. Instead,
the Security Council continues to use the monthly
Middle East debate to single out, scrutinize and criticize
Israel — an island of democracy in the world’s greatest
hotbed of tyranny.

Mr. Prosor (Israel): As we begin a new year, I want
to take the opportunity to congratulate the five new
members of the Security Council. I wish each and every
one of them a lot of luck and success in navigating the
sometimes stormy waters of the Chamber.

I have a novel idea. Perhaps this discussion
could occasionally spend some time examining why
the situation in the Middle East remains unstable,
undemocratic and violent. I will give the Council a
hint: it has nothing to do with Israel.

Yesterday the people of Israel went to the polls.
Millions of men and women cast their ballots. Israeli
democracy continues to flourish. Elections are just
one component of Israel’s vibrant democracy. Our

There are many threats to security in our region.
But the presence of Jewish homes in Jerusalem — the
eternal capital of the Jewish people — has never been one
of them. Jews have been building homes in Jerusalem

13-214469

S/PV.6906

since the time of King David, 3,000 years ago. Jewish
communities witnessed the rise and fall of the Roman
Empire. They lived in Jerusalem throughout crusades
and pogroms. Some here say that the preliminary
building plans announced last month prevent a twoState solution, even though it is clear that all of those
neighbourhoods will remain part of Israel in any final
peace agreement.
I cannot understand how people can conclude that
a Palestinian State cannot exist if there is contiguity
between Ma’ale Adumim and Jerusalem, which
are seven kilometres apart. Those who make that
claim are the same people who stand up and speak
about a contiguous State between Gaza and the West
Bank — areas divided by more than 70 kilometres.
Connecting Gaza and the West Bank would cut Israel
into two. Yet, Israeli contiguity never seems to be a
concern for some in the Chamber.
The briefing that we heard this morning was
particularly selective in the facts it chose to present.
For instance, it does not take a Sherlock Holmes or New
York City Police Department detective to see that the
fingerprints of senior Palestinian Authority officials
were all over the recent provocations staged in the area
known as E-1. Conveniently, the involvement of those
Palestinian leaders in those activities was omitted,
miraculously, from the briefing of this morning. Since
selective perception is one of the greatest hallmarks of
this debate, I would like to take a moment to set straight
a few facts about the past two months.
In November 2012, President Abbas stood in the
General Assembly Hall and submitted a unilateral
resolution to that body (General Assembly resolution
67/19). He claimed it was an act of peace. He insisted that
it was “the last chance to save the two-State solution”
(A/67/PV.44, p. 3). The Palestinian delegation promised
that they would immediately return to the negotiating
table after the voting, without preconditions. I know
that some in the Chamber voted for resolution 67/19 on
that basis. Today, those nations who supported Abbas’
bid have a duty to ask themselves: What, exactly, did
we vote for?
Suffice it to say that the Palestinians have not lifted
one finger to restart negotiations. We have seen neither
a single gesture, nor a single statement, nor a single
indication that they want to return to negotiations.
Just 10 days after President Abbas spoke to the entire
world about his commitment to a two-State solution,
his political party — Fatah — released a new logo that
10

completely erased the State of Israel from the map. Make
no mistake, the major obstacle to a two-State solution
is the Palestinian refusal to speak to their own people
about the true parametres of a two-State solution — to
speak a lexicon of peace, not a litany of war.
One will never hear President Abbas or any other
Palestinian leader use the phrase “two States for two
peoples.” One will not hear them say it because they
have called for an independent Palestinian State but
want millions of their people to flood the Jewish State.
That would mean the destruction of Israel. Let me be
clear: that is not a solution for peace, and no one who
truly believes in peace could ever accept it.
Some in the Chamber may say that the Palestinians
know that they will have to give up the claim of return
at the negotiating table. Some Palestinian leaders might
even whisper it quietly behind closed doors. But they
have never, ever, said it publicly. The Palestinian people
have no idea that they will one day have to give up that
claim of return. Since the Palestinian leadership refuses
to tell the Palestinian people the truth, the international
community has the responsibility to tell them the
truth. Those truly interested in peace will begin by
speaking out forcefully and publicly and unequivocally
against that claim. We cannot abide by the voices of the
selectively principled.
Last December, a few days after President Abbas
appeared at the United Nations, we heard a very public
statement from Khaled Mashaal, the political chief of
Hamas. At a rally for hundreds of thousands in Gaza,
he called for Israel’s complete and total destruction. He
said, “Palestine is ours from the river to the sea and
from the south to the north; there will be no concession
on one inch of land”.
One would think that the call for Israel’s
destruction might merit a joint statement of concern
from some prominent and some permanent members of
the Council. I was told that some of the prominent and
permanent members said something about that casual
call for Israel’s destruction. Israel is known for having
amazing listening devices. The members must have
whispered something so quietly that even our most
sensitive equipment was not able to pick it up.
Apparently, Mashaal’s speech was not only of
concern to President Abbas. Instead of seeking peace
with Israel through negotiations, he has devoted all his
energy to seeking unity with Hamas. Hamas is the same
terrorist organization that fired thousands of rockets

13-21446

S/PV.6906

into the heart of Israeli cities last November. It is the
same terrorist organization that commits a double war
crime as a matter of policy, using Palestinian schools to
fire rockets at Israeli schools. The Hamas charter calls
for the destruction of Israel and the genocide of Jews.
It has turned Gaza into a destination of choice; I would
say a Club Med for global Jihadists.
Some in the Chamber have the audacity to suggest
that Israel should also welcome Hamas with open arms.
I ask, would they say the same if Islamic militants
were firing rockets into their backyards? Would they
say the same to France, which is now working with
the Government of Mali to fight Al-Qaida in the
Sahel? France’s Foreign Minister said this month that
his country was fighting to prevent the creation of an
Islamist terrorist enclave “at the doorstep of France and
Europe”. If Mali is on France’s doorstep, Gaza is in
Israel’s living room. Let me be perfectly clear. France’s
principled stand should be commended. We only ask
that France and all the countries that are supporting its
principled stand today support Israel tomorrow when
we fight Islamic terrorism on our borders.
The Palestinian representative speaks in the
Chamber as if he represents a Jeffersonian democracy.
Yet, no amount of rhetoric, spin or bluster can change one
simple fact: the Palestinians clearly fail to meet the most
basic criteria for statehood. The only Palestinian State
in the Chamber is the Palestinian state of denial. Last
month’s resolution did not confer Palestinian statehood.
It did not constitute recognition of a Palestinian State.
Many Member States made that clear on 29 November
and in the days that followed. Israel has placed its view
on record in connection with the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 67/19. That position remains
unchanged. The recent resolution does not entitle the
Palestinians to participate in United Nations meetings
and international conferences, join treaties or seek
membership in international organizations as a State.
The change in terminology and titles risks creating a
false impression of Palestinian statehood, when no such
State exists. That is clearly not mandated by resolution
67/19. In the real world statehood comes with control
of territory. Yet, the resolution did not change the fact
that the Palestinian Authority has no control over Gaza.
That is 40 per cent of the territory that President Abbas
claims to represent.
Any efforts to alter the Palestinian status outside
the agreed negotiating framework directly violate the
agreements between the parties. Those agreements

include specific limitations on the Palestinian capacity
in the sphere of foreign relations. They contain express
obligations to resolve all outstanding issues through
negotiations, and to refrain from any step that seeks
to alter the legal status of the West Bank and Gaza
pending the outcome of negotiations. Acting to
facilitate violations of those agreements undermines the
credibility of the Organization, which has repeatedly
affirmed that a Palestinian State can only emerge as a
result of bilateral negotiations.
Moreover, resolution 67/19 cannot serve as
acceptable terms of reference for future negotiations.
The resolution not only contradicts agreed terms of
reference, it also seeks to predetermine some issues
explicitly reserved for negotiation, while ignoring
others such as security and the end of claims, which
are core components of any future agreement. The
campaign that the Palestinian leadership has waged
at the United Nations is a false idol for the Palestinian
people. There is only one route to statehood. It does
not travel through this Chamber in New York. It runs
through direct negotiations between Jerusalem and
Ramallah. There are no shortcuts, no quick fixes, no
instant solutions. Peace must be negotiated; it cannot
be imposed.
Exactly 67 years ago this week, on 17 January
1946, the Security Council held its first meeting at
Westminster in London. On that day, the Council clearly
defined its mission, namely, to advance global peace
and security, to oppose tyranny and to safeguard the
rights of all people. It would be a true understatement
to say that the monthly debate on the Middle East falls
far short of that standard. Most of the millions in our
regions who live under oppression, fear and violence
are completely ignored in the debate. They are cast
aside to make way for a litany of half-truths, myths
and outright lies about Israel. Repeating a lie does not
make it true. Repeating a constant flood of falsehoods
does not and cannot change the facts. The simple fact
remains that Israel is not what is wrong in the Middle
East. Israel is what is right in the Middle East. Make
no mistake: cynical politics do no favours for the Arab
world. The silence of the Council in the face of terror
does no favours for those seeking a brighter future.
It is time to do some soul-searching in the Chamber.
The Council needs a Global Positioning System to
find its moral centre in the debate on the Middle East.
Just weeks after the Council’s founding, Sir Winston
Churchill outlined the challenges facing us today.
He said the following about the newly formed United

13-2144611

S/PV.6906

Nations: “We must make sure that its work is fruitful,
that it is a reality and not a sham, ... that it is a true
temple of peace...and not merely a cockpit in a Tower
of Babel”.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would like
to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, for his briefing.
The terrorist attacks in the desert of Algeria, the
threat posed by Iran and its nuclear programme and the
internal challenges with which Arab societies today are
grappling to make their Governments more democratic
and more responsive to the needs of their people, all
make the Middle East a region that must command our
enduring attention and active engagement. Today I will
focus on the Palestinian question and the Syrian crisis.
The current financial crisis in the Palestinian
territories is severe, and the recent news of Saudi
Arabia’s generous $100 million donation to the
Palestinian Authority is welcome. We have made
enormous investments in the Palestinian Authority and
the Palestinian people that we wish to be sustained,
including through the immediate resumption of
regular-clearance revenue transfers. Over the years,
no Government has invested more in assistance to
the Palestinians than the United States. We remain
committed to supporting the Palestinian people.
Yet, as we all know, the vote on 29 November 2012
in the General Assembly (resolution 67/19) has not
brought the Palestinians any closer to our common goal
of achieving a State. As we have said repeatedly, the only
way to establish a real Palestinian State is through the
painstaking work of direct negotiations on final status
issues, without preconditions, between the Israelis and
Palestinians. General Assembly resolution 67/19 cannot
be viewed as establishing terms of reference or as
prejudging any final status issues, notably with respect
to territory. These are simply inescapable facts.
The United States therefoer remains fully
committed to direct negotiations, and we will continue
to work vigorously towards that end. We are consulting
with the parties and international partners on the way
forward, and we are underscoring that every step taken
must aim to reduce tensions and create a climate for
peace. The Quartet envoys met earlier this month in
Jordan to discuss the measures necessary to create a
positive atmosphere conducive to future negotiations.
12

That meeting followed United States Special Envoy
David Hale’s engagement with Israeli, Palestinian,
Jordanian, Egyptian and Arab League leaders to
advance Middle East peace and security, including by
maintaining and strengthening the Gaza ceasefire.
Throughout our engagement, we have reiterated
our long-standing opposition to Israel’s West Bank
settlement activity and to construction in East Jerusalem,
which run counter to the cause of peace. Construction
in the E-1 area would be especially damaging to efforts
to achieve a two-State solution, and we have urged
Israeli leaders to reconsider those unilateral decisions
and to exercise restraint. For decades, the United
States has not accepted the legitimacy of continued
Israeli settlement activity, and we oppose any efforts
to legalize outposts. We will continue to urge leaders
on both sides to avoid unilateral steps and provocations
that make peace negotiations harder to resume.
The position of the United States regarding
Palestinian status, including as reflected in our
explanation of vote in connection with the adoption
of Assembly resolution 67/19 (A/67/PV.44, page
13), remains unchanged. The United States does
not consider that the resolution bestows Palestinian
statehood or recognition. Only direct negotiations
to settle final status issues will lead to that outcome.
In our view, therefore, any references to the State of
Palestine in the United Nations, including the use of the
term “State of Palestine” on the placard in the Security
Council, or the use of the term “State of Palestine” in
the invitation to this meeting or in other arrangements
for participation in this meeting, do not reflect our
acquiescence to the view that Palestine is a State. That
statement of our position shall apply to Palestinian
participation in meetings of the Security Council or
other United Nations meetings, regardless of whether
the United States specifically intervenes on this matter
in the future.
Let me now turn to Syria, where the situation is
dire and deteriorating. We have seen a sharp increase
in indiscriminate attacks in the past month. In a small
village outside Homs, regime militia reportedly killed
more than 100 people last week, including entire families
and numerous children. The regime’s air strikes near
the University of Aleppo killed 87, and attacks on health
clinics and hospitals across the country have made it
impossible for wounded civilians to seek help. In the
face of those mounting atrocities, we reiterate our utter
condemnation of any attack directed against unarmed

13-21446

S/PV.6906

civilians. At all levels, those responsible for atrocities,
no matter what their allegiance, will be identified and
held accountable.
As the transition proceeds, we stand ready to assist
Syria’s new leaders in their efforts to address issues
of accountability and reconciliation. For that purpose,
the United States will continue to support Syrian and
international efforts to document evidence of atrocities
committed by all sides, for use in future accountability
processes. The international community should
also play a role in ensuring that any future domestic
accountability processes have the expertise they need
to meet international standards.
On the political and diplomatic front, I underscore
my Government’s strong support and gratitude for
Joint Special Representative Brahimi’s efforts to find
a durable solution to this crisis. Every member of the
Council knows that a political transition would be
the fastest and most effective way to end the horrific
bloodshed. The United States will therefore continue to
engage with our partners, both on and off the Council,
to support a meaningful political transition that meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. In that
regard, I reaffirm our commitment to the principles
outlined in the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523,
annex), including a transitional body with full executive
powers formed on the basis of mutual consent.
At the same time, we are continuing our efforts
to support the Syrian opposition coalition as it works
towards a more unified opposition that is able to start
addressing the needs of the Syrian people now. We
are supporting the coalition’s assistance coordination
unit, so that increased assistance gets to local councils
providing basic services. In addition to more than
$210 million in humanitarian assistance, the United
States has contributed more than $50 million to bolster
Syrian civil society, including its emerging leaders, in
order to help them communicate, organize and prepare
for an eventual political transition.
The burden is on all of us to help the millions of
people displaced and in urgent need of lifesaving
assistance. There is no doubt that the tireless work of
many United Nations agencies in delivering such aid,
including the support of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
has saved countless lives. We look forward to the United
Nations pledging conference in Kuwait on 30 January
and encourage States to increase their contributions
to the two combined United Nations appeals. We also

encourage United Nations agencies and donors to seek
more opportunities for cross-border assistance, to help
Syrians in underserved areas and to work with the
Syrian opposition coalition’s assistance coordination
unit to respond to needs on the ground.
We will continue to help Syria’s neighbours,
including Lebanon, Turkey, Iraq and Jordan, to
respond to the influx of refugees. We appreciate their
generosity in affording shelter and services to nearly
630,000 refugees — a number sure to rise as long as
Al-Assad’s forces continue their assault. We commend
the Lebanese Government’s recent approval of a
refugee response plan and encourage all neighbouring
Governments to maintain open borders to those fleeing
Al-Assad’s brutality.
Difficult days lie ahead, especially as long as
Al-Assad remains in power. We continue to support
all Syrians, within and outside the Government, who
aim to bring an end to the bloody Al-Assad regime
and build a democratic and unified Syria in which the
rule of law is respected. We will continue to seek the
valuable contributions of the international community
to that end.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Serry, for his detailed
assessment of the situation in the Middle East. We
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State
of Palestine, Mr. Malki, who is taking the floor for
the first time in this Chamber in his new capacity
as representative of the observer State to the United
Nations.
We carefully listened to the statement by the
Permanent Representative of Israel, Mr. Prosor. I will
be frank — we do not understand everything that
Mr. Prosor said to the Security Council today, but we
recognize that, at this stage, the Security Council, for
well-known reasons, has not been able to reach a unified
position allowing for true progress in the PalestinianIsraeli settlement.
The solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
has long been at a deadlock. The attempts made in
2012 to establish contacts for negotiation between the
Palestinians and Israelis, with the assistance of the
Middle East Quartet and other interested in parties,
were unsuccessful. In spite of the ongoing calm in the
Gaza Strip after the November clashes, the military and
political situation on the whole remains far from stable.

13-2144613

S/PV.6906

The situation is exacerbated by continuing Israeli
settlement activities. There has been an unprecedented
surge in those activities, and that is a matter of concern.
According to Israeli non-governmental organizations,
in 2012 alone the building of 7,000 housing units was
approved, while one year earlier that number was 1,770
and, in 2010, 570 units were approved.
The recent events surrounding the so-called
E-1 area demonstrate that unfortunately, in spite of
the strong appeals of the international community,
the Israeli authorities do not intend to review their
settlement policy. This distances us even farther from
the prospects of a peaceful solution to the PalestinianIsraeli conflict; it represents an outright violation of
the Security Council resolutions and the road map and
undermines the possibilities of a settlement on the basis
of two States.
An already difficult situation is exacerbated
by heavy-handed financial pressure on Palestinian
authorities, from whom Israel has withheld tax and
tariff revenue. This exacerbates complex social,
economic and humanitarian problems in the Palestinian
territories. Additional steps are needed to clear the
way for a full economic exchange between the Gaza
Strip and the outside world. We are convinced that the
longer the current alarming status quo continues, the
worse its effect will be on the process of resuming the
negotiations.
The path to breaking through the stalemate and
easing the tensions in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is
well known. There is a need to cease unilateral actions
and to rebuild trust between the parties in the interest
of resuming dialogue on the agreed bases, including
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002),
1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), the Madrid terms of
reference, the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Going forward, this would allow for a discussion of
the pressing final status issues, including borders,
Jerusalem, refugees and water.
Along those lines, we welcome the critically
important and timely appeal — made in December
2012 at the summit of the Ministerial Committee of the
League of Arab States on the Arab Peace Initiative — for
a resumption of the negotiating process on the basis of
well-known international legal provisions. The final
goal of such dialogue would be an end to the Israeli
occupation and the establishment of an independent,
viable and territorially integral Palestinian State, living

14

in peace and security with Israel. We hope that the new
Israeli Government, as soon it is established, will duly
take into account the need to move beyond mistrust and
to re-engage in a substantive negotiations process.
A crucial factor for implementing any agreement
with Israel is the establishment of inter-Palestinian
reconciliation. We hope for practical results as an
outcome of the agreements achieved between the
leaders of Fatah and Hamas in Cairo last week.
For its part, Russia, bilaterally and in international
forums, including first and foremost the Quartet
of international mediators, continues to assist in
overcoming the stalemate in the Palestinian-Israeli
situation by relaunching the negotiating process to
achieve lasting peace between Palestinians and Israelis.
In that context, we call, among other things, for a speedy
convening of the ministerial meeting of the Quartet and
more active participation by the League of Arab States
in its work.
The recent exacerbation of the situation of
Palestinian refugees in Syria, in particular in the
Yarmouk camp outside Damascus, was a striking
reminder of the harmful deadlock in the Middle
Eastern situation. Clashes between pro-Government
and opposition forces led to the movement of many
Palestinian refugees to Lebanon, further destabilizing
an already difficult situation in that country. In that
respect, we note the affirmed Palestinian position of
non-intervention in the internal affairs of Arab States,
including in the Syrian conflict.
With respect to the situation in Syria as a whole,
Russia advocates a continuation of collective efforts to
find a solution to the conflict in that country on the
basis of the Geneva communiqué of the Action Group
(S/2012/523, annex). In that context, we are providing
necessary support to the activities of Joint Special
Representative Brahimi. We feel that a solution to the
crisis must be political and attained through Syrian-led
dialogue on the basis of the principles of international
law. In that connection, all parties to the conflict must
cease all violence and be guided solely by the greater
interests of the Syrian people and the task of ensuring
their security and the democratic and free development
of the country.
While the international community bears significant
responsibility for resolving the Syrian crisis, in the
final analysis it must be a Syrian-led process. In that
connection, we regret that the Syrian opposition has not

13-21446

S/PV.6906

taken steps to engage in dialogue. We are convinced
that the time has come for such a step, in particular as
the Syrian Government has conveyed a willingness to
negotiate with a broad section of the opposition forces.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, as well as the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the State of Palestine and the Permanent
Representative of Israel for their statements.
In these early weeks of 2013, the Middle East is
undermined by two crises that, after another year of
blockade and paralysis, call for resolute action on the
part of the international community.
First, with regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
the Secretary-General has continuously warned us
over the course of the past year that the window of
opportunity for a two-State solution is closing. The
options now are simple. Either 2013 will be a year in
which substantive negotiations are undertaken, leading
to a final agreement settling all issues and demands, or
it will see the disappearance of this unique opportunity
to establish peace via a viable, independent, sovereign
and contiguous Palestinian State, living in peace and
security within recognized borders alongside the Israeli
State, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the two
States.
Indeed, the reality on the ground cannot be
denied, given the latest announcements of the Israeli
Government on settlement activity, in particular in the
E-1 area, that if completed would separate Jerusalem
from the rest of the West Bank — that is, from the
State of which the eastern part of the city should be the
capital. We condemn that settlement policy, which is
illegal and a serious obstacle to peace.
In that context, the withholding by Israel of
taxes and tariffs collected on behalf the Palestinian
Authority is a counterproductive retaliation measure
that we have called upon Israel not to take after the
General Assembly’s sovereign vote. It must stop.
It exacerbates a financial crisis in the Palestinian
Authority that undermines the succesful institutional
reforms achieved. Donors must mobilize to address this
problem. The European Union will soon allocate a large
part of its annual contribution to the Palestinian budget,
and France will also endeavour to make a first payment
of its budgetary assistance as quickly as possible.
However, it is time to stop talking about the twoState solution; we must work to realize it in 2013. We

know how many efforts have been made since the Oslo
Accords, first and foremost by the United States. We
recognize also the courage needed by the leaders in
both Israel and Palestine. But in order for their future
efforts to bear fruit, it is essential to define a framework
likely to relaunch substantive discussions on all final
status issues in an adequate climate of trust and within
a realistic timeline. With our European partners, we
have already proposed parameters for defining that
framework. We call on all key stakeholders in such a
process — the new American Administration as well as
regional partners — to make a new commitment on the
basis of those principles, with the active support of the
international community as a whole. A new approach is
needed, with the active support of the United States, the
Europeans and the Arabs. France will give unstinting
support to those efforts, including within the Security
Council and the European Union.
However, no process will materialize without the
will of the parties to restart substantive negotiations
immediately and without preconditions. That implies,
on the Palestinian side, that they make constructive use
of the status resulting from resolution 67/19, adopted
on 29 November by the General Assembly, and, on
the Israeli side, that the next Government concretely
show its peaceful intentions so that the trust shaken,
particularly by the unilateral measures, may be
re-established.
To reach a final settlement, inter-Palestinian
reconciliation under the auspices of President Abbas,
in conformity with the principles of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, is necessary. We welcome
the Egyptian efforts to that end. It is important to
support partners for peace and not to offer a platform
for Hamas radicals, whose declaration with respect to
Israel we condemn, as we have always done, in French
and Hebrew, on the site of our embassy in Tel Aviv.
We are pleased that the ceasefire in Gaza is
holding, but it needs to be strengthened. That involves
combating arms trafficking and lifting the blockade
against Gaza, in order to offer other political horizons
for the residents of Gaza and ensure the security of Israel
for the long term. France and its European partners are
ready to contribute to that effort, in particular through
the reactivation and strengthening of the European
Union Border Assistance Mission in Rafah.
My second subject is Syria. The year 2013 must
also be the year of the liberation of the Syrian people,
whose situation is tragic. Ms. Valerie Amos and

13-2144615

S/PV.6906

Ms. Navi Pillay described for us again on Friday the
ordeal of the Syrian population — at least 60,000 dead,
600,000 refugees, and 4 million people, mostly women
and children, in utter destitution. Despite the repeated
condemnations of the international community, the
Damascus regime continues to violate international
law by using cluster bombs, incendiary bombs and now
ballistic missiles against its own people. We recall that
any use of chemical weapons by the regime of Bashir
Al-Assad would be unacceptable and would lead to a
reaction from the international community.
In that context, the Council’s inability to take action
is scandalous. That is why with 58 other States we have
called on the Security Council to refer the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court. We must not
let the silence draw a veil across the war crimes and
crimes against humanity that are being perpetrated
in Syria today. We must not stop demanding that the
Syrian authorities, their agents and their accomplices
be brought to account before the Syrian people and the
international community after Syria’s liberation. That
is a precondition for reconciliation in the country.
With regard to humanitarian issues, the emergency
calls for a response that covers all affected Syrians,
including in the liberated areas. We support the efforts
of the humanitarian coordinator, Ms. Amos, as well
as those of the specialized agencies, in particular
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, to expand access
to populations in need. It is absolutely necessary
that the Syrian authorities authorize the full range
of humanitarian actors to operate in their territory,
whether or not it be under their control. Confronted
with the immense needs within Syria, as well as in
countries of the region, where more than 600,000
Syrians have sought refuge, donors must remobilize.
In that connection, we welcome the organization of the
Kuwait conference by the Secretary-General.
France will also continue to work in coordination
with the Syrian National Coalition and its assistance
coordination unit to bring aid to vulnerable populations
that do not have access to traditional assistance
channels. We support the contacts that the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has made
with the Coalition to ensure access to zones liberated
by the opposition.
But beyond the humanitarian crisis and the human
rights issues, the way out of the Syrian crisis remains
political. We have therefore worked for a transition
16

in line with the aspirations of the Syrian people. We
support the efforts of the Joint Special Representative,
Mr. Brahimi, to reach a solution, and we welcome
his resolve. Unfortunately, President Al-Assad, in
his statement of 6 January — a speech he could have
delivered 18 months ago, without alterations — showed
once again that he had closed the door on a political
transition.
Nevertheless, to encourage that possibility, France
is helping the opposition to develop a structure and
actively prepare for transition. The creation of the
Syrian National Coalition, recognized by more than
a hundred States on 12 December in Marrakech,
is a major political turning point, as it shows the
international community that the Coalition represents
the credible political alternative we had hoped for,
based on principles of inclusiveness, democracy,
national unity and respect for human rights. Today, a
majority of Members of the United Nations recognize
and support it. We will continue to support this project,
which represents the aspirations of the Syrian people.
We encourage all the Members of the Organization to
do the same.
A quick transition in Syria depends on regional
security and stability. The displacement of populations
and the socioeconomic tensions resulting from the
Syrian crisis for the neighbouring countries, as well
as the intensification of violence such as the regime’s
attempts to export the crisis, are destabilizing factors.
We once again remind the Syrian regime of its obligations
with regard to respect for the territorial integrity of
neighbouring States, primarily its obligations with
regard to Lebanon and Turkey. Similarly, in the Golan,
the violation of the area of limitation must stop.
Faced with the these risks of destabilization,
France is offering its support to the countries that
are generously taking in refugees. We also recall our
solidarity with Turkey and the Council’s commitment to
the end of impunity in Lebanon respect for its integrity
and sovereignty. France continues to offer its support to
the efforts of the Lebanese authorities to preserve the
unity and stability of the country. and it encourages all
Lebanese political stakeholders to constructively take
part in the consultations led by President Sleiman to
that end.
The international community must remobilize to
find without delay a way to settle the two crises. If the
year 2013 does not see the achievement of a two-State
solution, the West Bank and Gaza will be swept up in
13-21446

S/PV.6906

the regional turmoil and radicalization. All the efforts
made since Oslo would be reduced to nothing. If 2013
does not see the transition in Syria, we will have to
bear responsibility for the destabilization of the entire
region.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, we want to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. We also thank Mr. Riad Malki
and the representative of Israel for their briefings.
Some question the frequency with which we
address this issue in the Security Council. If that
frequency were a function of progress made, perhaps
our meetings would not be justified, since the few
advances that have been made have been generally
modest, and certainly not linear in nature. But if the
frequency is tabulated as a function of the magnitude
and intensity of changes, then our meetings are fully
justified. A region that for forty years valued continuity
over change has seen a frenzy of events since 2011 that
point towards change, and even profound change. As
with any transition, the consequences and outcomes
of such change cannot be predicted, but at least they
should be carefully monitored.
Today, I will not address the bigger picture, but
will focus instead on two topical issues: the situation in
Syria and the peace process in the Middle East.
With regard to the situation in Syria, the work of the
Council throughout most of the past year was focused
on the search for a political solution to the conflict that
has gripped that country. Despite the efforts, first by
Kofi Annan and then by Lakhdar Brahimi, throughout
all those months we witnessed an increase in the use
of violence by both the Government and the armed
opposition, leading to the deaths of thousands of
innocent civilians, the suffering of millions of people
and a humanitarian crisis of grave proportions.
Guatemala continues to believe strongly that the
only solution to the conflict in Syria is rooted in a
commitment by both parties to lay down their arms and
negotiate a political exit. We understand that the logic
of war, which seems to prevail with both parties — the
Government and the armed opposition — prevents an
easy solution. But it is clear that the prolongation of
the armed struggle will only serve to increase sectarian
hatred among the people, with the additional risk of
spreading to neighbouring countries. In that context,

the involvement of the international community will be
essential.
Any transition agreement in Syria must be the
product of an inclusive process led by the Syrian people
in which the rights of all are respected. We believe that
any transitional Government must have the support
of all the Syrian people and must be the product of a
democratic electoral process. Here it should be made
clear, however, that those responsible for all crimes
committed in Syria, whoever they are, must be punished
for their actions. Atrocities of the magnitude of those
that have occurred in Syria cannot be allowed to go
unpunished.
Let me turn now to the Middle East peace process,
including the Palestinian question. In 2013, 20 years
will have passed since the signing of the Oslo Accords.
It is very sad to recognize that we are no closer today
to the solution of two sovereign States, living in peace
within secure borders, than we were back in 1993.
But the frustration built up over those 20 years by the
lack of progress and by the deterioration linked to the
proclivity of each party to blame the other for the lack
of progress makes it today more urgent than ever to
give that vision a chance finally to become reality.
At least for our part, we have not given up hope.
When we consider the options for addressing what
in our jargon is known as “the Palestinian question”,
the option of two States, Israel and Palestine, living
in peace and harmony within secure borders must not
to be seen as an unattainable dream, but rather as the
best and most viable option within reach. To achieve it,
it is of course the parties directly involved who must
show the political will and commitment to negotiate
the content and scope of a final agreement. Direct
negotiations between the parties is without doubt the
only way to reach lasting agreements.
Until such negotiations occur, the international
community must urge both sides to avoid any act,
action or provocation that may hinder the possibility
of a return to the negotiating table. This includes, of
course, preventing the firing of rockets from the Gaza
Strip into Israel, but also freezing the expansion of
Israeli settlements in the occupied territory, as such
settlements are illegal under international law. It is
alarming that the Israeli Government continues to
promote the construction of new settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including in such
sensitive areas as that known as E-1. The decision of

13-2144617

S/PV.6906

the Israeli Government to withhold funds from tax
revenues intended for the Palestinian Authority that
are intended to pay civil servants’ salaries falls into the
same category.
In other words, all the acts that on a daily basis
threaten to crush the possibility of a lasting solution are
unjustified and undermine any hope that these peoples
may enjoy a life of peace and security. It is unjustifiable
that the decisions of Governments and armed groups
perpetuate hatred and separation between peoples who
so desperately need to live together.
For all these reasons, we affirm that the
international community, through the United Nations,
has the obligation to condemn any and all violations,
including with respect to security, and to take all
actions necessary to put an end to such transgressions.
The parties cannot be expected to act responsibly when
others deliberately avoid condemning their actions.
Finally, my delegation believes that only by
respecting the rights of each of these peoples and with
a firm commitment to seek a peaceful solution will
both be able to live together within strong and secure
borders.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I should
like to thank Special Coordinator Robert Serry for his
briefing and Palestinian Foreign Minister Mr. Malki
and the Permanent Representative of Israel for their
contributions to today’s debate.
The events of the final two months of 2012
highlight the urgency with which we must all approach
the Middle East peace process. Negotiations towards a
two-State solution are the only way to ensure that the
Israeli people have the security they are entitled to and
that the Palestinian people have the State they deserve.
The year 2013 is a critical year. The window is rapidly
closing on the two-State solution. Without a concerted,
urgent effort towards negotiations in 2013, we could
find ourselves in a situation where there is no longer
a two-State solution to speak of. There is a real risk
that facts on the ground, in particular Israeli settlement
activity, will mean that a viable Palestinian State is no
longer possible. Without this, there will be no security
for Israel. Furthermore, resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict remains critical to the longer-term stability of
the Middle East region.
The parties themselves are, of course, central to
achieving a credible return to negotiations. We call
upon both President Abbas and the next Israeli Prime
18

Minister to demonstrate the bold, decisive leadership
required to push the process forward. But the history
and politics of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict show
that serious external leadership is also required to
reinvigorate a return to negotiations. We look in
particular to the United States to show that leadership
and to drive the peace process forward.
The United Kingdom, with our European partners,
stands ready to offer significant political and practical
support. Together the international community has to
make greater efforts in 2013 than anything seen since
the Oslo peace accords 20 years ago.
The countries of the region have a vital role to
play by setting out the positives that will flow from
the resolution of the conflict, including greater longterm security for the Middle East region. We encourage
the countries in the region to think about how they can
make a positive contribution to help create a conducive
environment for a return to negotiations.
If there is to be genuine progress in 2013, both
sides must avoid steps that would risk setting the
peace process back. For the Palestinian Authority, that
means returning to negotiations without preconditions
and avoiding steps that deepen the lack of trust. For
the Government of Israel, that means being prepared
to enter serious negotiations and ceasing settlement
activity, which is illegal under international law.
On 17 December, following the announcement
of more than 4,000 new settlement units, the United
Kingdom, France, Germany and Portugal delivered a
statement in which we expressed our strong opposition
to the plans by Israel to expand settlement construction
in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem, and in
particular plans to develop the E-1 area. Since then, we
have seen yet more settlement activity, including the
decision on 7 January to approve zoning boundaries
which effectively designate the illegal outpost of Nofei
Nehemia, in the north of the West Bank, as a settlement
under Israeli law.
Tenders have been published for 198 settlement
units in the Hebron area which, if built, would further
jeopardize the territorial contiguity of any future
Palestinian State. The United Kingdom condemns such
actions, which are profoundly provocative and run
contrary to the Geneva Conventions. Such steps are
damaging to Israel’s international reputation as well as
to the peace process.

13-21446

S/PV.6906

It is also vital that the Government of Israel
reinstate the transfer of tax revenues to the Palestinian
Authority, in line with its obligations under the Paris
Protocol. We understand that $120 million per month
is being withheld, which would normally account for
44 per cent of total Palestinian Authority spending.
The dire financial situation of the Palestinian
Authority should be of concern to us all. It is in all of
our interests to ensure that the Palestinian Authority is
sustained. The United Kingdom is a principal supporter
of the Palestinian Authority and will continue its
strong support for its State-building work. We urge
our international partners to do all they can in support,
and we welcome the decision by the European Union
to front-load its budget support to the Palestinian
Authority by advancing €20 million this month.
The United Kingdom welcomes the work of
those involved in the Gaza ceasefire negotiations and
remains ready to support the parties in implementation.
It is important now to work towards the easing of
restrictions on Gaza, the end of arms smuggling and
Palestinian reconciliation so as to increase the chances
of achieving long-term peace.
We continue to follow developments linked
to Palestinian reconciliation closely. A reconciled
Palestinian polity is ultimately necessary for peace.
We have made it consistently clear that we will engage
with any Palestinian Government that shows, through
both its words and its actions, that it is committed to
the principles set out by President Abbas in Cairo in
May 2011.
In Syria, the violence continues at a horrific rate,
with the regime bearing the brunt of the responsibility
through its use of air strikes, ballistic missiles and
heavy weapons. Despite regime attempts to blame the
opposition, it is now evident that the recent explosions
at Aleppo University, which killed more than 80 people,
were caused by missiles fired from regime jets. Terrible
acts have been committed across Syria, and that is why
we are supporting the call for the situation in Syria to
be referred to the International Criminal Court.
The Syrian opposition is increasingly credible and
organized. It draws on the powerful yearning of the
Syrian people for the freedom they have been denied
for decades. The opposition has not only withstood
the most brutal levels of repression imaginable, it has
strengthened and consolidated its position as the Syrian

people turn away from a discredited and disgraced
regime.
The regime needs to understand that the Syrian
people will not be slaughtered into submission. It
cannot crush the opposition by force. The regime must
recognize the need to take the political route, which
starts with meeting its obligations to bring about
a sustained cessation of hostilities, as the Council
has repeatedly demanded. We strongly support the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, in his efforts to achieve that goal.
We want to see a peaceful political transition backed
by the international community and the Council. But we
must be realistic. No opposition movement that wants
to play a role in Syria’s future is going to be prepared
to work with Al-Assad. One can make a strong moral
argument for Al-Assad’s departure, but there is an
equally strong practical reality. Any transition that
involves him is simply not sustainable. There needs to
be a clear break from the leader who has unleashed this
carnage on his own people.
We want the Council to play the role that it was
established to fulfil. Its failure to do so, so far is a stain
on its reputation. We are ready to work with Mr. Brahimi
and to resume efforts in the Council to come together
behind the steps that are necessary to secure a peaceful
political transition.
But we need to be clear that the transition is already
under way, whether we are influencing it or not. While
the Council remains blocked, we and our partners will
continue to work outside the Council to help the Syrian
people prepare for the transition that they want and
deserve.
In the meantime, the people of Syria continue to
pay a terrible price under Al-Assad’s brutal regime.
The Kuwait donors conference to be held at the end
of this month is an opportunity for the international
community to step up its support for the multilateral
effort to help those in dire need.
The United Kingdom has already contributed
$110 million to support the people of Syria and the region.
But to date the overall contributions by the international
community have been woefully inadequate. We must
all be ready to increase our financial support to help
alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.

13-2144619

S/PV.6906

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank Mr. Robert Serry, the United
Nations Special Coordinator of the Middle East Peace
Process, for his very comprehensive briefing, as well as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Observer State
of Palestine and the Permanent Representative of Israel
for their respective statements.
Luxembourg fully endorses the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
I will begin with the peace process in the Middle
East, before moving on to Syria.
The situation is troubling. Recent developments in
the Middle East have given rise to great uncertainty.
That is evident in the continuing increase in the number
of settlements, in violation of international law; the
repeated withholding of the transfer of Palestinian
tax revenues; and the proliferation of provocative
statements made by extremists from all sides.
Luxembourg is very concerned about the decisions
taken by the Israeli authorities following the granting
to Palestine by the General Assembly, on 29 November
last, of the status of non-member observer State. Like its
partners in the European Union, Luxembourg is deeply
troubled by Israeli plans to expand settlements in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and particularly
by the projects in the E-1 area. We are firmly opposed
to this. Implementing those projects would seriously
undermine the prospects for a negotiated settlement of
the conflict by jeopardizing the chances for a viable,
contiguous Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as the
future capital of two States.
Against that backdrop, tensions have increased
alarmingly in the West Bank. The extremists on both
sides mutually feed off their reciprocal and provocative
acts. What can be said about the situation, except that
such radicalization is a godsend for those seeking to
prevent the dying peace process from reviving? What
can be said about the statements that refuse to grant
Israel the right to security, or even the right to exist,
except that they are a way of preventing peace — as if
after almost 65 years of conflict, against all odds, there
is any kind of hope of resolving the conflict by avoiding
genuine dialogue?
How do we relaunch the peace process? The basis
for a just and lasting peace in the Middle East has been
laid out many times. We are all familiar with the terms
of that equation. The time has come to take bold and

20

concrete measures to achieve peace. The negotiations
between the parties must finally be resumed. Only
negotiations will make it possible to deal with the root
causes of the conflict between Israel and Palestine.
Whatever Government is formed after yesterday’s
elections in Israel, we hope that Israelis and Palestinians
will act promptly and agree on the modalities for the
immediate resumption of direct talks. On the basis of
such an agreement, and in the context of a credible
framework that is structured around clear parameters
that lays out the basis for negotiations and that is
itself based on a precise timetable, the negotiators can
then agree on new and significant efforts to achieve
peace. For such a resumption of negotiations to occur,
appropriate international support will be necessary, as
will decisive commitment from all key participants,
including the United States.
In the Council, and as a member of the European
Union, Luxembourg will do all it can to provide both
parties with all the support they need to identify and
accept a compromise that, when all is said and done,
will necessarily be painful but necessary. The countries
of the region have a crucial role to play in that respect.
We believe that an important part of the equation
leading to a peaceful settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict will also involve reconciliation between the
Palestinians, under the leadership of President Abbas.
In that context, we welcome the mediation efforts
undertaken by Egypt.
Allow me to add a few words on the subject of
the unprecedented financial crisis that the Palestinian
Authority is experiencing currently. Luxembourg
appeals to Israel to promptly unblock, in keeping with
the Paris Protocol, the transfer of fiscal revenues that
it receives on behalf the Palestinian Authority. On
a bilateral basis, Luxembourg contributes €500,000
annually to the Palestinian Authority. That contribution
is in addition to the significant contributions of the
European Union, to which Luxembourg, as a member
of the European Union, also contributes. The European
Union announced just last week the disbursement of
€60 million to help the Palestinian Authority pay wages
and pensions during the first quarter of 2013. We call on
other donors, in particular the countries of the region,
to show their solidarity. Otherwise, the viability of the
Palestinian Authority and the process of establishing
State infrastructure will be seriously jeopardized.

13-21446

S/PV.6906

All the necessary support must also be given to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) for its activities in
the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, Jordan, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Lebanon. According to UNRWA reports,
the 525,000 Palestinian refugees in Syria are among
the minorities most affected by the current conflict
in Syria, with 80 per cent of them are dependent upon
UNRWA for access to basic social services.
I now turn to the situation in Syria. During the
Council’s consultations on 18 January 2013, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem
Pillay,
and
the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie Amos, described
the tragic situation in Syria, where human rights
are trampled and humanitarian distress has reached
unbelievable levels. The figures speak for themselves.
After almost two years of conflict, over 60,000 people
have died in the fighting. Over 4 million people are
directly affected by the crisis and need humanitarian
aid, while the continued hostilities and the current
winter conditions compound the situation further.
Now more than ever, humanitarian access must be
ensured. We hope that Ms. Amos’ visit to Syria will
enable progress to be made in this respect, including
with regard to essential assistance from neighbouring
countries.
The international community, for its part, must
do all it can to alleviate the suffering of the affected
populations and to provide support to the neighbouring
countries of Syria — Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan and
Iraq — which are generously and selflessly hosting
the displaced Syrian population. The extent of the
crisis is such that substantial financial resources will
be necessary to meet the needs identified in the United
Nations humanitarian aid plan for Syria and the region.
The donor conference to be held on 30 January in Kuwait
City must mobilize those resources. Luxembourg has,
to date, made humanitarian contributions of €2 million
to assist persons impacted by the Syrian crisis and
is planning on announcing a substantial additional
contribution on 30 January.
It is, however, as much a political emergency
as a humanitarian one. In the end, the humanitarian
challenges will only be resolved through a negotiated
political outcome to the crisis. Syria must undertake a
political transition process that meets the aspirations of
all Syrians. That is the only way to restore peace in

Syria and protect the security of the region. Otherwise,
the list of atrocities will, alas, continue to grow.
We reiterate our full support to Mr. Brahimi’s
efforts to achieve a political outcome to the conflict as
soon as possible. We must give him all the necessary
support to allow him to make progress along that path.
We owe that to the people of Syria, who are the victims,
above all, of the intransigence of the authorities who
are clinging to power. Luxembourg stands shoulder to
shoulder with the Syrian people in their courageous
fight for freedom, dignity and democracy.
As Ms. Pillay emphasized last week, and as already
stated by the independent international commission of
inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, human rights
violations are increasingly prevalent in Syria. An
increasing number of such actions could be qualified
as war crimes or crimes against humanity. Those
crimes cannot go unpunished. Those responsible for the
atrocities committed in Syria must be held accountable
for their acts, without distinction of any kind. This
accountability applies first and foremost to the national
authorities.
The international justice system has a
complementary role to play in intervening where there
is a refusal or inability to act at the national level.
Syria clearly has not responded to the appeals of the
international community in that regard. Luxembourg
believes that, in the absence of a credible, fair and
independent system of accountability, the International
Criminal Court (ICC) must be seized of the situation.
Luxembourg therefore supports the Swiss initiative to
send a letter to the President of the Security Council
calling on the Council to refer to the ICC the situation
that has prevailed in Syria since March 2011, without
exception and without distinction as regards the alleged
perpetrators of those crimes (S/2013/19, annex). That
request has been supported by 58 States from every
region of the world. We will remain committed to
ensuring that that appeal for accountability does not go
unheard.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
All me at the outset to thank you, Sir, for having
organized this debate. I also thank Mr. Robert Serry,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing on the general situation in the region.
I also welcome Mr. Riad Malki, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Palestine, and Ambassador Ron Prosor of
Israel.

13-2144621

S/PV.6906

More than six decades after the creation of our
Organization and the establishment of the State of
Israel, the members of the Security Council are called
upon once again to review their collective conscience
concerning peace in the Middle East. Obviously,
Rwanda is concerned over the political status quo in
Israel and Palestine, and over the deteriorating security
and humanitarian situation in Gaza and the West Bank.
Like the African Union, Rwanda reiterates that only
a political, two-State solution is viable for those two
nations. It will require the creation of an independent
and sovereign Palestinian State living side by side in
peace and security with the State of Israel. In that regard,
Rwanda is deeply concerned over various statements
issued by the Israeli Government following the vote
by the General Assembly on 29 November, according
Palestinian the status of observer State to the United
Nations. These statements include announcements of
the construction of more than 7,000 new housing units
in the West Bank, including 3,000 in the E-1 area of
East Jerusalem.
Not only is this settlement policy a violation of
international law, in particular the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, but it will also and above all
divide the West Bank and make unviable the Palestinian
State we all wish to see. Moreover, Rwanda calls on
Israel to end all witholding of Palestinian tax revenues,
which has already exacerbated an already critical
humanitarian situation.
Nevertheless, Rwanda believes that the security
of Israel and its people is critical to finding a political
solution. In that respect, we condemn rocket fire and
terrorist attacks on Israeli territory, as well as any
disproportionate and indiscriminate response against
the people of Gaza. We hope that the ceasefire achieved
in Gaza thanks to the actions of Egyptian President
Morsy will endure. We condemn any rhetoric from the
Hamas leadership negating the very existence of Israel
and calling for its destruction.
Rwanda firmly supports the Palestinian Authority,
under President Abbas, and calls for the unity and
reconciliation of the Palestinian people and its leaders.
Rwanda supports Egypts efforts to that end. Such
reconciliation is a prerequisite for political consistency
in upholding Palestinian interests. Nevertheless, any
reconciliation among Palestinian leaders must go
hand in hand with an unequivocal renunciation of
terrorism on the part of certain Hamas leaders and their
irreversible recognition of Israel’s right to exist.
22

Our country reiterates that only direct politial
dialogue between Israel and the Palestinian Authority
will lead to a lasting solution to the conflict. We hope
that, following yesterday’s elections in Israel, contact
will resume between the two parties. In that regard,
while strongly committed to the right of peoples to
self-determination, Rwanda recalls that there is no
shortcut to peace. Regrettably, history has taught that
any unilateral activity can only exacerbate an already
tenuous situation. On the other hand, we support the
Quartet’s mediation efforts, although we regret the
current diplomatic stalemate. We therefore call on the
Quartet and other countries that have influence on the
two parties to the conflict to redouble their efforts to
devise new initiatives for peace in the Middle East.
Allow me to say a few words on the conflict in
Syria. Rwanda condemns the violence in that country,
which has led to more than 60,000 deaths in 22 months,
according to the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. We recall that the responsibility
to protect in Syria is borne primarily by the Syrian
Government, whose army, according to many reports, is
guilty of crimes of war and crimes against humanity. We
also condemn the crimes committed by the opposition,
including attacks committed by terrorist groups.
As with the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we believe
that a resolution to the Syrian conflict requires open
and direct political dialogue. As Gandhi said, strength
does not come from physical capacity. It comes from an
indomitable will. We therefore call on all Syrian parties
to demonstrate their strength and will by engaging in
political dialogue, which is the only way to end the
suffering of the Syrian people. In that regard, Rwanda
pays tribute to Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States, for his untiring efforts on behalf of peace
in Syria. We also believe that any political solution
must be based on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523,
annex) and ensure that justice is served to the Syrian
people. We nevertheless reiterate our belief that Syrians
must be masters of their own destiny and that any
foreign intervention, be it may military, political or
legal, can only complicate an already difficult peace
process.
In conclusion, it is clear that the status quo in the
Middle East will have devastating consequences not
only for the region, but also for the world as a whole.
We recall that the current situation has for some time
now empowered Islamic terrorism and promoted the

13-21446

S/PV.6906

spread of weapons of mass destruction. We therefore
call on everyone to shoulder their responsibilities.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Robert Serry for
his report. We welcome the presence of Palestinian
Foreign Minister Malki an Israel’s Permanent
Representative, Ambassador Prosor.
So often in this Council, we say that the situation
between Israel and the Palestinians is at a crucial
juncture, and it often is. But we now seem to be facing
a decisive stage. The status quo is self-evidently
unsustainable. The prospect of a two-State solution
is quickly disappearing. It is time for a new effort to
resuscitate the peace process, but with a genuine focus
not on the process but on the objective — peace.
The conflict in Israel and Gaza in November 2012
highlighted again the fundamental risks to peace
and security of allowing the status quo to continue.
Australia condemned the rocket attacks on Israel from
Gaza. We recognized Israel’s right to defend itself.
Obviously, we welcomed the ceasefire and commended
Egypt’s leadership role in brokering the agreement,
with support from others.
But it is critical for the ceasefire’s the effective
implementation that efforts to prevent the flow
of weapons into Gaza be intensified. And while
acknowledging that Israel has already taken some steps
in this regard, there is an urgent need for a further
relaxation of restrictions on the flow of lawful goods
into and out of Gaza so that the Gazan econony can
grow. Of course, a ceasefire does not guarantee lasting
peace. The only way to secure that, as we know, is for
both Israel and the Palestinians to resume negotiations
without preconditions towards a two-state solution.
General Assembly resolution 67/19 on the
Palestinians’ status as a non-member observer State
reflected international support for a future Palestinian
State, as well as deep concern about the continuing
stalemate on the ground. Australia abstained in the
voting on the resolution, reflecting both our support
for a Palestinian State and our concern that the only
way to achieve the reality of statehood for Palestinians
is through direct negotiations. Australia urged both
Israel and the Palestinians not to exploit or overreact
to the vote. Instead, actions by both sides must be in
the interests of peace, and neither side should create
obstacles to that objective.
Australia has therefore been deeply concerned by
Israel’s decisions to expand settlements. Settlements

are illegal under international law; they undermine the
prospects for peace and directly threaten the viability of
a contiguous Palestinian State, and hence a negotiated
two-State solution. The recent announcements in
the E-1 block were of particular concern and took
us further away from the path to peace, and we
continue to be deeply concerned by instances of settler
violence. We also call on the Palestinian Authority
to exercise restraint and to avoid provocative actions
at international forums. We urge the Palestinians to
resolve their internal differences, unite for peace and
cease acts of violence against Israel.
At the same time, we need to reinforce the role
of the Palestinian Authority, which is fundamental to
stability in the region. We call on those countries in a
position to do so to provide further financial support
to the Authority. Australia has made a five-year
commitment. It is also vital that tax transfers to the
Authority be resumed.
Like all of us, Australia wants to see a secure Israel
living in peace alongside a viable Palestinian State.
Lasting security for Israel and the establishment of
a Palestinian State cannot be achieved by unilateral
actions. They can be achieved only through negotiation
of a two-State solution on the basis of the 1967
boundaries, with agreed land swaps. Australia calls on
Israel and the Palestinians to return to direct negotiations
in good faith and prepared to make the compromises
required by both sides to achieve a settlement. We also
call on both sides to refrain from further actions that
undermine confidence and damage the prospects for
negotiations to resume.
The worsening conflict in Syria will soon enter
its third year. The assessment of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights that the death
toll has reached at least 60,000 should shock us. As a
member of the Security Council, Australia will work to
encourage a strong and unified response to bring about
a process of political transition. We support the work
of Joint Special Representative Brahimi, including his
call for strong backing from the Council to enhance
the prospects for transition. The Council needs to take
a fresh look at how it can best support Mr Brahimi’s
efforts. Continued inaction will only condemn Syrians
to further bloodshed and the region to greater instability.
President Al-Assad has had many opportunities to
end the brutality against his own people. We have seen
nothing that would suggest that he is willing to engage

13-2144623

S/PV.6906

in meaningful negotiations. His speech on 6 January
was not a step on the road to peace; it led down a
cul-de-sac. He must step down now.
Australia joined more than 100 countries at the
December Friends of Syria meeting in Marrakesh
in acknowledging the National Coalition for Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces as the legitimate
representative of the Syrian people. We are working
with partners to ensure that the National Coalition is
a responsible representative of the Syrian people. It is
imperative that it abide by the norms of international
humanitarian law.
As we know all too starkly, the humanitarian
dimension of the conflict continues to worsen,
increasing the need for international support, including
through the current United Nations appeals. The
meeting in Kuwait at the end of this month will be
an essential opportunity to galvanize further support.
Like many others, Australia is particularly concerned
about securing adherence to international humanitarian
law and ensuring the safe and unhindered access
of humanitarian personnel. We have advanced a
humanitarian initiative for protecting medical facilities
and workers in Syria, which is a major priority for us.
We will continue to work with other countries to secure
a commitment from all sides in the conflict not to target
medical personnel, not to block access to doctors and
hospitals, and not to attack medical facilities.
To conclude, as we approach the third year of the
Syrian conflict, our collective efforts obviously must
be directed towards an immediate end to the violence,
the realization of a political solution that meets the
legitimate aspirations of all of Syria’s citizens, ensuring
accountability for the crimes that are being committed
and planning for post-conflict stabilization assistance
to help rebuild Syria. The Council must play a decisive
role in all of that.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I wish to welcome Mr. Riad Malki, Foreign Minister
of Palestine, to the Council and to thank Robert Serry
for his comprehensive briefing on the developments in
the situation in the Middle East, including Palestine.
No one can disagree that the Palestinian question is
in an extremely critical and historical phase right now.
We have seen many years of stalemate and setbacks
in the peace process in the Middle East as a result of
obstacles erected by the Israeli occupation authorities
and their complete lack of political will to allow the

24

Palestinian people to establish their own independent
sovereign State.
The situation has further deteriorated with Israel’s
intensification of settlement activity, particularly
its announced intention to construct thousands of
settlement units in the E-1 area, north and south of
East Jerusalem and in the West Bank, in a way that
would lead to the geographical bisection of the entire
West Bank, effectively erasing the possibility of
achieving peace. Morocco strongly condemns this
Israeli settlement plan and calls on the international
community, as represented in the Council, to intervene
to put an end to such policies, which, if things remain
unchanged in 2013, will effectively make any political
solution, including the two-State solution, impossible.
While Israel persists in its settlement activities
in Palestinian territory, it prevents Palestinians from
building on their own land. It destroys Palestinians’
homes, displaces them, and confiscates their land, as
we recently saw in Bab Al-Shams and Bab Al-Karamah.
East Jerusalem is the primary area targeted by the new
settlement plan because of the religious significance it
holds for the three religions. The policy is designed to
change the demographic and geographic composition of
the area and its cultural and religious features in order
to isolate it from its natural Palestinian surroundings.
His Majesty the King of Morocco, as Chairman
of the Al-Quds Committee, has called on the Security
Council, and especially its influential members, to live
up to their responsibility, to take a principled position
opposing the desecration of Muslim and Christian
religious sites, and to safeguard the people and those
sites. Israel should be made to honour international
resolutions that declare its actions as null and void.
Palestinians have proven by word and deed their
commitment to the peace process and to negotiations to
put an end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We believe
that Palestinian reconciliation will bolster the negotiating
position of the Palestinian side. Arab countries have
reaffirmed that a just and comprehensive peace is an
irreplaceable strategic choice. However, experience has
shown that the flexibility and commitment shown by
the Palestinian side are not reciprocated by the Israeli
side. Rather, Israel persists in its settlement activities,
its blockade against Gaza and its occupation practices,
thereby undermining the comprehensive final solution,
which enjoys international support.

13-21446

S/PV.6906

The international community must firmly and
immediately intervene and reaffirm the need to
work for the two-State solution within clear political
parameters and a finite timeframe through negotiations
between the two parties to reach a settlement, enabling
the Palestinian people to establish their own viable,
independent State based on the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and living side by side in peace
and security with Israel.
The economic situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, as Mr. Serry said, continues to deteriorate
owing to the Israeli occupation and the Palestinian
Authority’s growing budget deficit caused by Israel’s
withholding of tax and customs revenues in response
to General Assembly resolution 67/19, which granted
Palestine non-member observer status in the United
Nations. This jeopardizes the Palestinian Authority’s
achievements to date. The Gaza Strip continues to suffer
an unjust blockade that flagrantly violates international
law and international humanitarian law and denies the
rights and dignity of more than 1.5 million Palestinians.
We call for an end to this condemned blockade, and urge
the international community to stop such collective
punishment.
The deterioratating situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories and Israel’s suffocating grip on
its population increase tensions, reduce the chances for
peace, and pose unprecedented threats to all peoples
of the region, without exception. The situation compels
the Council and the Quartet to act immediately to
ensure that negotiations towards the establishment of
a just and comprehensive solution in the Middle East
can resume.
Our focus on the Palestinian question, which is at
the heart of the Arab-Israeli conflict, arises from our
serious concern about the situation. However, that does
not mean that we are any less concerned about Syria
or Israel’s occupation of other Arab territories in the
Syrian Golan and southern Lebanon. We note with the
utmost concern the worsening humanitarian conditions
in Syria. I would like to express our recognition and
appreciation of the initiative of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon to hold a donors conference in Kuwait City by
the end of the month.
We also commend the efforts of Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi on behalf of the United Nations and the League
of Arab States. We hope that, by the end of the month,
the Council will be able to report conditions that are
more conducive to ending the armed conflict and to

the launching of an inclusive national dialogue aimed
at the establishment a free and democratic society in
Syria that guarantees the rights and dignity of all and
preserves the national unity and territorial integrity of
that brotherly country.
In conclusion, I cannot fail to mention Morocco’s
condemnation of Israel’s policies towards Lebanon. We
reiterate our grave concern about the stability, territorial
integrity, unity and sovereignty of Lebanon, in
particular given the challenges that the region currently
faces. We would like to welcome the foresight, wisdom
and responsibility of all Lebanese parties that have
refrained from taking any action that would exacerbate
the situation in the region.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mr. Robert
Serry for his briefing on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I would also like
to thank the Palestinian Minister for Foreign Affairs
and the Permanent Representative of the State of Israel
for their statements. On the occasion of this debate,
my delegation will talk about the Israeli-Palestinian
question and the situations in Syria and Lebanon.
As we once again meet to consider the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
my delegation can only express its great concern about
the events that continue to take place in the region. As
we all know, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues
to keep the attention of the international community,
in particular the Security Council, without achieving
tangible progress.
Events with regard to conflict in recent months
are perceived differently by the parties involved. We
still recall the crisis between Hamas and Israel in the
month of November, which led to numerous victims
and massive destruction of property. The sense of
responsibility that the two parties demonstrated, with
the help of friendly countries, in particular Egypt,
fortunately make it possible to reach an agreement that
put an end to the crisis. My country would once again
like to welcome that.
To preserve that peace, the State of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority must resolve to work towards
strengthening mutual trust. While granting Palestine
the status of observer State in the United Nations
gave rise to the hope within the Palestinian Authority
that that would bring about a rapid settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, concerns remain over

13-2144625

S/PV.6906

the definition of the territories comprising the State,
dividing Israelis and Palestinians. We note since then
the determination to restart building settlements in East
Jerusalem and the West Bank. In my delegation’s view,
that threatens to complicate the two-State solution of
Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and
security within internationally recognized borders.
Similarly, Hamas, which stands firm in its position
of not recognizing the State of Israel, should, in our
view, put aside its extremist demands and work towards
unity with Fatah, which continues to state its readiness
to resume talks with the State of Israel.
In the light of the prevailing situation, my country
would like to reiterate that the solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict requires direct negotiations
between the two parties. Those negotiations, which
had began but have been suspended for a while, must
resume, under the auspices of the Quartet, in the context
of establishing the State of Palestine and guaranteeing
Israel its security. The international community should
help the two parties to resume the negotiations process
without preconditions. It can do that by calling for
reactivating the Arab Peace Plan, the Madrid principles
and the road map, with the support, of course, of States
Members of the United Nations that have any influence
on the two parties.
In Syria, the situation is becoming increasingly
tragic. The violence has spread to all corners of the
country, exacerbating the humanitarian situation of
the refugees and displaced persons, while the civilian
population sees its rights massively violated by
belligerents of all sorts. The fact that the number of
dead now exceeds 60,000, as has been pointed out, and
that the destruction of private and State infrastructure
has intensified, while diplomacy has to date not found a
solution to the crisis, has only added to our frustration
in view of the chaotic situation engulfing Syria brought
about by its own population. In view of the evidence,
it would be no exaggeration to say that the mission of
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint Special Representative of
the United Nations and the League of Arab States for
Syria, appears destined for the same fate as that of his
predecessor.
The Security Council and the international
community as a whole have so far remained powerless
to end the ongoing tragedy in Syria, which poses a
genuine threat to humankind. Nevertheless, we believe
that there is still a chance to resolve the conflict. That

26

will necessitate unity and solidarity among the members
of the Security Council, in particular the permanent
members, to deal with the distressful situation of the
Syrian people. In that regard, we welcome the recent
initiatives taken by the United States of America and
the Russian Federation, together with the Joint Special
Representative, with a view to achieving a satisfactory
solution. All things considered, Togo reaffirms its
unwavering support for the Joint Special Representative
and urges him to continue his efforts with the Council’s
support, which he has always asked for.
The Security Council, together with the League of
Arab States, should redefine the strategies that could
assist in resolving the crisis by negotiation. For all of
the evidence indicates that a military victory by one
of the parties would likely not lead to durable peace
and security in Syria. In Togo’s view, national dialogue
remains necessary in creating a new, peaceful and
reconciled Syria.
With regard to Lebanon, my country remains
concerned about the current insecurity on the border
with Syria and about the repercussions of the war
in Syria on that country. That is why we condemn
the killings of politicians, military personnel and
innocent civilians — all victims of terrorist attacks.
Such a climate of insecurity and impunity threatens
the country’s stability. Togo commends the efforts of
the Lebanese authorities to strengthen security for its
population and urges the international community,
especially the Security Council, to continue to support
those efforts.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Palestinian Authority,
for his briefing. I also welcome Mr. Malki, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Palestine, to today’s meeting.
I have listened carefully to the statements
made by Foreign Minister Malki and the Permanent
Representative of Israel.
The question of Palestine has always been at
the centre of the Middle East issue. Dialogue and
negotiation remain the ultimate solution to the
settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. However,
Israeli-Palestinian talks have been stalled since 2010.
China is gravely concerned about that situation. The
continued deadlock in the Israeli-Palestinian peace

13-21446

S/PV.6906

talks is in the interest of neither side and will not lead
to lasting peace in the Middle East. It also contravenes
the common aspiration of the international community.
The status quo is untenable.
The Middle East peace process must be restarted
as soon as possible, in order to achieve the vision of
the two-State solution. China welcomes any and all
initiatives aimed at restarting the Israeli-Palestinian
talks. We hope that the two sides will advance in parallel
by adopting practical measures to foster a favourable
environment aimed at resuming the talks and making
progress at an early date.
China has consistently rejected Israel’s settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem and the West Bank. We are
also seriously concerned about Israel’s suspension of
tax revenue transfers to Palestine. Nevertheless, the
problem of settlement activities remains the main
obstacle to the resumption of the peace talks. Israel,
as the more powerful party to the conflict, should
take the initiative to cease its settlement activities in
occupied Palestinian territories, release detainees
and ease the humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including the Gaza Strip, in
order to eliminate the obstacles and create conditions
favourable to the restart of the peace talks.
The international community should base its
actions on the ultimate goal of achieving peace and
stability in the Middle East, address the question of
Israel and Palestine with greater urgency and promote
the peace talks more vigorously. China appeals to
the Quartet to take substantive action with a view to
restarting the peace talks. China also urges all of the
parties concerned to demonstrate the necessary political
will. In that context, China supports the efforts of the
League of Arab States and favours a greater role for
the Security Council in settling the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.
It is China’s continued view that all of the parties
concerned should settle their disputes through
political dialogue based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the road map for peace in the
Middle East, so that Israel and Palestine can eventually
live side by side in peace as two States.
China supports the establishment of a sovereign,
independent State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as
its capital, based on the pre-1967 borders. Achieving

independent statehood is the legitimate right of the
Palestinian people and constitutes the foundation and
principles of the peaceful coexistence of Palestine
and Israel as two States. The granting of observer
State status to Palestine by the General Assembly
represented one more step towards the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State.
China has always promoted the peace talks in its
own way, and has made efforts to advance the Middle
East peace process. China would like to work with
the parties concerned, together with the international
community, and to continue to play a constructive role
in achieving comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East region.
China is gravely concerned about the continuing
tension in Syria. A political settlement is the only
feasible solution to the Syrian issue and reflects the
common understanding of the international community
as a whole. The current urgent task requires intensifying
political mediation efforts and urging all Syrian
parties to cease fire and halt the violence with a view
to launching a Syrian-led political process as soon as
possible. China applauds all efforts aimed at promoting
a political solution.
China supports the just and fair mediation efforts
of the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States on the Syrian crisis,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. We sincerely hope that all of the
parties concerned will strive to find a just, peaceful
and appropriate solution to the question of Syria based
on the final communiqué of the Geneva meeting of the
Action Group on Syria (S/2012/522, annex) and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank Special
Coordinator Serry for his comprehensive briefing. I also
thank Foreign Minister Malki and Ambassador Prosor
for their warm words extended to the five new members
of the Security Council, including my country.
The relationship between Israel and Palestine
is still at the crux of security issues in the Middle
East. However, the ongoing situation between Israel
and Palestine is much worse than a simple stalemate.
During the past few years, regardless of the reason,
the two sides have continued to step away from
implementing agreements. The violence witnessed in
Gaza and in southern Israel in November 2012 was but
a manifestation of that persistent feud. My delegation
strongly urges both Israel and Palestine to resume

13-2144627

S/PV.6906

direct negotiations as soon as possible. They need
to sit down together to talk now. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the recent import of construction
materials to the Gaza Strip through the Kerem Shalom
checkpoint for the first time in five years. It serves to
improve the living conditions of the people in Gaza.
That also means that the ceasefire negotiations behind
the scenes are making slow but steady progress. The
negotiation process involving Egypt should contribute
to building confidence between Israel and the new
Egyptian Government, which is necessary to maintain
their peace treaty.
On the other hand, increasing tensions and clashes
in the West Bank are a worrying sign. It is of serious
concern that Israeli-Palestinian security cooperation in
the West Bank has continually debilitated since late last
year.
My delegation watched the result of yesterday’s
general election in Israel with great interest. We expect
that the new Israeli Government will place its priority
on making progress in the Middle East talks and
make sincere and serious efforts for the resumption of
talks with Palestine. Also, my delegation took note of
President Abbas’s recent visit to Cairo and hopes that
the Palestinian Authority and Hamas will work together
towards reconciliation, with a view to creating an
environment conducive to peace talks. Unless and until
the vision of two States living peacefully side by side
is embraced by all of Palestine, our common aspiration
to see the State of Palestine thriving in reality will
continue to remain elusive.
The Republic of Korea supports the mediation
efforts by the Quartet. It was disappointing to have
witnessed that little progress was made until, and
even after, the deadline set by the Quartet to finalize
an agreement. However, the failure to meet the time
limit should not be interpreted as an indictment of the
Quartet, the role of which should continue to be an
integral part of the process. My delegation encourages
the Quartet to renew its activities soon, and both Israel
and Palestine to fully cooperate with the process.
The Republic of Korea shares with the international
community its strong concerns over Israeli settlement
activity. Israel, since its announcement to build 3,000
dwellings on the West Bank, including in the E-1 area,
has continued to reaffirm its intention to construct
additional settlements in Ramat Shlomo and Givat
Hamatos. We are deeply concerned that settlements in
the area between Jerusalem and Ma’ale Adumim would
28

jeopardize the negotiation process for a two-State
solution.
In Syria the bloodshed has now entered its twentysecond month. More than 60,000 people have been
killed. There are more than 650,000 refugees and an
estimated 4 million people in urgent need of assistance.
The Syrian authorities and the opposition groups must
stop atrocities against innocent civilians. My delegation
reiterates its call for all parties’ cooperation for safe,
unimpeded and timely humanitarian access to the
people in need of help. Those who violate international
humanitarian and human rights laws must be brought to
justice. In that context, the Republic of Korea supports
the referral of the Syrian situation to the International
Criminal Court.
Edmund Burke once said that all that was necessary
for the triumph of evil was that good men do nothing.
Continued inaction will not only result in the increase in
the tragic statistics, but also fundamentally undermine
peace and stability in the whole Middle East region. The
deeper the grudges and grievances of Syrians against
Syrians grow, the longer bloody vengeance will prevail,
even after President Al-Assad steps down. Extremists
are the only group that benefits from the prolongation
of the conflict.
The increasingly sectarian nature of the Syrian
conflict risks spreading beyond its borders. In particular,
the domestic politics of Lebanon are seriously affected
by the spillover from the Syrian situation. The growing
number of refugees is already causing instability in the
neighbouring countries. We compliment the efforts of
Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey to continue to open
their borders to accommodate Syrian refugees in spite
of immense difficulties. In that regard, we hope for a
successful donors conference to be held in Kuwait next
week.
My delegation firmly supports the mediation efforts
of Joint Special Representative of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, and strongly urges all parties to cooperate
fully with Mr. Brahimi.
Lastly, we warn the Syrian regime to not use
chemical weapons on any occasion. The use of weapons
of mass destruction will be the kiss of death for the
Syrian regime. Last month at Marrakech, the Republic
of Korea recognized the Syrian National Coalition as
the legitimate representative of the Syrian people. We
hope that the Syrian National Coalition will begin an

13-21446

S/PV.6906

inclusive process of political transition with a view to
winning the hearts and minds of all Syrian people. The
Republic of Korea will cooperate with other members
of the Security Council to overcome its current division
so that the Council can translate its Charter obligations
into action and restore lasting peace in Syria.
Mr. Sharifov (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to extend to your delegation, Mr. President,
our gratitude for having organized this meeting.
We welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs, His
Excellency Mr. Riad Malki, at today’s meeting. We
would like express our thanks for the statements made
by Mr. Malki, Special Coordinator Serry and the
Permanent Representative of Israel.
The situation in the Middle East continues to
occupy our minds and to challenge our efforts to achieve
a just and lasting solution to the persistent security
issues in the region. Deeply rooted and often recurring
conflicts in the Middle East, together with the new
challenges brought about by the wave of transition and
changes, require greater involvement and assistance
on the part of the international community. Beyond
conflict-resolution efforts, helping States to overcome
the hardships of transformation processes is another
crucial task associated with the region nowadays.
There is no shortcut to success; the road is long and
bumpy. However, one should never underestimate the
power of faith, allegiance and commitment, which are
the staunchest allies to help overcome the trials of history
and accomplish hard missions ahead. Nevertheless,
however vibrant the discussions, whatever mediation
efforts are needed or whatever tailored assistance might
be provided by the international community, the key
to solving the region’s predicament lies in the political
will of the leadership of the States of the region and in
the cohesion within society. But that in no way absolves
the international community, including the Council, of
its own responsibility to protect international peace and
security and to facilitate the achievement of solutions
to conflict situations based on the generally accepted
norms and principles of international law.
The state of the Middle East peace process
remains worrisome, with no improvement. After the
21 November 2012 ceasefire there was some hope that
the parties would make an attempt to move forward to
solidify the existing truce and revive the peace process.
We lament that that has not happened. It is clear that the
longer the phase of no negotiations lasts, the further the
parties will drift apart in achieving a solution. Needless

to say, the achievement of peace is impossible in the
absence of consistent commitment by the parties. It is
also obvious that among the necessary prerequisites
for success is the need to ensure that the process and
efforts are guided by the normative standards set by
the Charter of the United Nations and by the objective
of achieving a comprehensive settlement based on
international law.
We have repeatedly stated that a lack of agreement
on political issues in a situation of armed conflict
and military occupation cannot be used as a pretext
for disrespecting international law and human rights.
Having said that, we want to express our deep concern
over the continuing settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories, in violation of international
humanitarian and human rights law and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. The construction of thousands of settlement
units throughout the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, is inhibiting a negotiated and
peaceful solution to the conflict, as well as constituting
an infringement on the rights and freedoms of the
Palestinians. The recently announced settlement plan
envisaging building thousands of homes in the E-1 area
will, if implemented, deal a serious blow to hopes to
revive the peace process and, ultimately, to achieve
lasting peace in the region.
Illegal activities in the occupied territories should
not be recognized under any circumstances. It is
important that the international community express
its strong and unified opposition to the settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory and
reiterate that such activity must stop immediately and
unconditionally. It is essential to underline once again
that in assuming its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Council must take all the necessary measures to ensure
that international law, human rights and fundamental
freedoms are observed and respected at all times and
without preconditions. Regional and international
efforts directed towards finding a solution to this
conflict, particularly those of the League of Arab
States, should be commended and supported. In that
regard, we welcome the convening on 9 December of
the ministerial meeting of the Arab Peace Initiative
Committee in Doha, which also called for resuming
negotiations between the parties.
It is also important to take full advantage of
ethnic, religious and cultural diversity by promoting

13-2144629

S/PV.6906

inter-communal
dialogue
and
reconciliation,
while categorically rejecting and invalidating any
manifestation of ethnic or religious intolerance. The
humanitarian and economic situation in Gaza demands
continued international attention, particularly in order
to ensure the unimpeded provision of humanitarian
aid throughout the region for alleviating the suffering
of people in need. In that regard, we would like to
announce a recent financial contribution made by the
Government of Azerbaijan to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East for the purposes of emergency assistance in Gaza.

territory contravenes international law, especially the
Geneva Conventions. The planned settlement in the
E-1 area, by connecting earlier illegal settlements with
other settlements in and around East Jerusalem, would
divide the West Bank into two enclaves and destroy the
contiguity of the Palestinian State. It would thus render
a two-State solution unworkable. The contiguity of the
Palestinian State has been reaffirmed as an integral part
of the peaceful resolution of the Middle East conflict in
the Quartet road map. All States Members of the United
Nations, and especially the members of the Quartet, are
therefore guarantors of a two-State solution.

In conclusion, we would like once again to express
our firm conviction that peace and security in the
Middle East is achievable with greater political will,
rigorous work and the concerted efforts of the nation,
the region and the international community.

World leaders have spoken against planned
settlements, but so far there is only negative response
from Israel. At the end of last month’s consultations on
the Middle East, the vast majority of Council members
expressed their position on settlements at a press
stakeout here. The Quartet, however, chose to remain
silent. The year 2013 is crucial. If the relevant actors do
not take action now, a two-State solution may not remain
viable at all. It is probably the last opportunity for the
international community to move towards a lasting
resolution of the conflict. Procrastination in pursuing a
two-State solution is leading to its erosion. Delay does
not mean suspension of activity; it is tantamount to the
abdication of responsibility.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
I thank Mr. Robert Serry for his detailed briefing
this morning. We also welcome the Foreign Minister of
the State of Palestine, His Excellency Mr. Riad Malki,
who has come to New York especially to attend this
meeting of the Security Council.
In the past quarter, two significant developments
took place. Following a spiral of violence in November,
a ceasefire was agreed on between Hamas and Israel.
The ceasefire is generally holding. Sporadic breaches
should come to an end. And on 29 November, the General
Assembly voted to make Palestine a non-member
observer State (General Assembly resolution 67/19).
That decision reflected the Palestinian people’s greatest
aspiration, supported by the vast majority of the General
Assembly and the international community.
Regrettably, after that momentous development,
two punitive measures were initiated against the
State of Palestine by Israel: the announcement of
new settlements, including in the E-1 area, and the
withholding of tax revenues owed to the Palestinian
Authority. The first measure scuttles a two-State
solution; the second debilitates Palestine economically
and financially. Both measures must be rolled back.
They are not in the interests of regional peace and
stability, nor of Israel.
We condemn the Israeli announcement that it
will expand settlements. In fact, the international
community is against that proposed expansion.
Settlement construction in the occupied Palestinian
30

We urge both the Quartet and the Security Council
to display a sense of urgency. If the Quartet cannot or
does not move, countries with interest and influence in
the region should act to facilitate a resumption of the
peace process, based on the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Quartet road map, the Madrid principles and the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
A resumption of the peace process, however, should
mean action with clear benchmarks and deadlines. A
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
cannot be assured without Israel’s withdrawal from
all occupied lands, including those of Lebanon and the
Syrian Golan. The Security Council must also ensure
and monitor the implementation of resolution 1860
(2009), as well as other relevant resolutions. The illegal
blockade of Gaza and the collective punishment of its
population must cease.
Peace in the Middle East has remained a dream
for six decades. A solution based on two States is
not an issue for the Palestinians alone. A single State
would also mean a demographic imbalance for Israel,
as well as continued strife, volatility and suffering.
Peace would remain elusive. The best course of

13-21446

S/PV.6906

action for resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict lies in
establishing an independent, viable and contiguous
State of Palestine on the basis of pre-1967 borders, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. Two States, living side
by side in peace and security, is the goal that we ought
to pursue single-mindedly.
Let me now turn to Syria. As Syria descends
into deeper conflict, racked by internecine violence,
the humanitarian crisis there continues to grow
exponentially. There are pronouncements and
protestations by the international community to the
effect that it must respond swiftly to stop the killings
and move the Syrian nation — Government and
opposition — towards dialogue and a political process.
But beyond political rhetoric, there is no progress
towards engagement. The only realities are continuing
carnage and political stalemate. The Security Council
itself remains immobilized.
The Secretary-General and Joint Special
Representative Lakhdar Brahimi have used their
political capital and clout to persuade the parties,
countries of the region and Council members to evolve
a common platform for ending the vicious cycle
of violence in Syria. Diplomacy is all about hope,
so we must not lose hope. We need a ray of hope, a
breakthrough, a process that brings Syria and the region
out of this quagmire. The levers for a breakthrough are
self-evident.
First, both the Syrian Government and the
opposition have to change their mind-set that they can
win this bloody war militarily. Secondly, engagement
is the only viable path, and it is the only viable option
before the parties. They have to move towards each
other. They have to move towards common ground.
Thirdly, the regional Powers and key Council members
need to persuade Damascus and the opposition to
renounce violence and come to the negotiating table. In
this conflict, the Syrian people as a whole are losing, but
nobody is winning. Fourthly, the supply of arms must be
stopped forthwith. We know from our recent historical
experience that the supply of arms to groups advocating
and practising different brands of extremism can have
unintended consequences. An apparent quick fix today
could be a nightmare for national and international
actors tomorrow as multiple regions are plunged into an
even greater period of volatility. Fifthly, humanitarian
access needs to be improved to alleviate the suffering
of the Syrian people.

Finally, we fully support the diplomatic efforts
being made by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. We wish him
success. We want diplomacy to succeed.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I wish to request all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with longer statements are requested to
kindly circulate their texts in writing and to deliver a
condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I would like to first thank
Mr. Robert Serry for his comprehensive briefing.
Allow me also to also warmly welcome His Excellency
Mr. Riad Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
State of Palestine. We are delighted that Mr. Malki is
here today, but we are even more delighted that the name
plate of State of Palestine is here for the first time, and
here to stay, as an expression of the international will to
recognize Palestinian statehood.
Indeed, it is a major leap in the uphill battle of the
Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable national
rights. However, we are not even half way there.
Palestine could only be granted observer status by
virtue of General Assembly resolution 67/19. But like
any other peace-loving State, it should be granted full
membership in the Organization. Therefore, we truly
hope that, sooner rather than later, the Council, based
on Article 4 of the Charter of the United Nations, will
recommend to the General Assembly the admission of
Palestine as a full Member of the United Nations.
Most important, the State of Palestine remains
occupied. It is our duty — the duty of the international
community — to help it put an end to occupation and
to achieve real independence. Then, and only then, can
we have a genuine and lasting peace in that part of the
world.
You, Mr. President, and your 14 colleagues around
this table all know that there is no greater obstacle
towards such a noble end than the unrelenting Israeli
policy of settlement in the territory occupied since
1967. Time and again, the question of the illegality of
settlement activity has been stressed in the Council. I
see no need to demonstrate it anew. Yet, for whoever
may still have any doubt on the matter, let me only
recall that one of the first people to recognize the

13-2144631

S/PV.6906

illegality of such activity was no one other than
Mr. Theodor Meron, a child survivor of the Holocaust
who became one of the world’s most eminent
international jurists and was recently elected President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. Mr. Meron was the Legal Counsel of the
Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs in September 1967.
He was asked by the Office of Mr. Levy Eshkol, then
Prime Minister of Israel, for his opinion on the legality
of civilian settlements in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip
and the Golan Heights. In a cover note dated September
18, 1967 to the legal memorandum that he submitted
on the matter, Mr. Meron summarized his conclusions
as follows: “civilian settlement in the administered
territories contravenes the explicit provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention.”
In the text of his memorandum, the Legal Counsel
of the Israeli Foreign Ministry is unequivocally
clear that the Geneva Convention prohibition on the
occupying Power to deport or transfer parts of its
civilian population into the territory it occupies is a
prohibition that is “categorical and not conditional upon
the motives for the transfer or its objectives. Its purpose
is to prevent settlement in occupied territory of citizens
of the occupying state”.
There is no need to dwell then any longer on the
legal aspect of settlements, I assume. Let me, then,
turn to the political effects of settlements and how they
prejudice the prospects for peace negotiations. To that
effect, most telling is a quote from Amos Elon, the
late Israeli journalist, essayist and author, who was
referred to in a New York Times obituary as a cultural
giant who was for many years Israel’s “most renowned
public intellectual”. Stressing how detrimental to the
prospects of peace the settlements could be, he wrote
in a 19 December 2002 essay in the New York Review
of Books:
“Imagine the effect on the peace process in Northern
Ireland if the British government continued moving
thousands of Protestants from Scotland into Ulster
and settling them, at government expense, on land
confiscated from Irish Catholics.”
To help assess the magnitude of the ongoing
settlement activity, let me underline here that approvals
of settlement plans jumped 300 per cent in 2012, and
that, in just one week of December of that year, the
Israeli Government pushed forward plans for over
11,000 homes beyond the 1967 border — nearly as many
settler homes as were approved in the previous 10 years
32

combined, as clearly demonstrated by the Israeli Peace
Now movement. A copy of the alarming report released
by that group one week ago, on 16 January, detailing
the record of Prime Minister Netanyahu’s Government
on settlements over the course of its full term in office,
that is from April 2009 to the present, can be found at
www.peacenow.org.
Yet, no less alarming than that unprecedented level
of settlement activity is the strategic location for the
recently approved construction plans. In that regard,
the case of the E-1 area is most indicative. According
to the Israeli human rights organization B’Tselem, if
built, the 3,426 housing units that were approved on
5 December 2012 for the E-1 area
“will exacerbate the isolation of East Jerusalem
from the rest of the West Bank, will interrupt
the territorial contiguity between the northern
and southern parts of the West Bank and will
create a physical and functional barrier between
East Jerusalem and the Palestinian population in
adjacent West Bank communities for which the
city serves as the main metropolitan and religious
centre”.
For the Israeli non-governmental organization
Terrestrial Jerusalem, E-1
“is not a routine settlement. If built, it is a
game-changer, maybe a game-ender. E-1 is the
binary settlement. If you support E-1, you cannot
possibly be in favour of the two-State solution; if
you are in favour of the two-State solution, you
must oppose E-1”.
For those who brush off criticism of E-1 by insisting
that Israel is not pursuing construction and that it is
just planning, the non-governmental organization
Terrestrial Jerusalem is right to remind us that
“when approved, Israel asserts a plan is ‘only
planning’; when implemented, ‘it is not new’. By
now, anyone hearing this refrain should immediately
understand: Israeli planning in settlements equals
Israeli construction in settlements, sooner rather
than later”.
Surely the Council will recall that, on 11 January, a
group of around 200 young Palestinians set up tents in
parts of the E-1 area and announced the establishment
of a village dubbed Bab Al-Shams — “Gate of the
Sun” — after the novel by the internationally renowned
Lebanese writer Elias Khoury, observing that “the time

13-21446

S/PV.6906

has now come to change the rules of the game, for us to
establish facts on the ground — our own land”. Before
their eviction two days later by the occupying forces,
Khoury addressed them from Beirut with the following
words:
“When you built your wonderful village you
gave back meaning to meaning. You became the
sons of this land and its masters ...
“You are the olives of Palestine that shine under
the sun of justice, and as you build your village, the
light of freedom flares up with you.

“Light upon light”.
Borrowing the words of my fellow countryman, I
will conclude by saying that it is also high time for the
Council to give meaning to meaning by living up to its
responsibilities under the Charter and putting an end by
all legal means to the illegal settlement activity in the
occupied territory.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers on my list for this meeting. I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.25 p.m.

13-2144633
