76

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General 84 transmitting the study of the Group of Experts to Prepare a Study
on Israeli Nuclear Armament,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his report on Israeli nuclear armament;
2. Expresses its deep alarm at the fact that the report
has established that Israel has the technical capability to
manufacture nuclear weapons and possesses the means of
delivery of such weapons;
3. Also expresses its deep concern that Israel has undermined the credibility of the International Atomic Energy
Agency safeguards, in particular by the bombing of the Iraqi
nuclear facilities which were under Agency safeguards;
4. Reaffirms that Israel's attack on the Iraqi nuclear
facilities and Israel's capability constitute a serious destabilizing factor in an already tense situation in the Middle
East, and a grave danger to international peace and security;
5. Requests the Security Council to prohibit all forms
of co-operation with Israel in the nuclear field;
6. Calls upon all States and other parties and institutions to terminate forthwith all nuclear collaboration with
Israel;
7. Requests the Security Council to institute effective
enforcement action against Israel so as to prevent it from
endangering international peace and security by its nuclearweapon capability;
8. Demands that Israel should renounce, without delay,
any possession of nuclear weapons and place all its nuclear
activities under international safeguards;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum
publicity to the report on Israeli nuclear armament and to
distribute it to Member States. the specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency and non-governmental organizations, so that the international community
and public opinion may be fully aware of the danger inherent
in Israel's nuclear capability;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to follow closely
Israeli military nuclear activity and to report thereon as
appropriate;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit
the report on Israeli nuclear armament to the General Assembly at its second special session devoted to disarmament;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Israeli nuclear
armament''.
91st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/99.

Conclusion of a treaty on the prohibition of the
stationing of weapons of any kind in outer space

The General Assembly,
Guided by the goals of strengthening peace and international security,
Expressing the common interest of all mankind in the
further exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes for the good of all States and in the interest of developing friendly relations and mutual understanding between
them,
Conscious of the danger which would threaten mankind
if outer space became an arena for the arms race,
84
A/36/431. The study was subsequently issued with the title Studv
on Israeli Nuclear Armament (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.82.IX.2).

Desiring not to allow outer space to become an arena for
the arms race and a source of strained relations between
States,
Taking into account the draft treaty on the prohibition of
the stationing of weapons of any kind in outer space, 85
submitted to the General Assembly by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, and the views and comments expressed
during the consideration of this item at its thirty-sixth
session,
I. Considers it necessary to take effective steps, by
concluding an appropriate international treaty, to prevent
the spread of the arms race to outer space;
2. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to embark
on negotiations with a view to achieving agreement on the
text of such a treaty;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled •'Conclusion of a
treaty on the prohibition of the stationing of weapons of any
kind in outer space''
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 198 I

36/100.

Declaration on the Prevention of Nuclear
Catastrophe

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the foremost task of the United
Nations, born in the flames of the Second World War, has
been, is and will be to save present and succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
Recognizing that all the horrors of past wars and all other
calamities that have befallen people would pale in comparison with what is inherent in the use of nuclear weapons
capable of destroying civilization on earth,
Reaffirming that the universally accepted objective is to
eliminate completely the possibility of the use of nuclear
weapons through the cessation of their production, followed
by the destruction of their stockpiles, and that, to this end,
priority in disarmament negotiations should be given to nuclear disarmament,
Convinced that, as the first step in this direction, the use
of nuclear weapons and the waging of nuclear war should
be outlawed,
Solemnly proclaims, on behalf of the States Members of
the United Nations:
I . States and statesmen that resort first to the use of
nuclear weapons will be committing the gravest crime
against humanity.
2. There will never be any justification or pardon for
statesmen who take the decision to be the first to use
nuclear weapons.
3. Any doctrines allowing the first use of nuclear
weapons and any actions pushing the world towards a
catastrophe are incompatible with human moral standards
and the lofty ideals of the United Nations.
4. It is the supreme duty and direct obligation of the
leaders of nuclear-weapon States to act in such a way as
to eliminate the risk of the outbreak of a nuclear conflict.
The nuclear-arms race must be stopped and reversed by
joint efforts, through negotiations conducted in good faith
and on the basis of equality, having as their ultimate goal
the complete elimination of nuclear weapons.

" Official Records of th,· General Assembly, Thirtv-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 128, document A/36/192, annex.

III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

5. Nuclear energy should be used exclusively for
peaceful purposes and only for the benefit of mankind.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/101.

Development and strengthening of good-neighbourliness between States

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the determination of the peoples of the
United Nations as expressed in the Charter to practise tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good
neighbours,
Recalling its resolutions 1236 (XII) of 14 December 1957.
1301 (XIII) of 10 December 1958, 2129 (XX) of 21 December 1965 and, in particular, 34/99 of 14 December 1979,
Bearing in. mind that, owing to geographic proximity,
th~re are particularly favourable opportunities for co-oper~tion and mutual advantage between neighbouring countries
m many fields and that the development of such co-operation
may have a positive influence on international relations as
a whole,
C'!nsidering_ that the great changes of a political, economic and social nature as well as the scientific and technological progress which have taken place in the world and
led to ~npre~edented interdependence of nations have given
new d1mens1ons to good-netghbourliness in the conduct of
States and increased the need to develop and strengthen it,
1. Reaffirms that good-neighbourliness conforms with
th~ purposes of the United ~ati?ns and is founded upon the
strict observance of the pnnctples of the Charter of the
United _Nations and of th~ Dec!aration on Principles of
International Law concernmg Fnendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the Unite_d Nations, 86_ as well as upon the rejection of any
acts seekmg to establish zones of influence or domination;
2. Calls upon all States, in the interest of the mainten~ce of internat~onal pe~ce and security, to develop goodneighbourly relations, actmg on the basis of these principles;
3. Co~si~ers that the generalization of the long practice
~d of pnn~tples and rules pertaining to good-neighbourlmess 1s hkely to strengthen friendly relations and
co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter;
4. Reaffirms the need to examine the question of good~eighbourliness in order to strengthen and further develop
tts content, as well as ways and modalities to enhance its
effectiveness;
?· Beli:eves that the results of the examination of goodne1ghbourhness and of the clarification of its elements could
be included, at an appropriate time, in a suitable international document;
6. Requests the Governments that have not communicated their views and suggestions on good-neighbourliness,
as well as on ways and modalities to enhance it, with a view
to preventing conflicts and to increasing confidence among
States, to do so as soon as possible, and invites the Governments that have already communicated such views and
suggestions to supplement them if they deem it necessary;
7. Invites the United Nations organs, bodies and programmes, as well as the specialized agencies, within their
fields of competence, to continue to inform the SecretaryGeneral of the aspects of their activities relevant to the
development of relations of good-neighbourliness between
States;
86

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

77

8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session, on the basis of
the replies of States and of the views expressed during the
thirty-sixth session, as well as of the comments of specialized agencies, a report containing an orderly presentation
of the views and suggestions received concerning the content
of good-neighbourliness. as well as ways and modalities to
enhance its effectiveness;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Development and
strengthening of good-neighbourliness between States".
91st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/102.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security

The General Assembly.
Having considered the item entitled · 'Review of the implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security",
Noting with concern that the provisions of the Declaration
on the Strengthening of International Security 87 have not
yet been fully implemented,
Profoundly disturbed by the escalation of tension in the
world, the ever more frequent recourse to the threat or use
of force_, interventio~, interference, aggression and foreign
occupation, the contmued stalemate in the solution of crises
in different regions, the continuous escalation of the arms
r~ce and military buil~-up, the pursuance of the policy of
nvalry. the confrontat10n and struggle for the division of
the ~orld into spheres of influence and domination, the
persistence of colonialism, racism and apartheid, and the
lack o! solution of t~e economic problems of developing
countnes. all of which endanger international peace and
secunty.
Deeply concerned that the process of relaxation of international tension has reached a point of deep crisis owing
to the lack of progress in the settlement of international
problems and conflicts and to the stalemate in the process
of disarmament,
S!ressing the. need for the main organs of the United
Na~10ns re~ponsible for the maintenance of peace and secunty, particularly the Security Council. to contribute more
effectively to the promotion of international peace and security by seeking solutions to the unresolved problems and
crises in the world.
Emphasizing that, in its twenty years of existence, the
~ovement of Non-Aligned Countries has significantly contnbuted to the efforts of the United Nations towards the
promo_tion ~f. international peace and security, the democrat1za~10n of mternati_onal relations, the development of inte~atlona\ co-opera_110n and the establishment of a system
of mternat10nal ~elat10ns based on justice, sovereign equality
a~d equal secunty of all States and peoples, in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles and policy of non-alignment.
I. Expresses its deep concern over the aggravation of
focal points of international tension and crisis in the world,
more frequent recourse to force and increasing violations
of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms once more the universal and unconditional
validity of the purposes and principles of the Charter as the
firm basis of relations among all States, irrespective of size,
"Resolution 2734 (XXV)
