2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to provide
personnel for four complete teams of interpreters
with the necessary technical staff as set forth in
the budget estimates for 1948' and the equipment and maintenance for which provision is
made in the supplementary est.imates for 1948 ;2
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to include
in the equipment mentioned in paragraph 2
above, wireless equipment for use in the General
Assembly Hall and in the two Council chambers,
and to service conferences away from headquarters.

Hundred and fifteenth plenary meeting,
15 November 1947.

2. Autorise le Secretaire general a constituer
quatre equipes completes d'interpretes, accompagnees du personnel technique neccssaire, conformement aux indications qui figurent clans les
previsions budgetaires pour 1948', et a pourvoir
aux installations et a l'entretien prevus clans le
supplement au budget pour 1948 2 ;
3. Autorise le Secretaire general a comprendre,
clans lcs installations mentionnees au paragraphe
2 ci-dessus, le materiel radiophonique destine a
,~tre utilise dans la salle des seances de l'Assemblee
generale, dans Jes deux salles de conseil et aux
conferences qui se tienncnt hors du siege de !'Organisation.
C ent-quinzieme seance pleniere,
le 15 novembre 1947.

153 (II). Composition of the Secretariat
and the principle of geographical
distribution

153 (ID. Composition du Secretariat et
principe de repartition geographique

Whereas it is desirable to attain a balanced geographical distribution in the composition of the
Secretariat, thus improving the present distribution, which results from unavoidable difficulties
encountered in the initial stages of organization ;

Considerant qu'il est souhaitable de realiser
dans la composition du Secretariat une repartition
gcographique equilibree, et d'ameliorer ai.nsi la
repartition actuelle qui e..~t due aux difficultes qui
ctaient inevitables aux premiers stades d'organisation;
Considerant que le principe precedent n'est pas
rn contradiction ave.: la consideration dominante
<lans le recrutement du personnel, telle qu'elle est
fixee clans !'Article 101, paragraphe 3, de la
Charte, c'est-a-dire avec la .necessite d'as.5urer a
!'Organisation le..~ services de personnes possedant
Jes plus hautcs qualites de travail, de competence
et d'integrite;
Considerant qu'en raison du caractcre international du Secretariat et afin d'eviter une predominance injustifiec d'habitudes nationales, la
ligne de conduite suivie par le Secretariat et Jes
mcthodes administratives appliquees par lui doivent au plus haut point s'inspirer et beneficier des
acquisitions des diverses cultures et de la compct cnce technique de tous Jes Etats Membres,

Where as the above consideration does not conflict with the paramount consideration of employment of the staff, as laid down in Article 101,
paragraph 3, of the Charter, namely, the necessity of securing the highest standard of efficiency,
competence and integrity;

Whereas, in view of its international character
and in order to avoid undue predominance of national practice..~, the policies and administrative
methods of the Senetariat should reflect, and
profit to the highest degree from, assets of the various cultures and the technical competence of all
Member nations,
The General Assembly
l. Reaffirms the principle of securing the highest standard of efliciency, competence and integrity in the staff of the Secretariat, as well as the
importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a
geographical basis as possible, and

2. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To examine the recruitment policy that
has been followed to date with a view to improving the present geographical distribution of the
posts within the various Departments;
( b) To take, as soon as possible, the necessary
steps with a view to engaging staff members from
those countries which have not yet any of their
nationals in the Secretariat;
( c) To review, in accordance with the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
'See Official Records of the second session of the General A,;,:mbly, Suppknwnt No. 5.

'Se,. don1mcnt A/+98.

L' Assemblee generale
I. Reaffirme le principe scion lequel ii est neccssaire d'assurer au Secretariat les services de
personnes possedant les plus hautes qualites de
travail, de competence et d'integrite, ainsi que
!'importance d'un recrutement du personnel effcctuc sur une base gcographique aussi large que
possible, et
2. Invite le Secrctaire general:
a) A revoir la ligne de conduite qui a ete suivic
jusqu'ici en matiere de recrutement, afin d'ameliorer la repartition geographique actuelle des
postc,s dans Jes divers departements;
b) A prendre, aussitot que possible, les mesures
nccessaires afin d'engager du personnel clans les
pays dont le Secretariat ne compte encore aucun
rcssortissan t;
c) A reexaminer, conformement aux recomrnandations du Comitc consultatif pour les ques'Voir Jes Documents ofjici£ls de la deuxieme session de
/'.1-'<rmblee generale, Supplt'mrnt ~~o 5.
'Voir lr document A/498.

Administrative and Budgetary Questions, the I tions administrative.s et budgetaires, Jes titres, la
qualifications, background and experience of the I carricre et !'experience des membres actuels du
present members of the staff, with a view to _re- I Secretariat, afin de remplacer ceux d'entrc eux
placing those who do not reach the high qui nc pnss<'·dcnt pa~ Jes hautes qualites exigecs par
la Chartc;
standards fixed by the Charter;
d) A prendrc toutes les mesures possibles pour
( d) To take all practicable steps to ensure the
improvement of the present geographical distri- assurer !'amelioration de la repartition geograbution of the staff, including the issuance of such phiquc actuelle du personnel, notamment en etarules and regulations as may be necessary to com- blissant toutcs regles et tous reglements qui peuply with the principles of the Charter as elabo- vent ctrf'. necessaires pour observer le.~ principes de
la Charte rappeles dans la presente resolution;
rated in this resolution;
e) A presenter a la prochaine session ordinaire
( e) To present to the next regular session of the
General Assembly a report of the action taken de I' Assemblee gcnerale un rapport sur Jes mesures prises en vertu de Ja presente resolution.
under this resolution.
Ce11 t-quinzieme seance pleniere,
Hundred and fifteenth plenary meeting,
le 15 novembre 1947.
15 November 1947.

154 (II). Proposal for the adoption of
Spanish as one of the working languages of the General Assembly

154 (II). Proposition d'adoption de l'espagnol comme l'une des langues de
travail de l'Assemblee generale

The General Assembly,
Taking into account the wide administrative
and budgetary implications and the political and
legal aspects of the adoption of Spanish as one of
the working languages of the General Assembly,

V Assemblee generate,
Ten ant compte des importantes consequences
d'ordre administratif et budgetaire qu'entrainerait !'adoption de l'espagnol comme l'une des langues de travail de I' Assemblee generale, ainsi que
des a~pccts politiques et juridiques que presente
cette adoption,
Invite le Secretaire general a etudier tous les
aspects de la proposition et a faire rapport a la
prochaine session ordinaire de l'Assemblee generale.
C ent-quinzieme seance pleniere,
le 15 novembre 1947.

Requests the Secretary-General to study all aspects of the proposal and to report to the next
regular session of the General Assembly.
Hundred and fifteenth plenary meeting,
15 November 1947.

155 (II). Appointment of an Investments
Committee

155 (Ill. Nomination d'un Comite des
placements

The General Assembly
Resolves that:
1. In accordance with the provisions of section
25 of the provisional regulations for the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Scheme,' the appointment by the Secretary-General of:

L' Assemblee generale
Decide ce qui suit:
1. Conformement aux dispositions de la section '2-1 du n\gJernent provisoire de la Caisse commune des pensions du personnel des Nations
unies 1 , la nomination par le Secretaire general
des personncs suivantes:
~f. Jacques Rucff, Gouverneur honoraire de la
Banque de France;
M. I ,·ar Rmith, Direrteur de la Banque de
Suede;
M. Marriner S. Eccle.~. President du Board of
Governon, Federal Reserve S·ystem des
Etats-Unis d'Amerique,
pour constituer un Comite des placements, est
approuvee;
'2. Les rnandats des membres du Comite expircront respectivemcnt le 31 decembre 1950, le 31
decembre 1~14c1 et le '.11 rlccembre 1948, clans l'ordre Oll leurs 110ms sont brnmeres plus haut;
J. La durfr norrnale du mandat d'un membre
du Comite des placement, est de trois ans, et Jes
membn's de cc Comite sont re1~ligibles. Chaque
annee, !ors de la ~ession ordinairc de l' As~emblee
genfrale, le Sccn;tairc general soumettra a l'ap-

11. Jacques Rueff, Honorary (;mTrnor uf the
Bank of France;
Mr. lvar Rooth, Managing Director of the
Baiik of Sweden;
Mr. Marriner S. Eccles, Chairman of the Board
of Governors, Federal Reserve System of the
United States of America,
to constitute an Investment~ Committee, is approved;
2. The terms of oflice of the members shall
expire on 31 December 1950, 31 December 1949
and 31 December 1948 in the order named above;

3. The normal term of office of a member of
the Investments Committee shall be three years,
and members shall be eligible for reappointment.
At the regular session of the General Assemblv
each year, the Secretary-General shall submit th~:
' See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly dur-

'Vmr les R<'solutions adopu!es par /'Asumblt!e gtlnt!rale
pnl(trnt la s< cnnde partic de- sa prerniC're session, page 159.

ing the St'Cond part of its first s,.ssion, page 159.

63
