United Nations

A/RES/60/149

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 February 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 71 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 2005
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/60/509/Add.1)]

60/149. International Covenants on Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 58/165 of 22 December 2003 and Commission on
Human Rights resolution 2004/69 of 21 April 2004, 1
Mindful that the International Covenants on Human Rights 2 constitute the first
all-embracing and legally binding international treaties in the field of human rights
and, together with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 3 form the core of the
International Bill of Human Rights,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the status of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocols to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 4
Recalling the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights2
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,2 and reaffirming that
all human rights and fundamental freedoms are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated and that the promotion and protection of one
category of rights should never exempt or excuse States from the promotion and
protection of the other rights,
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights Committee and the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in examining the progress
made by States parties in fulfilling the obligations undertaken in the International
Covenants on Human Rights and the Optional Protocols to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 5 and in providing recommendations to States
parties on their implementation,

_______________
1
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
Resolution 217 A (III).
4
A/60/284.
5
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex, and resolution 44/128, annex.

05-49654

A/RES/60/149

Considering that the effective functioning of the Human Rights Committee
and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights is indispensable for the
full and effective implementation of the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Recognizing the importance of regional human rights instruments and
monitoring mechanisms in complementing the universal system of promotion and
protection of human rights,
Reaffirms the importance of the International Covenants on Human
1.
Rights2 as major components of international efforts to promote universal respect for
and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2.
Strongly appeals to all States that have not yet done so to become parties
to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights2 and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,2 and to consider as a matter of
priority acceding to the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights5 and making the declaration provided for in article 41 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and, while acknowledging that
additional States have recently become parties to these instruments, requests the
Secretary-General to continue to support the annual treaty event to this end;
Invites the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
3.
intensify systematic efforts to encourage States to become parties to the
International Covenants on Human Rights and, through the programme of advisory
services in the field of human rights, to assist such States, at their request, in
ratifying or acceding to the Covenants and to the Optional Protocols to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with a view to achieving
universal adherence;
Calls for the strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations
4.
under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and, where applicable, the
Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
Emphasizes that States must ensure that any measure to combat terrorism
5.
complies with their obligations under relevant international law, including their
obligations under the International Covenants on Human Rights, and welcomes the
establishment by the Commission on Human Rights of the mandate of a Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism; 6
6.
Stresses the importance of avoiding the erosion of human rights by
derogation, and recalls that, in accordance with article 4 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, certain rights are recognized as nonderogable in any circumstances and that any measures derogating from the
provisions of the Covenant must be in accordance with that article in all cases,
bearing in mind the need for States parties to provide the fullest possible
information during states of emergency so that the justification for the

_______________
6

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum
(E/2005/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A, resolution 2005/80, para. 14.

2

A/RES/60/149

appropriateness of measures taken in those circumstances can be assessed, and
underlining the exceptional and temporary nature of any such derogations; 7
7.
Encourages States parties to consider limiting the extent of any
reservations that they lodge to the International Covenants on Human Rights and the
Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to
formulate any reservations as precisely and narrowly as possible, and to regularly
review such reservations with a view to withdrawing them so as to ensure that no
reservation is incompatible with the object and purpose of the relevant treaty;
Welcomes the annual reports of the Human Rights Committee submitted
8.
to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth 8 and sixtieth 9 sessions, and takes note of
the General Comments adopted by the Committee, including the most recent,
General Comment No. 31 on the nature of the general legal obligation imposed on
States parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; 10
9.
Also welcomes the reports of the Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights on its thirtieth and thirty-first sessions 11 and on its thirty-second and
thirty-third sessions, 12 and takes note of the General Comments adopted by the
Committee, including the most recent, General Comment No. 16 on the equal right
of men and women to the enjoyment of all economic, social and cultural rights,
adopted by the Committee at its thirty-fourth session; 13
10. Expresses regret at the number of States parties that have failed to fulfil
their reporting obligations under the International Covenants on Human Rights, and
urges States parties to fulfil their reporting obligations on time and to attend and
participate in the consideration of the reports by the Human Rights Committee and
the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights when so requested;
11. Urges States parties to make use in their reports of sex-disaggregated
data, and stresses the importance of integrating a gender perspective in the
implementation of the International Covenants on Human Rights at the national
level, including in the national reports of States parties and in the work of the
Human Rights Committee and of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights;
12. Strongly encourages States parties that have not yet submitted core
documents to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to do so, and invites all States parties regularly to review and update their
core documents while bearing in mind the current discussion on the elaboration of
an expanded core document;
13. Urges States parties to take duly into account, in implementing the
provisions of the International Covenants on Human Rights, the recommendations
and observations made during the consideration of their reports by the Human

_______________
7
See, for example, General Comment No. 29, adopted by the Human Rights Committee, on article 4 of the
Covenant regarding derogations from the provisions of the Covenant during a state of emergency (Official
Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/56/40), vol. I, annex VI).
8
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/59/40).
9
Ibid., Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/60/40).
10
Ibid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/59/40), vol. I, annex III.
11
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 2 (E/2004/22).
12
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 2 (E/2005/22).
13
E/C.12/2005/4.

3

A/RES/60/149

Rights Committee and by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
and the views adopted by the Human Rights Committee under the first Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;2
14. Urges all States to publish the texts of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights in as many local languages as possible and to distribute them
and make them known as widely as possible to all individuals within their territory
and subject to their jurisdiction;
15. Urges each State party to give particular attention to the dissemination at
the national level of their reports submitted to the Human Rights Committee and the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and, further, to translate,
publish and make available as widely as possible to all individuals within its
territory and subject to its jurisdiction by appropriate means the full text of the
recommendations and observations made by the Committees after the examination
of those reports;
16. Reiterates that States parties should take into account, in their
nomination of members to the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, that the Committees shall be composed of
persons of high moral character and recognized competence in the field of human
rights, consideration being given to the usefulness of the participation of some
persons having legal experience, and to equal representation of women and men,
and that members serve in their personal capacity, and also reiterates that, in the
elections of the Committees, consideration shall be given to equitable geographical
distribution of membership and to the representation of the different forms of
civilization and of the principal legal systems;
17. Invites the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, when considering the reports of States parties, to
continue to identify specific needs that might be addressed by United Nations
departments, funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, including through
the advisory services and technical assistance programme of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
18. Stresses the need for improved coordination among relevant United
Nations mechanisms and bodies in supporting States parties, upon their request, in
implementing the International Covenants on Human Rights and the Optional
Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and
encourages continued efforts in this direction;
19. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made so far by the Human
Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to
improve the efficiency of their working methods and encourages the Committees to
pursue their efforts, welcomes in this regard the meetings held by the Committees
and States parties to exchange ideas on how to render the working methods of the
Committees more efficient, and encourages all States parties to continue to
contribute to the dialogue with practical and concrete proposals and ideas on ways
to improve the effective functioning of the Committees;
20. Takes note of the proposals of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights as well as other proposals on human
rights treaty body reform, inter alia, to harmonize reporting requirements and to

4

A/RES/60/149

create a unified standing treaty body, and looks forward to further deliberations on
this subject;
21. Welcomes the continuing efforts of the Human Rights Committee and the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to strive for uniform standards
in the implementation of the provisions of the International Covenants on Human
Rights;
22. Notes the need for further consideration of the issue of justiciability of
the rights set forth in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and for further efforts towards developing indicators and benchmarks to
measure progress in the national implementation by States parties of the rights
protected by the Covenant;
23. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the open-ended working
group of the Commission on Human Rights established with a view to considering
options regarding the elaboration of an optional protocol to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on its second session, 14 and
encourages all parties to participate actively in the third session, at which the
working group will consider a paper with elements for an optional protocol
presenting a non-judgemental analysis of all the various options for an optional
protocol, to be submitted by the Chairperson of the working group in order to
facilitate a more focused discussion at the third session;
24. Encourages the specialized agencies that have not yet done so to submit
their reports on the progress made in achieving the observance of the provisions of
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, in accordance
with article 18 of the Covenant, and expresses its appreciation to those that have
done so;
25. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to assist States parties to
the International Covenants on Human Rights in the preparation of their reports,
including by convening seminars or workshops at the national level for the training
of government officials engaged in the preparation of such reports and by exploring
other possibilities available under the programme of advisory services in the field of
human rights;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights effectively assists the Human Rights
Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in the
implementation of their respective mandates by providing, inter alia, adequate
Secretariat staff resources and conference and other relevant support services;
27. Also requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly
informed of the status of the International Covenants on Human Rights and the
Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
including all reservations and declarations, through the United Nations websites.
64th plenary meeting
16 December 2005

_______________
14

E/CN.4/2005/52.

5
