UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2477e

MEETING:

NEW

13 SEPTEMBER 1983

-YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2477)

.. ... . .... .... ... .. ... .... ... .. ... ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..-. . ..*...............

1

Letter dated 12 September 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations
of Nicaragua addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15975). .

1

S/PV. 2477

‘i,.
i-

..i

,b’.

_,

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . ‘.) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Securi!y Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2477th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday,
president: Mr. Noel G. SINCLAIR

13 September

Council itself to the alarming escalation of aggression thatour country has suffered during the last few weeks. New
successive and co-ordinated acts of aggression have
occurred in recent days. Their nature and scope give rise
to real concern, since they reveal that the level of assistance to Somozist and mercenary groups adopted and
maintained
by the United States Administration
is
increasing progressively.

(Guyana).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2477)
1. Adoption
2.

1983, at 10.30 a.m.

5. We will not give an exhaustive account at this time of
the latest attacks and violations of our territory during the
past months; there have been hundreds of such cases since
the last time Nicaragua came to the Council. However, it is
necessary to mention here some particularly flagrant ones
that have taken place during this last week which clearly
demonstrate that the counter-revolutionary
groups are
being supplied with an increasing amount of sophisticated
equipment.

of the agenda

Letter dated 12 September 1983 from the Deputy
Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15975)
The meeting was called to order at 11.40 a.m.

6. At dawn on 8 September of this year a Cessna 404
airplane bombed Agusto Char Sandino International Airport in Managua and the Sandinist air force installations.
At the same time, another counter-revolutionary
airplane
bombed a residential community, the objective here being
the home of the Minister for External Relations, Father
Miguel D’Escoto Brockmann. In the first attack two 500pound bombs of United States manufacture were dropped.
Three officials of the Sandinist air force were wounded,
and a civilian, a student employed by the airport customs,
Miguel Erwin Garcia, 21 years old, died of bums suffered
in the bombing. The airplane that carried out the attack
was downed by the national anti-aircraft defence; both
pilots died in the crash. The documentation found indicated that one of them, Agustin Roman Maradiaga, was a
Somozist who had been granted asylum in the United
States. We will give more information on him further on.
In the second attack, the other airplane dropped a bomb
similar to the ones dropped in the first, that is, a bomb of
United States manufacture. It fell in the vicinity of the
Central American College, a private school run by the
Jesuits-a school where more than 1,500 children study.
Fortunately, there was only material damage, involving
the destruction of lamps and windows in the school and in
a dozen homes in the surrounding area. There was no loss
of human life.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 12 September 1983 from the Deputy Minister
for External Relations of Nicaragua addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15975)
1. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council is meeting
today in response to the request contained in the letter
dated 12 September 1983 from the Deputy Minister for
External Relations of Nicaragua to the President of the
Council in document S/15975.
2. I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/15979, also containing the text of a
letter dated 12 September from the Deputy Minister for
External Relations of Nicaragua to the President of the
Security Council; and S/15980, with the text of a letter
dated 12 September from the representative of Honduras
to the President of the Security Council.
3. Mr. TINOCO (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President,. it is an honour for me once again to
extend to you the greetings of my delegation and Government on the occasion of your chairing the Council during
this month. Your ability and diplomatic experience will,
without doubt, give wise and correct guidance to the work
in which we are engaged.

7. On the following day, 9 September, at 5.30 a.m., two
T528 type ah-planes, painted in camouflage colours and
originating from Honduran airspace, violated our national
airspace and attacked the port of Corinto, Nicaragua’s
most important port on its Pacific coast. It dropped four
high-explosive bombs. On this occasion the objectives

4. Nicaragua is once again forced to resort to the Council in order to alert the international community and the
1

were a strategic bridge, the docks and the fuel tanks of that
The national anti-aircraft defence reacted immediately and prevented the aircraft from manoeuvring
freely, thus making it impossible for any bombs to hit the
objectives. However, some of the fuel tanks containing
flammable liquids, particularly methyl ketone and hexane,
were penetrated by shrapnel, which caused leaks and made
it necessary to evacuate more than 5,000 civilians from
among the population of Co&to, due to the danger they
faced. One of the airplanes was hit by national anti-aircraft
defence fire and headed south, The other one retreated
towards Honduran airspace.

find out what exists at our only international airport, no
satellites, no AWACS or any other type of complicated
spy planes such as those being used by the Reagan Administration, which are operating illegally in our airspace, are
necessary. We emphasize that the anti-aircraft batteries
depicted in photographs presented by President Reagan as
“dangerous” weapons serve only to defend us from attacks
by those sent from the United States. One need only land
at the Sandino International Airport on any international‘
flight to realize that there is nothing there that comes even
close to what President Reagan so fears.

8. On the same day, 9 September, at 1500 hours, an
aircraft of undetermined type proceeding from Costa
Rican airspace illegally penetrated Nicaraguan airspace in
the area of Bolsillo and La Juana Island, department of
Rio San Juan. It carried out manoeuvres in support of
counter-revolutionary
attacks four kilometres from the
Costa Rican border, as a result of which it was downed by
artillery and rocket fire of the Sandinist People’s Army
anti-aircraft defence.

14. With reference to those illegal flights, it is appropriate to note that last week the Costa Rican people complained about the tremendous noise of the North
American spy planes when they break the sound barrier
flying over Costa Rican soil.

port.

15. The other objective of these attacks, the port of
Co&to, is, according to the military calculations of the
President of the United States as expressed at the same
conference on 23 March, the port of entry for weapons and
military equipment that, according to his own statement,
pose a danger to the region.

9. On the same day, 9 September, at 1900 hours, three
aircraft also proceeding from Costa Rican airspace violated Nicaraguan airspace and attempted to attack the
Cibalsa military unit in the department of Rivas. Again the
national anti-aircraft defence proceeded to repel the attack
and forced the aircraft to return to their place of origin.

16. -Against that background, do those attacks not seem
directly linked to such extraordinary accusations?
17. This concern is further strengthened when we consider, in addition to the Reagan Administration’s
overt
support for the criminal forces of the so-called Nicaraguan
Democratic Front, the collusion of that Government with
the counter-revolutionary forces that operate in the south.

10. On, the same day, two T-33 aircraft originating in
Honduran airspace penetrated all the way into the Matagalpa department on reconnaissance missions.

.

11. The Government of Nicaragua is convinced that
these counter-revolutionary
activities which originate in
Costa Rican territory are not approved by the Govemment of that country. Through frequent dialogue and a
constructive and mature relationship, our two Govemments seek formulas that will prevent incidents of this
nature.

18. Let us recall that several months ago the counterrevolutionary forces operating in the south made a dramatic appeal to the Reagan Administration
to support
their military operations against the Sandinist people’s
revolution by providing them with funds, arms and training, since otherwise, they said, they would be forced to
abandon their activities. In other words, “Either the
United States gives us massive support, just like the support given the counter-revolutionaries
operating in the
north, or we retreat**. Shortly thereafter, those counterrevolutionaries operating along the southern border began
to carry out new activities, and it is obvious that they have
acquired bigger and better means for their counterrevolutionary operations, including a virtual air force. All
of that demonstrates that the help requested from
Washington flows effectively and rapidly.

12. This brief account of the facts leads us to conclude
that military actions are taking place from the north and
the south and confirms the co-ordination that the United
States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), which controls
all the counter-revolutionary activities against Nicaragua,
has been able to establish between Somozist guardsmen of
the so-called Nicaraguan Democratic Force, whose base of
operation is located in Honduras, and the counterrevolutionary and mercenary forces which operate along
the southern border.

19. 7Xe Miami Herald, in its issue of 9 September 1983,
revealed that mysterious donations, supposedly from the
CIA, have strengthened counter-revolutionary
groups
operating along the southern border. One of the leaders of
the counter-revolutionary
group ARDE (Revolutionary
Democratic Alliance), when questioned about the origin of
those donations, answered that he suspected they were
from the CIA. The same counter-revolutionary
leader
admits, according to New Yotk magazine of 12 September,
that one half of the monthly personal operational budget
of the counter-revolutionary
leadership in the south,

13. We are struck by the fact that the civilian and military targets to which we have referred are a key element in
the analysis and presentations made public by the President of the United States, Mr. Ronald Reagan. One of
those civilian targets-the Agusto CCsar Sandino International Airport, which any traveller can use-was the object
of a show by President Reagan on 23 March of this year, in
the course of which he presented a series of photographs
supposedly to demonstrate that the civilian airport harboured an extraordinary military device. We stress that to
2

approximately $450,000, comes from United States intelligence sources. Where else but from the omnipresent CIA?
20. The money which comes out of the pockets of American taxpayers, by way of the CIA budget and its programme against the Nicaraguan revolution, is being used
not only to attempt to destroy that revolution and overthrow its Government, but also to terrorize our people and
inflict even greater suffering upon them. American taxpayers’ money is being used in Nicaragua ‘to assassinate
teachers and to slit the throats of peasant families. The last
18 peasants victimized in this manner were from Waya
district, Rtio Blanco, in the department of Matagalpa, on 3
September. This money is used to terrorize the population
in the border areas and to buy aeroplanes of all sizes to
bomb civilian targets indiscriminately-for
example, in the
suburb of Villa Fontana in Managua. In that bombing,
which was denounced on 8 September, the lives of thousands of students at the Central American College and of
thousands of residents were endangered. The same thing
happened in Corinto, where the lives not only of the 5,000
residents of the area near the petrol tanks attacked on 8
September, but of hundreds of long-shoremen at the port,
who were at work at the time, were endangered. There
could have been a massacre.
21. Terrorism both selective and indiscriminate, is the
translation in Nicaragua of what officials of the American
Administration describe as “pressure”, the policy of ‘putting pressure on Nicaragua’:, which according to those
same officials is yielding results: death and terror.
22. The responsibility of the present United States
Government for these acts of aggression is very clear. Its
own representatives are not in the least hesitant to admit it.
To give only a few of the more recent examples, I draw the
Council’s attention to what President Reagan said at his
press conference on 21 July, to the effect that it is
extremely difficult to achieve peace in Central -America
while the Sandinist Government is in power in Nicaragua.
It is also interesting to recall the statement of an American
diplomat, reflecting the true sentiments of the American
leader, when he told Beth Nissen, of the weekly Newsweek,
that the only thing the Sandinistas could do to please the
White House would be to shoot themselves. There have
been statements along the same lines by the United States
Secretary of Defense, Caspar Weinberger, who affirmed
during his recent trip to Central America that the American Administration’s present aggressive policy is *‘the correct path”. He added, “We should not stop now”.
23. In corroboration of all this, Z%eNew Yodc Timesof 12
September, in an article datelined Washington, 1I September, informed us that Fred C. IklC, Under-Secretary of
Defense for Policy and third-ranking official in the Pentagon, had outlined the Administration’s
position with
respect to the Nicaraguan Government and revolution in a
speech to the Baltimore Council on Foreign Affairs, in
‘_ which he said, “We must prevent consolidation of a Sandi,<nista regime in Nicaragua that would become an arsenal for
insurgency.”
._

24. Today The Washington Post, on page A 12, in an article
headed “Central America Military Viiory Called Necessity”, referring to the statement made yisterday by Mr.
Iklt, says:
“Fred C. Ikle, the third-ranking
official in the
Defense Department, last night called for a military
victory in Central America, saying negotiations alone
cannot resolve current conflicts there.
“. . .
“In addition to seeking more military and economic
aid for El Salvador and rightist insurgents in Nicaragua, the Reagan Administration
has decided to
increase by as many as 11 the number of U.S. military
personnel in El Salvador*‘.*
Later the article quotes Mr. IklC as saying:
“ ‘Let me make this clear to you,‘.Ikle continued, ‘we
do not seek a military defeat for our friends. We do not
seek a military stalemate. We seek victory for the forces of democracy.’
‘6. . .
“Ikle urged continuation of covert aid to ‘democratic resistance forces in Nicaragua.’ Any other
action, he said, ‘would turn Nicaragua into a sanctuary
from which the nations of Central Anierica &Id be
safely attacked, but in which U.S.-supported forces
could not operate.’
“A strong and unthreatened Nicaragua, in turn,
could force the United States to’place troops in neighboring countries, ‘as in Korea and West Germany,’
Ikle said. ‘Clearly, we must prevent such a partition of
Central America.“‘*
25. These quotations from a statement by Mr. IklC, of
the Pentagon, clearly reflect the policy which the American Administration has been following and which it plans
to continue in the coming days, with great danger to peace
in Central America and in Latin America in general.
26. These clear expressions publicly acknowledging the
Reagan Administration’s
responsibility for the aggression
against Nicaragua and its intention to destroy our revolution can now be confirmed by documents found on one of
the counter-revolutionary
pilots of the airplane which
bombed the international airport at Managua and which
was brought down by the Sandinist anti-aircraft forces;
Documents such as the .resident alien card, the permit to
reenter the United States with multiple entries, and the
pilot’s licence issued in Miami, among others, clearly indicate all the facilities and support given to the counterrevolutionary Agustin Romln by the American authorities
just a few weeks after he went into exile, so that he could
carry out his counter-revolutionary
activities. It should be
-*Quoted

in English

by the speaker.

recalled that thousands of Nicaranuans who have lived in - 32. This constitutes clear proof of the ease with which ..
the United States for several yea; have great difficulty in
the American authorities grant facilities and aircraft to
acquiring the minimum documentary or legal assistance
counter-revolutionaries
who attack the Nicaraguan revofor their stay in this country.
lution, bomb civilian targets and thus endanger peace in
Central America. The members of the Council will have
27. If we pause to review the pilot’s log of that counterall this information, which has been photocopied, availarevolutionary, we note his constant ‘journeys between
ble to them.
Miami and various Central American countries and
between Miami and other United States cities in various
33. Regrettably, war continues to be at the heart of the
types of transport aircraft, including the DC-6 and the
policy of the United States Administration
towards CenBoeing 727. We are absolutely sure that this individual was
tral America and Nicaragua. It does not want peace or
not working for any commercial airline but that the aircraft
dialogue, it wants blindly to destroy the aspirations for
t mentioned, acquired with CIA money for the counterjustice and national independence of the Central American
* revolution, transported arms and all kinds of supplies for its
peoples. In the eyes of the ultra-right executive power in
activities against Nicaragua. We are also certain that they
this country, these aspirations are impertinent and intolerare the same ones used to bomb our people.
ant threats to the interests of the empire and its goal of
domination in the area.
28. In order for the Security Council to become aware of
the true dimension of the aggression perpetrated against
34. Examples and proof of this warmongering policy
the Nicaraguan revolution, an aggression shamelessly sup
abound; recent and very eloquent examples can be menported by the United States, we believe it useful to present
tioned. For example, in response to the serious and painsome of the originals of the documents taken from the
staking proposal put forward by the Presidents of
pilot who was shot down over Sandino Airport in
Colombia, Mexico, Venezuela and Panama on 17 July in
Managua.
Cancun [see S.15877, annex] in an attempt to prevent the
generalisation of war in Central America, the United
29. Representatives can see the pilot’s resident alien card
States expressed verbal “support**, but then a few days
as well as his Social Security card, documents which thoulater its specific response on the ground was to send its
sands of Nicaraguans who have resided in the United
war fleet to the coasts of Nicaragua and thousands of
States for many months and years would have liked to
United States Marines to Honduras, contrary to the speobtain in the way that this counter-revolutionary received
cific request of the aforementioned Presidents to abstain
them only a few weeks after arriving in the country. We
from any measure that might increase tension in Central
should also like to show representatives the permit to reAmerica.
enter the United States, a kind of passport for those who
35. Similarly, on 19 July, in response to our serious and
have found asylum in this country. Inside this document
responsible
six-point proposal [see S/15878, annex], put
we see that the subject, a person who supposedly found
forward in this very Council, the United States again
asylum here, has the visa and the right to enter and leave
expressed, in the words of President Reagan himself, that it
the United States, precisely in order to carry out the
had been a “‘positive step”. Nevertheless the fact was that
counter-revolutionary
activities which the CIA has been
they proceeded to send their war fleet and thousands of
having him perform.
Marines for joint manoeuvres with Honduras. Today, two
30. It is also interesting to look again at the pilot’s log of
months after submission of the peace proposal for Central
the pilot of the downed aircraft. If we look carefully at the
America and after it had been verbally considered as a
flight records, all of which bear the signature of the
positive step by President Reagan, we have not received
counter-revolutionary
pilot, Agustln Roman, we see that
the slightest response, comment or observation on it.
he made constant flights between Miami and various Cen36. Consistent with this same warmongering policy of
tral American and Latin American cities, undoubtedly to
make contact with the CIA networks in the Agency’s
the Administration, while the countries of the Contadora
Group and the five Central American countries were meetefforts to overthrow the Nicaraguan Government.
ing recently on 7, 8 and 9 September in Panama, laboriously trying to find a way to understanding and detente in
31. We see, for instance, flights in DC-6 and Boeing 727
aircraft and in all kinds of aircraft from Miami to Latin
Central America, the CIA was instigating the bombing of
Managua and Corinto and Defense Secretary Weinberger
American cities. On 17 June, for example, we see that he
flew a DC-6 aircraft, identification number 666P, from
was visiting Central America and emphasizing the continuation of military measures as a basic element of the
Miami to Panama; on 18 December, in the same DC-6,
number 666P, he flew back from Panama to Miami; on 25
Administration’s
policy towards Central America.
June, in the same DC-6, number 666P, he flew from
Miami to El Salvador; on 26 June, in the same DC-6, he
37. The spectre of a generalized conflagration in Central
flew from El Salvador to Miami; on 28 June, in a Boeing
America as a result of this policy of war and aggression is a
727, identification number DISAL, he flew from Miami
painful reality in our region. As long as the hegemonist,
ultra-conservative sectors of the present United States
to John F. Kennedy Airport in New York; on 30 June,
two days later and in the same Boeing 727, he flew from
Administration continue to believe that the national interest of the United States is incompatible with the indepenJFK Airport to Miami and thence immediately
to
’
Honduras.
dence of the Central American republics, as long as they
4

continue to think the quest for internal social justice by
those countries should of necessity not .go beyond their
own conception of justice and social relations and as long
as the principle of the national security of the United States
continues to be perceived as contradictory to the natural
tendency of Latin American nations - towards non- ’
alignment and political independence, those conservative
sectors will continue to follow misguided nolicies and to
place our peoples in grave danger aid in situations of great
tension.

38. For its,part, Nicaragua reiterates its constant readiness for dialogue and understanding with the United States
and with even greater reason with our Central American
II
brothers.
39. The PRESIDENT:
There are no further speakers.
The Security Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dtpositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK l-IOJIYY%iTb

II3&4HIISI

OPIAHII3AIWI

OITbELDIHEHHbIX

HAUFIIl

M3ArwurOpraHu?auuu06aeAHHeHHblx
Hauntt MOXCHOYynl4TbB
KHSiXUJblXMaTa3kiHaX
HaT~T~BaXBOBCeXpaROHaXMupa.Has~uTeCnp~Ku
06 83AiuISiIIX BBaLUeMKHU~HOM
HaraswHe
HJIW IIWlllHTe
no aApeCy:
0pWiSf3aI~iSl
06aeA5fHeHHbIX
Hauuti,
CeXIltiR
IlpOAaXte
H3AaHHtt.HbdiOpK
HJIH TeHeBa.

II0

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONBS DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas es& en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras en
todas panes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

00300

90-60205-January

1992-2.050
