United Nations

A/RES/63/235

General Assembly

Distr.: General
17 March 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 107

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2008
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/63/L.64 and Add.1)]

63/235. Agriculture development and food security
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 1 Agenda 21, 2
the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 3 the Johannesburg
Declaration on Sustainable Development 4 and the Plan of Implementation of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation”), 5 the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on
Financing for Development, 6 the 2005 World Summit Outcome 7 and the Doha
Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up
International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the
Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, 8
0F

1F

2F

3F

4F

5F

6F

7F

Reaffirming the goal set out in paragraph 19 of the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, 9 to halve, by 2015, the proportion of the world’s people whose income
is less than one dollar a day and the proportion of people who suffer from hunger,
8F

Recalling the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food
Summit Plan of Action, 10 the Declaration of the World Food Summit: five years
later, 11 including the goal of achieving food security for all through an ongoing
effort to eradicate hunger in all countries, with an immediate view to reducing by
9F

10F

_______________
1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
5
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
6
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
7
See resolution 60/1.
8
Resolution 63/239, annex.
9
See resolution 55/2.
10
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the World Food Summit, 13–17 November
1996 (WFS 96/REP), part one, appendix.
11
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the World Food Summit: five years
later, 10–13 June 2002, part one, appendix; see also A/57/499, annex.

08-48489

A/RES/63/235

half the number of undernourished people by no later than 2015, as well as the
commitment to achieving the Millennium Development Goals,
Recognizing that agriculture plays a crucial role in addressing the needs of a
growing global population and is inextricably linked to poverty eradication,
especially in developing countries, and stressing that integrated and sustainable
agriculture and rural development approaches are therefore essential to achieving
enhanced food security and food safety in an environmentally sustainable way,
Emphasizing the urgent need to increase efforts at the national, regional and
international level to address food security and agriculture development as part of
the international development agenda,
Remaining concerned that high and volatile food prices and the global food
crisis pose a serious challenge to the fight against poverty and hunger, as well as to
the efforts of developing countries to attain food security and achieve the objective
of reducing by half the number of undernourished people by no later than 2015 as
well as other internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals, and reiterating that the global food crisis has multiple and
complex causes and that its consequences require a comprehensive and coordinated
response in the short, medium and long term by national Governments and the
international community,
Welcoming the holding of the High-level Conference on World Food Security:
the Challenges of Climate Change and Bioenergy, from 3 to 5 June 2008 in Rome,
and acknowledging the initiative of the Secretary-General in establishing the Highlevel Task Force on the Global Food Security Crisis, which has produced the
Comprehensive Framework for Action, 12 as well as other multilateral, regional and
national initiatives,
1F

Taking note with appreciation of the work undertaken by relevant international
bodies and organizations, including the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development and the World
Food Programme, on agriculture development and enhancing food security and by
the Commission on Sustainable Development on the thematic cluster of issues on
agriculture, rural development, land, drought, desertification and Africa,
Emphasizing that the United Nations can play an effective role in building a
global consensus in addressing agriculture development and food security,
Reiterates the need to adequately and urgently address agriculture
1.
development and food security in the context of national and international
development policies;
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session an
2.
item entitled “Agriculture development and food security”, to be taken up by the
Second Committee;
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
3.
sixty-fourth session a report on national, regional and international efforts within
the context of the present resolution, under the item entitled “Agriculture
development and food security”, in close cooperation and coordination with United
Nations relevant bodies and organizations.
73rd plenary meeting
22 December 2008

_______________
12

2

Available from www.un.org/issues/food/taskforce/cfa.shtml.
