THIRTY-FIRST

M/p 2 8 ;y;$

YEAR
N
)“#c .
I_,..,

1941st

MEETING:

‘.’

12 JULY 1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/lWl)

. , . . . . . . .. . . .. .. . . . . , ,. . . . . . ,. , . . , . . ,

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . , , , , . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . , , . , , . . . . . . . , . , , . . . , , . . .
Complaint by the Prime Minister of Mauritius, current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, of the “act of aggression” by Israel against the
Republic of Uganda:
(N) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Assistant Executive Secretary of’the
Organization of African Unity to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12126);
(h) Letter dated 6 July,1976 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritania
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12128);
(c.) Letter dated 4 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/12123);
(~0 Letter dated 5 July 1976 from the Chargk d’affaires u.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/12124). . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . I ,. . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV, 1941

>’

,.

,,

.

:
I

‘,

‘1

.s’:
!
.:
i/~

;I
/

i

,:
‘,’

::

‘,.,

i

8,

,:

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.

/I
,,
‘;, ,, I’:
i
/
I’ j
I
/’ !:
,,_,I
j
I’j,
1 ‘,‘.

”

;
‘1
;,I; ,, ~‘7:

!,: ,/!i I!
!,“1;

.I i

,,,il
:

.

(8

1;:’ i’
., I
:I! Ll:
18 :’ 1,
4’
7’
,, “j ,*‘,
‘; ‘,). ,, ‘.
,I ,’‘, ,I/ !
, “8 18
,1: ,I’ $,I
: ;j 2”
~1I! ,j;j, .
,j, i’j,!
~ : /I.I 1:
;I:,:l,i’:,;,‘:
1.;’ ,/I,‘::
,.I,/!;:
1’; I.;‘,:
1”: .,
(;’ I ,mjl$l
,)
‘)j,:,I ‘8
t.,
,i
I,,//!.
nj., .,,/. :
i :q,,,
: I,: I
i‘!,I
;:!’ ‘,’.,
,.! ‘,, ,; 1’
:! ~:‘.
lil ;I’“I
i!,1i 1,
I,lj’i,,
:
:;‘a/ ,,! 8’

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~rpplernents
of the Qfjciul
Records qf the Security Council.
The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutiw?s
rrd
Dedsions
qf the Sec’wity CoutwiI. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

4

i,“; ., /;,:m“’,,

i

.

.,.

1941st MEETING
Held in New York, on Monday, 12 July 1976, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Piero VINCI

(Italy),

(c) Letter dated 4 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/12123);
(d) Letter dated 5 July 1976 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Uganda to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12124)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Provisional
1. Adoption

1. The PRESIDENT:
.In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council at its 1939th and 1940th
meetings, I invite the representatives
of the Federal Republic of Germany, Guinea, Israel, Kenya,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Qatar, Somalia, Uganda and
the United Republic of Cameroon to participate in the
Council’s discussion, without the right to vote.

agenda (S/Agenda/lWl)

of the agenda

2. Complaint by the Prime Minister of Mauritius,
current Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity, of the “act of aggression” by Israel against
the Republic of Uganda:
(l/) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Assistant
Executive Secretary of the Organization of
African Unity to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12126);
(I,) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritania to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12128); .
(c) Letter dated 4 July 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/12123);
(d) Letter dated 5 July 1976 from the ChargC
d’affaires ~r.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Uganda to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12124).

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received a letter
requesting an invitation to participate in the Council’s
discussion from the representative of Yugoslavia. In
accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representative of Yugoslavia to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote.
3. I invite the representative of Yugoslavia to take
the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that he will be invited
to take a place at the Council table when it is his turn
to speak.

Adoption of the agenda

Complaint by the Prime Minister of Mauritius, current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, of
the “Act of aggression” by Israel against the Republic of Uganda:
(a) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Assistant Executive Secretary of the Organization of African Unity
to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/12126);
(b) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritania to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12128);

4. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (intp~prptotion ,fiam Fr~w*k):
Mr. President, before coming to the question now
before the Council, allow me to extend to you the
sincere congratulations
of my delegation
on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of July. My delegation believes that, thanks to
I

10. Have we, then, the right to pelt President Idi
Amin with insults and to paint such an unpleasant
portrait of him when we know that, out of all the actors
in the tragedy at Entebbe, it was he who, in the final
analysis, helped to bring about a denouement which
has been described as fortunate? Can we regard President Idi Rmin as an accomplice in this act of aerial
piracy without vigorously condemning
that great
Power, a party to the Hague Convention for the Suppression’of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft,’ which asked
a small country to harbour the hijackers and the hostages? In fact, what we are seeing is tremendous
hypocrisy on the part of the great Powers. Let us suppose for a moment that the hijacked aircraft had landed
in the Soviet Union, for example. Do the members of
the Council think that in that case Israel would have
dared to commit this foul act? Of course not.

your outstanding qualities as an experienced and tried
diplomat, the Council’s debates will take place in a
calm climate of sincere co-operation. Your country,
Italy, and mine, the People’s Republic
of Benin,
have long been committed to mutually advantageous
co-operation, which is making constant progress both
in the European Economic Community
and within
the specific framework of relations between our two
countries.
5. I should like to renew to your predecessor, Ambassador Jackson of the Co-operative
Republic of
Guyana, my delegation’s sincere congratulations
for
the impartial and outstanding manner in which he led
our debates for the month of June. My delegation
was particularly honoured because the distinguished
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guyana presided over
our last meetings. This was an outstanding and noteworthy tribute to the importance that all third world
nations attach to the noble ideals of the United Nations
for the safeguarding of international peace and security.

Il.
The Council, which has the lofty task of maintaining international peace and security at all costs,
must examine impartially and without ulterior motives
this flagrant and premeditated act of aggression that
has been whole-heartedly
criticized by Africa and
unanimously
condemned by the peace-loving
and
justice-loving peoples of the world.

6. Finally, I should like to take this opportunity
to
extend the Beninese delegation’s most sincere and
heartfelt condolences to the Chinese delegation at
the passing of a great and unforgettable son of China,
Comrade Chou-teh, member of the Central Committee
and President of the Standing Committee
of the National People’s Congress of the People’s Republic of
China. Comrade Chou-teh will always be an example
of a revolutionary patriot of great stature, who participated in an outstanding manner in the struggle for
national liberation and in the creation and consolidation of socialist China.

12. Africa as a whole has its eyes on the Council,
and it rejects in advance any manceuvre aimed at
getting the Council to discuss a question that is not
before it. No excuse, no justification-however
intelligently presented by the Israeli aggressors and their
friends-can
push into the background the obviously
criminal nature of this act, whose consequences are
so serious. Indeed, the facts themselves prove that
statement to be true.

7. My delegation associates itself fully with the
clarification made this morning by the representative
of the Libyan Arab Republic; this is why it will limit
itself strictly to the item inscribed on the agenda, that
is, Uganda’s complaint regarding Israel’s aggression
on its territory.

13. President Amin, who deserves our sympathy
and our full solidarity, took personal charge of the
situation with a view to settling the matter peacefully
and saving innocent jives. At every stage of the events
connected with the tragedy, he did everything he
could to preserve the lives and safeguard the security
of the hostages aboard the French Airbus diverted to
Entebbe. The best proof of this is the impartial tribute
paid to President Amin by the flight engineer of the
Airbus in Paris, on behalf of the crew and the passengers-a tribute later confirmed by the commandant
of the plane. All the hostages, without exception, were
given special attention by the President of Uganda.
He made medical supplies and food available to them.
Clippings from the international press also prove that
the passengers of the airbus hijacked to Entebbe were
not subjected to bad treatment or any demonstrations
of hatred on the part of the Ugandans, who, on the
contrary, scrupulously observed the rules of African
hospitality.

8. The matter brought before the Council by the last
summit meeting of African Heads of State meeting in
Mauritius is one of principle which can be approached
very simply. There is no need to go outside this precise framework, clearly defined by the 48 African
Heads of State, and lose ourselves in conjecture or in
the various byways of international politics, in order
to approach the consideration of the question whose
immediate or far-reaching implications
for international peace and security are all too evident.
9. Indeed, what is at stake here? This is an act of
aggression perpetrated against Uganda. Can we forget
what led to this reprehensible act of which Uganda
was the victim? Can we forget that Uganda, in agreeing
to allow the hijacked aircraft to land at its airport,
onIy acceded to the request of a great nation which,
in any case, was only trying to save its aircraft and
the lives of the innocent passengers?

14. Another very important element which attests to
the good faith of the President of Uganda and which
helped considerably to relax the very tense atmosphere was that he was able to obtain the progressive
release of a large number of hostages. It should be
3

and small, rich and poor-with
due respect for their
diversity, have joined together in the United Nations.

added that the President of Uganda was able, at the
expiration of the first deadline set by the hijackers,
to obtain an extension of the deadline until 4 July.
That deadline had not yet been reached when the
Israeli aggressors put their diabolical plan into effect.

22. By lheir act of aggression the Israeli authorities
have placed themselves beyond the pale of international law and justice. The Council must realize this
and do all it can to safeguard and strengthen international peace and security.

15. Finally, although Uganda no longer has diplomatic relations with Israel, is it not a fact that President Amin agreed to admit to his rerritory a special
Israeli envoy entrusted with the task of following the
negotiations for the exchange of Palestinian prisoners
for the 103 hostages, almost all of whom were Israeli?

23. My delegation unequivocally
and vehemently
condemns Israel’s act of aggression against Uganda
-an act which has caused many Ugandan casuaIties
vast material destruction
which have evoked unanimous sympathy for the Ugandan people. Hence it
is absurd, if not immoral, to considerthat act a victory,
for it can in no way brighten tarnished image of the
Israeli Zionists in the comity of nations.

16. The revelations widely disseminated
in the
international press have proved, (I jktiori,
that the
President of Uganda and his people had been duped
in a most dishonest and inadmissible
way. This
precious Israeli negotiator was nothing other than
a terrorist saboteur officially sent to Uganda by Israel.
He was nothing but a super-spy whose mission was
to prepare the ground by destroying the telecommunication facilities, thereby making it easier to carry
out a reprehensible crime that was such a danger to
international peace and security.

24. As a matter of fact, Uganda is not the only victim
of this tragedy. The victims are the peoples of Africa,
indeed, the peoples of the entire world, who are struggling against all forms of domination in international
relations. Israel’s aggression is consistent wlith, the
logic of international
imperialism, .which will’stop at
nothing in order to impose its law.

17. As to the alleged connivance of the President of
Uganda with the hijackers, that was an accusation
which they did not hesitate to make, for everyone
knows that the people of Uganda and the overwhelming
majority of the international community support the
Palestinian cause, which is a deeply just cause.

25. Israel’s aggression confirms us in our position
regarding Israeli Zionism, which remains a political
doctrine of aggression and domination, .a bridgehead
for the scourge of international imperialism.

18. In the light of the foregoing, all of the actions
taken by President Amin throughout the tragic events
“_ in Entebbe reflect a deep and praiseworthy humanitarian concern.

26. For all those reasons, Israel’s act of aggression
against Uganda cannot but receive unanimous disapproval and unreserved condemnation.
Israel must
be required to pay compensation
for the damage
inflicted on Uganda.

19. The false accusations and lies of the enemies of
Africa grid of the freedom of peoples are aimed solely
at sowing confusion and division. Israel’s criminal raid
in Entebbe is an outright act of aggression that flies
in the face of international law, which Israel regards
as a mere scrap of paper.

27. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Somalia. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
28. Mr. HUSSEN (Somalia): Sir, may I at the outset
congratulate you upon your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of July. Your
wide-ranging experience and diplomatic skills qualify
you to guide the deliberations of this august body.
My delegation takes special pleasure in seeing you
presiding over the Council, as you represent a country
with which the Somali Democratic
Republic has
strong and long-standing ties of close friendship and
co-operation. Once again, I am pleased to renew my
country’s appreciation to your country for the sincerity and good faith with which Italy carried out the
Trusteeship Agreement relating to Somalia. I should
like to express rn3 delegation’s thanks to you and to
the rest of the Council for having permitted my delegation to take part in the debate.

20. The Israeli aggressors, their protectors and their
admirers have deliberately created a dangerous precedent which, it must be honestly acknowledged, will
pose a constant threat to the collecti’ve security which
the United Nations, through our Council, is responsible for preserving. No criminal act by isolated individuals, no matter how reprehensible it may be, can
justify any nation’s resorting to the law of the jungle.
21. Those who, unscrupulously
and deliberately,
have impIicated themselves in this criminal act of
war have inevitably given Israel carte h/n/z&e and
are prepared to condone a repetition
elsewhere.
Therein lies the true danger--that mankind inay once
again be plunged into nightmare, with the crumbling
of all the values and noble ideals that inspire the United
Nations. It is to protect those values and ideals that
the nations of the world, powerful and weak, large

29. At this moment, and before I go further, allow
me tb express my delegation’s heartfelt condolences
to the delegation of the People’s Republic of China
3

upon the demise of Comrade Chou-teh, whose qualities
as one of China’s greatest revolutionary
leaders will
be imprinted
on our memories throughout the years.
I request the representative
of China to convey our
sincere expression of sympathy to the Government
and people of China.

by the Sudanese civil war, in which southern Sudanese.. . had been fighting for 10 years with northern
Sudanese”. Though it is a well-recorded fact, the
paper has reconfirmed that throughout this long period
Israel continued to supply arms shipments to the
southern Sudanese. Other countries, including my
own, have also been subjected to the same unwarranted interference in a variety of forms. Uganda is
only the latest victim of the continuous terror and
intimidation perpetrated by Israel.

30. We asked to participate in this debate to add our
voice to those who preceded us, and to urge the Council to condemn, in the strongest possible terms, the
Zionist regime in Tel Aviv for the naked act of aggression which it has committed against the people and
Government
of the Republic of Uganda. We ask the
Council to do so because what is at stake here is the
very existence and sovereignty of a Member State.
Not only does this act of terrorism and aggression
unleashed by the Zionist regime against Uganda on
4 July threaten the purposes and principles of the
United Nations and its Charter, but it constitutes a
danger to international
peace and security.

34. Numerous hijackings, most of them politically
motivated, have taken place over the years. The victims of these acts have been innocent civilian citizens
of different nationalities. The international community
has consistently demanded the release of these innocent people and their safe conduct to their destinations. Yet, we all know that the safety of such victims,
important and legitimate as it is, cannot be a justification for a blatant act of aggression against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a State and the wanton killing of its innocent citizens. Such a despicable
act could only be committed by Israel which, assured
of the full support of a powerful country and always
shamefully anxious to display its arrogance, has made
it a major principle of its governmental
policies to
espouse State terrorism. Such an attitude is not the
least surprising, for Israel is itself a product of terrorism.

31. It is with great indignation that the people and
Government of the Somali Democratic Republic view
this unprovoked and unlawful act of aggression. This
feeling of indignation is aptly summed up in the telegram transmitted
by Jaalle Mohamed
Siad Barre,
President of the Somali Democratic
Republic,
to
Idi Amin, President of the Republic of Uganda. In that
telegram, the President of the Somali Democratic
Republic stated :

35. Israel also made it a habit that it is customarily
expected for its delegations at international
forums
to remind us, as it did before the Council on 9 July
[1939th meting],
of the Nazi holocaust in Europe in
order to enlist sympathy and support. Israel should
realize that, if the world condemned Hitler and his
Nazi philsophy based on racial purity, it is only logical
that Israel too must expect the same from the world
community as it practises policies similar to, if not
identical with, those of Hitler yesterday and those of
Pretoria’s white minority regime today.

32. The Republic of Uganda is not the first peaceloving country whose sovereignty
and territorial
integrity have been violated by the arrogant racist
Zionist regime. Since its illegal occupation of the Arab
land of Palestine 30 years ago, this regime has been
engaged in committing
unprovoked aggression against
sovereign nations. For an illustration
of Israel’s
habitual transgression and its unbelievable, barefaced
inclination to indulge in an unrestrained attitude, we
need only look at the surrounding Arab States. We
can recall the numerous occasions on which the world
came to the brink of an all-engulfing war because of
the callous behaviour of the Zionist r&gime in the
Middle East and its utter disregard for international
law. The plight of the Palestinian Arab nation is a
perfect example of the fiendish mentality of the Israeli
regime.

36. The Zionist regime claims that it was alone in
planning and executing its atrocity in Uganda. The
Government and people of the Somali Democratic
Republic find it very hard to believe that Israel did
not get a helping hand from its customary supporters
in conducting this sordid affair, as has been the case
in all its past military adventures. We feel strongly
that the conspiracy is larger than has been admitted
to, that the truth will come out in time, and that whoever took part in this shameful act will ultimately be
uncovered.

33. It is a well-known fact that this racist Zionist
regime has ‘been engaged, through the years, in wilful
violence and subversion in Africa and elsewhere. It
if fitting in this regard to quote from The New York
Tirms of 10 July, which, in a long article dedicated to
the discrediting
of the Head of State of a Member
State of this Organization,
touched incidentaIly
upon
Israel’s open interference in the internal affairs of
other Arab and African countries. It stated, inter alia:
“Israel’s
interest in Uganda was largely motivated

37. The representative of Israel tried to convince us
-especially
the members of the Council-that
even
my country, Somalia, was involved in the hijacking
of the French airbus. He tried to make the participation of the Somali Ambassador in the negotiations for
the safety of the hostages look as if the Government
of Somalia was linked to the venture. This sinister
allegation is unfounded and slanderous, to say the
4

least. The reason why the Somali Ambassador accepted the plea to participate in the negotiations, apart
from his natural sympathy, compassion and concern
for human life, was that he was the dean of the Arab
Ambassadors accredited to Uganda. In that capacity,
as has been explained by President Idi Amin in his communication
contained
in document
S/12124, the
Somali Ambassador agreed to participate in the negotiations along with his French counterpart. It is difficult to believe that the Israeli representative would
have the insolence to distort the facts and to attempt
to discredit the compassionate action undertaken by
the Somali Ambassador. Had the Somali Ambassador
done otherwise and refused to lend his requested services to the cause of saving the hostages, it would, in
our opinion, have been an unforgivable act on his
part. For this reason there is no room for the Israeli
allegation. However, this is merely another demonstration of the desperate and cynical attitude which
the Zionist regime has for anything that smacks of
humanitarianism.

the law of the jungle,
survive.

where only the strong would

40. Even the Organization of African Unity was not
spared indiscriminate harrassment on the part of the
Tel Aviv representative. He felt no shame in offending
an organization of 48 independent States. Allow me
to refer to what he said in this connexion:
“The move by the Organization of African Unity
to bring this complaint to the Council must appear
to be completely incongruous were one’s senses
not completely dulled by the utter incongruity of...
the proceedings of this Organization. The deliberations on this occasion will doubtless be no exception.” [Ibid., pnra. 124.1
Such insolence on the part of a regime th’at fully shares
with Pretoria’s minority regime the belief that they
are superior races and that other races are inferior to
them is preposterous and utterly unacceptable. Africa
makes no compromise.on the rejection and denunciation of such and absurd notion.

38. Throughout his statement, the Israeli representative endeavoured to drive a wedge between the
Arab States and the African States by acting as a selfappointed devil’s advocate. It is not, of course, new
to us that he should do so, because we know the
history of Israel and the fact that it thrives on sowing
seeds of trouble and subversion. We know, too, that
the Tel Aviv regime derives its inspiration, strangely
enough, from discord and violence.

41. In conclusion, I should like to emphasize once
again that my delegation urges the Council to take
adequate and prompt measures against the Israeli
regime and to condemn it for its unlawful act of aggression against the Republic of Uganda.
42. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
the Somali Democratic Republic for the congratulations he conveyed to me. I am particularly grateful
to him for his reference to the close historic links between the Somali Democratic Republic and my country and to the satisfactory way in which Italy has
carried out the mandate conferred upon it by the
United Nations. Having myself been involved in that
task, in however small a role, I fully share some happy
remembrances with my Somali colleague.

39, In his fruitless groping for previous examples of
what I can describe as “justifiable
violence”,
the
Israeli representative once again attempted to feed
us another distorted version of the unfortunate incident at Loyada, a small village on the border of the
Somali Democratic Republic with so-called French
Somaliland.
If the Zionist representative had any
desire for the truth, he would not have blinded himself to the facts of that incident. It it were not’for his
deviousness, he would have recalled-for
it is there
in. the records of the Council-that,
first of all, the
vehicle in which the children were held was in a territory under Frech rule, and not in the Somali Republic’s territory, as he would have us believe. The
Zionist representative,
in his desperate groping for
an elusive justification of his regime’s shameful and
unprecedented action, assembled examples of other
activities involving violence which had been committed by other Powers. He cited incidents such as
the Mavcrgiiez, Loyada and Entebbe-all
of which
are incidents of aggression by those States whose
arrogance of power has made them oblivious to respect for the principles of international
law and for
equality and sovereingty among nations, large and
small, the very principles
this Organization
was
created to safeguard and uphold. We believe that it
is the duty of the Council to reject such a contention,
which, if it went unchallenged, might undermine the
very reason for the existence of this world body. This
idea is nothing but a suggestion we should return to

43. The next speaker is the representative of the
Federal Republic of Germany. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table.
44. Before I give him the floor, I should like to convey to him and to the .Government and people of his
country, on behalf of the Council and on my own
behalf, our most sincere condolences upon the demise
of a former Head of State, Mr. Gustav Heinemann,
who was President of the Federal Republic of Germany
from 1 July 1969 until 30 June 1974. In this connexion,
I wish to recall a significant event which occurred
during his tenure of office: the admission of the Federal Republic of Germany to the United Nations.
45. I ca1I on the representative of the Federal Repub&of Germany.
46. Mr, von WECHMAR
(Federal Republic of
Germany): Mr. President, let me, on behalf of my
delegation, thank you and the other members of the
Council for the kind words of condolence that YOU
5

55. It has been alleged that the Federal Government
participated in the operation to save the. hostages and
that it knew about the rescue plan in advance. This
assertion is false and without any foundation.

have expressed on the occasion of the untimely death
of the former President of the Federal Republic of
Germany, Mr. Gustav Heinemann.
47. My delegation would first like to express its
gratitude to the members of the Council for authorizing our participation in this debate.

56. We hope that this debate will clarify the course
of events at Entebbe airport. Their consequences are
grave. They concern us all. New international tension
has been created.

48. It is for the first time that the delegation of the
Federal Republic of Germany addresses the Security
Council. We are particularly pleased that this should
occur under the presidency of the representative of
Italy, a country with which we are closely ,united as
friends and as partners in the European Economic
Community.
Mr, President, your wisdom, skill and
long experience in international affairs will guarantee
the most objective guidance of the Council’s procedures.

57. In the Federal Government’s
view, this new
case of taking hostages has clearly shown once again
that an escalation of force, whatever reason may be
given for it, jeopardizes international
security and
threatens the foundation of normal intergovernmental
relations. We appeal to those responsible to unite in
declaring that such acts of violence committed against
innocent and uninvolved human beings must never
be a means of enforcing political interests and objectives.

49. Allow me on this occasion to extend to the
delegation of the People’s Republic of China the sincere condolences of my delegation on the recent death
of Mr. Chu-teh, Chairman of the Standing Committee
of the National People’s Congress of the People’s
Republic of China and an outstanding leader.

58. In our view, this most recent hijacking drama,
no less than the assault on the ministers of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries in Vienna
in December 1975, was nothing but a criminal act.
The drama at Entebbe is a challenge to the world Organization, whose primary task is to safeguard peace.

50. In the Federal Republic of Germany we have
watched with consternation and sympathy the hijacking of a commercial airliner, the holding hostage
of its more than 250 passengers and crew and the
sufferings of those victims, including many women,
children and elderly people.

59. The community of nations has failed so far to
create effective instruments to combat terrorism and
in particular the taking of hostages. This was rightly
pointed out earlier by several speakers in the Council.
The United Nations should now address itself to this
task, and without delay.

51. It was with profound relief that we learned of
the failure of the terrorist action and the rescue of the
hostages at the very last minute before the announced
intention to kill them was carried out. We deeply
regret the loss of lives that occurred.

60. The Federal Government urges the General Assembly to consider this issue at its next session. Priority should be given to international
measures to
prevent the taking of hostages. We strongly request
the preparation of a convention
on international
measures against the taking of hostages which will
ensure, in particular, that those perpetrating such acts
are either extradited or prosecuted in the country
where they are apprehended.

52. The Federal Republic of Germany was directly
affected. It was intended to compel the Federal Government, under threat of death to the hostages, to
release criminals who, as is well known, in no sense
can be called freedom fighters but are persons convicted of, or under criminal investigation
for, the
murder of a judge and other capital crimes under penal
law.

61. Faced with this common threat, let us set aside
differences and take concrete action now.
62. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

53. We regret that German nationals were among
the kidnappers. If it should be found that they had
accomplices in my country, these will be severely
punished.

63. Mr. MUJEZINOVIC
(Yugoslavia): Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on your assuming
the presidency of the Council for the month of July.
The excellent and friendly relations existing between
Yugoslavia and Italy, as two neighbouring countries,
give me added pleasure in doing so. Your skill and
experience in both bi!ateral and multilateral
diplomacy are a guarantee that the Council, faced with
complex and responsible tasks this month, is in very
capable hands indeed.

54. The kidnappers’ plot, which outraged the international public, was marked by a total disregard for
the fundamental human rights of innocent persons
and was a barbarous assault on the States they tried
to blackmail.
In view of the kidnappers’
publicly
announced determination
to kill tlie hostages, the
rescue operation was undertaken to resolve a situation
which must have appeared hopeless.
6

opinion of my delegation, contrary to the Charter and
to the international rules governing relations among
States. Far from promoting international
peace, this
has a negative impact on peace and might have very
grave consequences for security in the world.

64. Before I proceed to the question on the agenda,
I should like to express my deep condolences to the
representative of the People’s Republic of China on
the tragic occasion of the passing-away of Chairman
Chou-teh, an outstanding statesman and a great leader
of the Chinese revolution.

68. The member States of the Organization
of
African Unity at their recent meeting in Mauritius
65. The United Nations and the international comthoroughly examined this latest act of State terrorism
munity as a whole have recently again been placed in
a situation which not only constitutes a violation
by Israel and adopted appropriate decisions. I should
of the basic provisions of the Charter but which
like to express the full support of my delegation for
also directly threatens the independence, territorial
the stand adopted in this regard by the Heads of State
integrity and sovereignty of an independent and nonor Government of African countries at this meeting.
aligned country, a State Member of the United Nations. As a response to the unacceptable method of
69. In conclusion, may I express, on behalf of my
blackmail
using the lives of innocent passengers
delegation, our deepest condolences to the people
and Government of Uganda and the families of all
-something
the international
community
cannot
tolerate, irrespective of the motives of those involved
citizens who were innocent victims of the military
in such a dangerous undertaking-an
act of aggresintervention at Entebbe Airport.
sion was committed
which constitutes a threat to
~’
international peace and security. The Israeli military
’ 70. ) Mr. SCRANTON
(United States of America):
intervention at the Ugandan airport of Entebbe con- t First of all, Mr. President, I should like to say how
stitutes an open act of aggression and a flagrant viola~pleased I am to see you in the President’s chair during
tion ‘of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of an
this debate. With the artistry of Leonardo da Vinci,
I/i the structural genius of Michelangelo,
and the pracindependent and non-aligned country.
I/ tical imagination of Galileo in your veins, I am sure
66. The Yugoslav people and Government condemn!
that your long experience and your diplomatic
skill
this act most emphatically,
an act in which many L(;’will make yours one of the outstanding presidencies
innocent people lost their lives and considerable
of our regime.
material damage was inflicted. This action is unprecedented in the relations and behaviour of States. At
71. ,I should also like to pay a tribute to Mr. Wills,
a time when the whole international
community is
the Foreign Minister of Guyana and to Ambassador Jackson for the competent way in which they
striving to preserve peace and security in the world,
when efforts are being made to ensure that the letter
presided over the many meetings and the many consultations that were held last month. Incidentally,
I
of the Charter relating to the peaceful solution of
disputes and the prohibition of the use of force for the
hope that the representative of Guyana will thank
Ambassador Jackson for his comments about the
solution of international
problems will be fully re200th anniversary of our independence.
spected, this most recent act of State terrorism sets a
precedent that could have unforeseeable conse72. Also, I should like to convey to the delegation
quences for international and inter-State relations.
of China my sincere condolences and sympathy on
the death of Chairman Chou-teh, and to the delegation
67. I am convinced that all the Member States and
the international
community are acquainted with the
of the Federal Republic of Germany the same feelings
position of non-aligned Yugoslavia with regard to
concerning the death of Mr. Gustav Heinemann.
terrorism in general. I would like to avail myself of
this opportunity to repeat what my Government has
73. And last but by no means least, I thank the
Foreign Minister of Mauritius for quoting me this
already stated many times in various international
morning-and
may I, incidentally,
say that I thought
forums, namely that non-aligned Yugoslavia, a Member State of the United Nations since its founding,
his delivery of what I said was far better than mine.
condemns most energetically
every terrorist attack
74. The Council has been convened to discuss the
and the hijacking of planes regardless of who the permilitary operation of Israel to rescue the hostages that
petrator is and for what purpose it is done. However,
we should like to point out that it is inadmissible to
were held by air hijackers at Entebbe Airport in
Uganda. The Government of Uganda has condemned
react to terrorist acts of individuals or groups, which
Israel for what is termed “aggression against Uganda”.
are condemned by the international community as a
Israel has been accused of violating the sovereignty
whole, through a terrorist attack such as that of the
State of Israel, against a sovereign and independent
and territorial integrity of Uganda, of wantonly destroying sections of Entebbe Airport, and of killing a
country. A halt Should be put to such behaviour by
number of Ugandan soldiers. These are very grave
means of the broadest action of the whole international community,
primarily
through the United
charges and it is clearly the duty of this Council to
Nations. Any encouragement
of such behaviour or
consider them in light of the facts and of international
open support of any act of State terrorism is, in the
law.
7

79. The apparent support given to the hijackers by
the Ugandan authorities causes us to question whether
Uganda lived up to its international legal obligations
under The Hague Convention of 1970.’ The rights of
a State carry with them important responsibilitjes
which were not met by Uganda in this case. The Israeli
military action was limited to the sole objective of
extricating the passengers and crew and it terminated
when that objective was accomplished.
The force
employed was limited to what was necessary for the
rescue of the passengers and crew.

75. As members of the Council know, I spoke several
times earlier this year in the Council defending the
principle of territorial sovereignty in Africa. I reaffirm
that today. In addition to that principle, there are other
basic principles and issues at stake in the question
that is before us. We must be deeply concerned over
the problem of air piracy and the callous and pernicious use of innocent people as hostages to promote
political ends. The Council cannot forget that the
Israeli operation in Uganda would never have come
about had the hijacking of the Air France flight from
Athens not taken place.

80. That Israel might have secured the . release
. . . of its
nationals by complying with the terrorists’ ctemanas
does not alter these conclusions. No State is required
to yield control over persons in lawful custody in its
territory under criminal charges. Moreover, it would
be a self-defeating and dangerous policy to release
prisoners, convicted in some cases of earlier acts of
terrorism, in order to accede to the demands of terrorists.

76. Let us review the circumstances surrounding the
Israeli action at Entebbe Airport. On 4 July, in order
to rescue the remaining 100 hostages that had been
hijacked in the Air France airbus and taken to Uganda,
Israel sent a small military force to Entebbe. This force
succeeded in rescuing the hostages and returning to
Israel. Three of the hostages, one Israeli soldier, seven
of the terrorists and a number of Ugandan soldiers
were apparently killed and several Ugandan aircraft
were destroyed. The Israeli force was on the ground
for one and a half hours and departed for Israel as
soon as it was possible to do so in safety.

81. It should be emphasized that this assessment of
the legality of the Israeli actions depends heavily on
the unusual circumstances of this specific case, In
particular, the evidence is strong that, given the attitude of the Ugandan authorities, co-operation with or
reliance on them in rescuing the passengers and crew
was impracticable. It is to be hoped that these unique
circumstances will not arise in the future. We of course
strongly defend the concept of national sovereignty
and territorial integrity. Moreover, the United States
deplores the loss of life and property at Entebbe and
extends its sympathy to those families who were
bereaved by events originating in acts of terrorism that
they neither supported nor condoned.

77. Israel’s action in rescuing the hostages necessarily involved a temporary breach of the territorial
integrity of Uganda. Normally, such a breach would
be impermissible
under the Charter of the United
Nations. However, there is a well established right
to use limited force for the protection of one’s own
nationals from an imminent threat of injury or death
in a situation where the State in whose territory they
are located is either unwilling or unable to protect
them. The right, flowing from the right of self-defence,
is limited to such use of force as is necessary and
appropriate to protect threatened nationals from injury.

82. The United States delegation
believes very
strongly that the Council should address itself to the
causes of incidents such as that which occurred last
week in Uganda. We believe that the Council should
once again take positive action to put an end to such
senseless violence. We believe the United Nations
should do everything within its power to ensure
against a recurrence of this brutal, callous and senseless international crime of hijacking-the
crime which
gave rise to the Israeli action. At the very least, it
seems to us, the Council should immediately
record
its collective view that international
terrorism-and,
specifically, hijacking-must
be stopped. There is
ample precedent for taking such action. The United
Nations has spoken out strongly against hijacking and
interference with international civil aviation a number
of times. On 9 Septembre 1970 the Council adopted
by consensus resolution 286 (1970), appealing “for
the immediate release of all passengers and crews
without exception, held as a result of hijackings” and
calling on States “to take all possible legal steps to
prevent further hijackings or any other interference
with international civil air travel.” Later in the autumn
of 1970 the Genera1 Assembly adopted its detailed
resolution 2645 (XXV) condemning “without excep-

78. The requirements of this right to protect nationals were clearly met in the Entebbe case. Israel
had good reason to believe that at the time it acted
Israeli nationals were in imminent danger of execution
by the hijackers. Moreover, the actions necessary to
release the Israeli nationals or to prevent substantial
loss of Israeli lives had not been taken by the Government of Uganda, nor was there a reasonable expectation such actions would be taken. In fact, there is
substantial evidence that the Government of Uganda
co-operated with and aided the hijackers. A number
of the released hostages have publicly related how the
Ugandan authorities allowed several additional terrorists to reinforce the original group after the plane
landed, permitted them to receive additional arms and
additional explosives, participated in guarding the
hostages and, according to some accounts, even took
over sole custody of some or all of the passengers to
allow the hijackers to rest. The ease and success of
the Israeli effort to free the hostages further suggests
that the Ugandan authorities could have overpowered
the hijackers and released the hostages if they had
really had the desire to do so.
8

tion whatsoever, all acts of aerial hijacking.. ,“. The
resolution, which the Assembly adopted by an overwhelming vote of 105 in favour and none against, with
8 abstentions, further declared that “the exploitation
of unlawful seizure of aircraft for the purpose of taking
hostages is to be condemned”, and it called for every
effort to make a success out of the then forthcoming
negotiations at the diplomatic conference in The Hague
for an anti-hijacking treaty. Again acting by consensus, the Council on 20 June 1972 [S/10705] stated its
grave concern “at the threat to the lives of passengers
and crews arising from the hijacking of aircraft.” The
Council called upon States “to deter and prevent such
acts and to take effective measures to deal with those
who commit such acts”. In addition, there already
exists an international
legal obligation for all States
to prevent terrorist acts. The Declaration of Principles
of International
Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, contained in
General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), declares:

to the eviIs of international
terrorism.
In 1972 we
proposed a draft convention to the General Assembly,
which provided, inter nlin, that a signatory State either
prosecute persons in its jurisdiction
who commit any
acts of international terrorism or extradite them to the
State in which the crime was committed.
Unfortunately, nothing has yet come of our initiative because
of disagreement over the definition of terrorism.
85. With regard to air hijacking in particular,
the
United States has repeatedly pressed in the International Civil Aviation Organization for the adoption of
an independent convention enabling States parties to
act in concert against a State, even if not a party, that
harbours hijackers or saboteurs or that fails to return
an aircraft, passengers or crew. We shall continue to
urge the adoption of such a convention because we
believe that it could provide for world-wide enforcement of the fundamental legal principles reflected in
the Hague Convention.
86. The Council can and should reaffirm its own stand
in opposition to air hijacking which was expressed in
the Council’s consensus decision on hijacking adopted
on 20 June 1972. Let us condemn the taking of innocent people as hostages. Let us deplore the threat to
innocent human life at the hands of terrorists. Let us
also reaffirm our dedication to the preservation of the
national sovereignty and territorial integrity of every
Member State. Most important, let us take a firm stand
against terrorist hijacking--one
of the most dangerous
threats to peace and security in the world today.

“Every State has the duty to refrain from organizing, instigating, assisting or participating in acts
of civil strife or terrorist acts in another State or
acquiescing in organized activities within its territory directed towards the commission of such
acts, when the acts referred to in the present paragraph involve a threat or use of force.”
83. Concerning air hijacking in particular, 12 members of the Council have ratified the Hague Convention of 1970. Over half the members of the international community have accepted this Convention,
including Uganda and Israel. The purpose of the Convention is to promote the safety of international civil
aviation. It seeks to discourage hijacking by creating
the realistic prospect of severe treatment by States
of persons hijacking aircraft. To achieve this objective
the Convention requires every Contracting State to
make hijacking an offence punishable by severe penalties. Each Contracting State is also bound to take
such measures as may be necessary to establish its
jurisdiction over the offence of hijacking and any other
act of violence against the passengers or crew of a
hijacked aircraft which comes within its territory.
According to the Convention,
a Contracting State
shall take all appropriate measures to restore control
of the aircraft to its lawful commander. It must also
facilitate the continuation of the journey of the passengers and crew as soon as practicable and shall
without delay return the aircraft and its cargo to
persons lawfully entitled to their possession. Finally,
it must take the hijackers into custody and either
prosecute or extradite them. These are high standards
-no one denies that-but
they are very reasonable
standards. My Government does not believe that the
Government of Uganda has lived up to its legal obligations under the Hague Convention to which it is a
party.

87. Those are the measured and considered views
of my Government concerning this episode, views
with which I totally concur. But I ask you, Mr. President, and my other colleagues here to bear with me
a few minutes longer, for I wish to make some personal comments about this episode in the context of
the image of the United Nations itself, and particularly the Security Council.
88. My tenure here, as you all well know, has been
of very short duration-approximately
four months.
In that period of time the Council has been in session
almost continuously. With rare exceptions the issues
before it have been exclusively those of the Middle
East-outstandingly-and
southern Africa.
89. To our Arab friends here and elsewhere, the
United States delegation has made it clear on several
occasions that problems in the Middle East are by no
means totally one-sided. Each of us, I am sure, has
individual pictures and vivid images that dwell in our
minds whenever matters concerning the Middle East
confront us-as they have many times over the last
four months. In my personal experience, there is outstandingly a visit to a refugee camp south-west of
Amman, where decent people were living under very
trying conditions only with the help of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, having been expelled from

84. The United States believes that the United
Nations should go much further in addressing itself
9

^.

-

_. --

..^ -

--

their homes in some cases not once but twice, in 1948
and 1967. And another picture which will never leave
my mind is the condition of Karameh after the raid
on that village. On the other hand, there is an equally
vivid picture of Jews with access now to pray at the
Wailing Wall. Or, even more vivid, those horrors
-and you must all remember them-of
BuchenwaEd,
Dachau and Auschwitz.

markable rescue missions in history, a combination
of guts and brains that has seldom, if ever, been surpassed. It electrified millions
everywhere, and I
confess I was one of them. It was justified-truly
justified-because
innocent decent people have a
right to live and be rescued from terrorists who recognize no law and who are ready to kill if their demands are not met.

90. To my African friends here and elsewhere I must
say that on the issue of the liberation of southern
Africa my Government has put itself squarely on the
side of those who seek majority rule, with the determination that it be achieved by peaceful means. I am
very happy that that policy has been adopted while
I have been here.

96. Who has a conscience about this? We should,
every single one of us. I assume that every one of us
wants to do all in our power to avoid such episodes
in the future. This is one episode in a series of cases
of hijacking by terrorists about which we can do a
great deal. I believe that if it really wants to, the
United Nations, including the Security Council, can
wipe such episodes off the face of this earth. As my
Government has stated in this message I have just
finished delivering, we can do this-1 have pointed
out how. We must do this; and then, and only then,
will our consciences be clear for the future. They will
never be clear for the past.

91, But to my Arab and African friends I say here
and now, loud and strong, that there may have been
mixed pictures concerning some of the questions that
have confronted the Council in the immediate
past,
but to my mind there is no doubt on this one-not
one
iota of doubt. h.

97. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania): It
is always difficult to speak after eloquent speakers;
it is much more difficult to speak after Ambassador
Scranton. I cannot possibly surpass him in commending you, Mr. President, and in expressing my
delegation’s appreciation at seeing you presiding ovel
our deliberations.
The Tanzanian delegation
and
I personally have had the pleasure of working with
you in the course of several months, and in fact several
years, both in the Council and outside it. We know of
your diplomatic
skill, your statesmanship,
your
capacity for work, your moderation and, above all,
your patience. With those qualities, I am sure that our
deliberations are in the right hands as we discuss
this important, somewhat emotional, and yet crucial
matter.

92. Why do I say that so strongly and so deeply?
Yes, there was a temporary breach of the territorial
sovereignty of Uganda, and let us hope that that never
happens again. But there is another value, another
judgement which surpasses that one in importance.
93. Like must of you, I have never been the head of
a nation nor had the responsibilities thereof, but I have
been accountable for the safety and protection
of
12 million people in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. During that period of time-even
though hardly
under the same circumstances, I know-there
were
several occasions on which incidents concerning the
safety, the protection and the lives of Pennsylvanians
came to my office. Action thereon had to be decided
by me, the uliimate executive authority in the Commonwealth. That was my first and forepost responsibility. It is the first and foremost responsibility
of
all Governments to take such decisions.

98. Allow me also, to pay a tribute to the Foreign
Minister of Guyana, Mr. Wills, and to the representative of Guyana, Ambassador Jackson, for the way
they conducted our deliberations
last month with
such distinction and effectiveness. Theirs was not an
easy period, and the fact that they were able to deal
with the’ matters before us with so much skill and
dedication, and with firmness and fairness, is a tribute
to their statesmanship and ability, and, above all, was
a credit to their country.

94. In this episode, that responsibility
lay with the
Government of Israel to protect its citizens, hostages
threatened with their very lives, in mortal danger in
a far-away place. Those innocent people were subject
to the terrorist hijacking of the airplane on which they
were rightfully flying, and further subjected to a sixday terrorizing experience in a foreign country, seeing
other persons freed while the Jews were forced to
remain; subjected at gunpoint to seven hijacker terrorists who know no law; aware that the only possibility of freedom came from a Government
whose
Head had previously rejoiced at the slaying of Israeli
athletes at Munich, called for the extinction of Israel
and praised that madman Hitler, who had on his evil
conscience-if
he had any conscience at all-the
murder of 6 million Jews.

99. Allow me now to join those of my colleagues
who have preceded me to express our heartfelt condolences to the Chinese delegation and, through them,
to the Chinese Government and people on the most
untimely passing away of Mr. Chou-teh, Chairman of
the Stan.ding Committee
of the National People’s
Congress. Having had the honour and the pleasure of
representing my country in China at one point, and
after having had the personal pleasure of knowing
Marshall Chou-teh, I know how much the Chinese
people and Government are mourning this great loss.

95. In such circumstances, it seems to me that the
Government of Israel invoked one of the most re10

I want to assure them that we of Tanzania, as indeed,
in fact-as has been rightly pointed out in this Council-the
international
community,
mourn his departure.

men-to
the effect that they would be prepared to
negotiate, Israel had all along been preparing to take
armed military action against the Republic of Uganda,
Thus the violation of the sovereignty of Uganda,
which was carried out on 4 July, was not really a
failure of the negotiating process but a pre-determined
illegal action on the part of Israel. It is clear, therefore, that such justification is without substance.

100. We are dealing with a matter of momentous
implications for the principles of the Charter. By the
time we finish these deliberations and take our decisions we shall have either condoned lawlessness or
reaffirmed the principles which are laid down in the
Charter. Either way, the implications
of our actions
will have tremendous effect. If we condone lawlessness and disrespect for all that the international community has held so dear, we shall be saying that the
Charter and what it stands for does not mean much.
We shall, in fact, be saying that we can always make
exceptions, depending upon how circumstances suit
our own interests. If, on the other hand, we reaffirm
our total commitment to the provisions of the Charter,
we shall have declared, before all the world, that the
United Nations and all its Member States will not
tolerate lawlessness and disregard for order ifi the
world.

104. I have just referred to the failure of the Israel
case on the facts. Yet Israel has no case even in international law as it exists now. Whatever might have
been the law in the past, and whatever writers and
jurists of the past might have seen as law with regard
to the right of a State to protect its nationals abroad,
such is no longer the case now. The advent of the
law of the Charter did away with all the traditional
methods for a State to obtain satisfaction on a unilateral basis by employing measures short of war which
were being resorted to in the past. Then, as people
realized the injustices involved in the previous system,
the law began to change, starting with such areas as
the prohibition of the use of force in contract debts.
Then came the Kellogg-Briand Pact. We all know
what that pact prohibited. In the end came the Charter
of the United Nations, which settled the question
beyond any doubt.

101, That is why my delegation has taken the issue
that is before us so seriously-for
we believe that there
cannot be any future for the world, especially for the
small States Members of the Organization and those
outside the Organization, if the principle of lawlessness-the principle of unilateral action-is
to be the
order of the day.

105. Many writers on international law agree on this.
I could quote many eminent authorities on international law in this matter. In this intervention, however,
I will confine myself to two such writers. One is an
eminent lawyer Georg Schwarzenberger, who has the
following to say in his book, Intemttionul
LN~
on
page 58 of volume II:

102. On 4 July the Israeli Government embarked on
a mission which involved the use of force against
Uganda, an African State and a Member of the United
Nations, In the process, Israeli forces took action
against lightly armed Ugandan forces stationed ‘at the
airport of Entebbe. No one can doubt that such action
breached the provisions of the Charter. In fact, many
of the spokesmen who have preceded me in the Council, while trying to justify and rationalize the position
of the Israeli Government, have not been in a position
to say that what the Israeli action amounted to was
not a violation of the provisions of the Charter. Still
more, the Israeli action resulted in the loss of human
life, which, in the view of our delegation, could have
been avoided had the normal process of negotiations
been left to take its course. In that context, the Israeli
action can be said to have constituted not only a violation of the sovereignty of Uganda, but indeed an act
of aggression against a Member State of this Organization.

“.. , The Corfifir Chrrnnd
(Merits)
cuse (1949)
appears to bear out the view that, within the international quasi-order of the United Nations, the
threat or use of force by individual Member States
against one another and against non-member States
is illegal, unless justifiable on grounds of individual
self-defence or collective defence under Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations.”

According to Hans Kelsen, the Charter of the United
Nations goes much further than its predecessors. It
obligates the Members of the United Nations not only
not to resort to war against each other but to refrain
from the threat or use of force and to settle their disputes by peaceful means. The use of force-the SOcalled enforcement action-is allowed by the Charter
only as a reaction of the Organization against a threat
to peace or a breach of the peace.

103. The Israeli Government and all those who SUPport it in this matter have attempted to justify its action
in this grave violation of international
law. It must
have been clear, however, to everyone on the Council
who has followed the events surrounding this violation that such attempted justification has, in fact, been
based on false premises. It would appear that, notwithstanding the initial statements made by the Israeli
representatives-or
the Israeli Government spokes-

106. Taking into account the history of international
law on this matter, the statements I have just quoted
are quite adequate to demonstrate the emptiness Of
the Israeli case, for it cannot be argued that the aggression committed by Israel against Uganda was done for
purposes of self-defence, Neither can it be argued that
such use of force was a reaction of the United Nations.
11

i
1

^...

--^.

A

serious abuses and such as cannot, whatever be the
present defects in international
organization, find
a place in international law. Intervention is perhaps
still less admissible in the particular form it would
take here; for, from the nature of things, it would
he reserved for the most powerful States, and might
easily lead to perverting the administration of international justice itself.

Of course, it is not denied that the use of force was
involved.
Under those circumstances,
there is no
other conclusion except that the Israeli action was
illegal. It was in that context that the Government of
the United Republic of Tanzania issued a statement
to condemn the Israeli action against Uganda, part of
which reads as follows:
“The Government
of the United Republic of
Tanzania condemns this reckless and unwarranted
Israeli action. It considers such a violation of the
sovereignty of an African State by Israel as a matter
of grave concern to the entire international
community, and more particularly to the Organization
of African Unity States. In expressing its outrage
against the Israeli invasion of Uganda, the Government is not in any way insensitive to the plight of
the hostages, Israelis as well as others, who were
taken by the hijackers. In fact, Tanzania has followed with great concern and sympathy their predicament.
We have always maintained
that such
endangering of human life is something that must be
avoided and that no efforts be spared to avoid recurrence of incidents of this nature. In the particular
case of the hijacked plane to Entebbe, we were concerned with the lives of all hostages and had hoped
that everything would be done so that no single life
was lost. Regrettably, Israel’s irresponsible military
action has frustrated our hopes.”
The statement

“,,, Between independent States, respect for territorial sovereignty is an essential foundation of
international relations.”
Bearing these views of the Court in mind, we must
here draw the necessary conclusions from this flagrant
violation of Uganda’s sovereignty by Israel. To us,
the Israeli action reflects a careless disregard of
Africa’s sovereignty and the territorial integrity of
African States.
108. In the words of the Tanzanian
statement,

Government’s

“This dangerous precedent of arbitrary violation
of Africa’s sovereignty by the Israeli authorities
must not be taken lightly. Free Africa has the right
to recognize that this challenge and provocation
against Uganda is in fact a challenge and gross provocation against the whole of Africa. Africa must
take all the necessary measures and precautions
against a repetition of this heinous crime from any
quarter.”

continues:

“The flagrant violation
of a country’s sovereignty is a matter which should cause an outraged
international
community,
but for Africa Israel’s
action has serious implications.
The fact that Israel
has committed
this action against an independent
African State shows the contempt that it has for
Africa and the African people, for this is not the
first time that Israeli citizens have fallen victims of
hijacking and other actions. It has happened elsewhere. Yet Israel has not even once mounted anything of this nature against those countries. It is the
contempt which Israel has for the sovereignty of
Africa which has prompted it to act in such an
arrogant and lawless manner.”

109. The Israeli military action at Entebbe cannot
be taken lightly. It is a dangerous precedent which,
if allowed to go uncontested, would usher in a new
era in international relations, an era of lawlessness.
We in Africa cannot but recognize that this provocation against Uganda is a serious challenge to Africa.
It is, above all, I submit, a challenge to the Charter.
The Security Council, which was given the role of
guardian of the peace throughout the world, cannot
witness the violation of the principles of the United
Nations without taking the appropriate corrective
measures. The action that we shall take in this matter
will give an indication of where the Council stat-ids
on this important issue, For us, the choice is clear.
We shall not be a party to condoning lawlessness,
under whatever pretext. It is with this consideration
in view that the Tanzanian delegation, on behalf of the
African members of the Council, and in response to
the specific mandate entrusted to us by the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity, has the honour to introduce the draft
resolution contained in document S/12139.

107. The violation of the sovereignty of a country
is a serious matter which goes to the very foundation
of a world governed by law. The International
Court
of Justice underlined
the importance of this in the
Corfu Channel Case4 when the United Kingdom
Government
conducted an operation in the territorial
sea of Albania, allegedly because of the extreme
urgency of the matter. After rejecting the reason of
extreme urgency, as advanced by the United Kingdom, the Court stated as follows on page 35 of its
judgment:

110. I must, at the very outset, apologize to my colleagues on the Council, the non-aligned members in
particular, and to those members who have always
worked very actively and closely with the African
members of the Council, for not waiting for their
response before introducing
this draft resolution.

‘I,,. The Court can only regard the alleged right
of intervention
as the manifestation of a policy of
force, such as has, in the past, given rise to most
12

We appreciate that some of them were prepared to
join in sponsoring the draft resolution which I am
introducing, but because of circumstances beyond our
control the African members of this Council were
compelled to introduce it at this point. Members are
aware that, contrary to the normal procedures to
which this Council is used, in which due process of
consultation
takes place, we have already a draft
resolution introduced by the representative of the
United Kingdom on behalf of the representative of
the United States [,Y/12138]. Being faced with this
situation, the African members of the Council request
the forgiveness of the other members of the Council,
in particular the non-aligned and other members who
had earlier intimated to us their readiness to join in
sponsoring a draft resolution, for our inability to
consult them in advance before presenting our text.

but essentially those who have spoken very strongly,
and in some cases very powerfully, in condemning
hijacking, in condemning the dangers inherent in the
action, which none of us can condone, have not spoken
with similar strength and similar determination
on the
blatant violation of the sovereignty of a Member State
of this Organization.
114. The African draft resolution-because
it is an
African draft resolution-demands
that justice be
done to the Government
and people of Uganda. Essentially, it demands that the fact of the violation of
Uganda’s sovereignty be taken into consideration and
that that act be condemned. It also demands that the
damage, both human and material, done in Uganda
be compensated for, and it asks the Secretary-General
to follow implementation
of the draft resolution.

111. I need not dwell at length on the text since it
will be circulated and members will have it at hand,
but suffice it to say that the draft resolution addresses
itself to the main topic before the Council, that is to
say, the complaint brought before the Council by the
Prime Minister of Mauritius in his capacity as the
current Chairman of the Organization
of African
Unity [S/12/26] and the letter addressed to the Council
by the President of Uganda concerning Israel’s military action at Entebbe Airport [/$/12/24]. The Council
has not been summoned to discuss the question of
hijacking, per. SP. Speaking for my delegation, we are
quite willing and prepared to discuss the dangers
inherent in hijacking, because I do not believe that
any member of the Council in his right senses could
in any way condone the crime of hijacking. In fact,
the representative of Israel yesterday did the Council
some justice and a favour by quoting extensively from
the resolution which was adopted by the Organization
of African Unity clearly condemning the act of hijacking [1939r/1 nleeri/jg, prr,vr. 125’1.

115. I have already stated that this is a draft which
addresses itself squarely to the problem. My good
friend and colieague Ambassador Scranton, for whom
I have very high esteem and respect, has spoken very, ’
very movingly about his own Government’s
position
on this question. But I hope he will understand that
from an African point of view, from the point of view
of countries which have been subjected to humiliation
for centuries, we must also speak forcefully and with
no less vehemence at this arbitrary display of arrogance and power against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a country. We must also speak
against the danger of allowing a precedent of this
nature to go uncontested. We must speak in such
terms because either we have international law we all
respect, either we have a Charter of the United Nations to which we all adhere, or we do not. If you
make one exception, then exceptions become the
rule. Today it is Uganda; tomorrow it can be Tanzania;
the day after tomorrow it can be any of the other
countries. I am not naive enough to presume that it
could be the United States or the United Kingdom;
I know that there have been hijackings and planes
have taken in some Western European countries, but
hijackings of the kind which happened at Entebbe
were never attempted there. So I am not nai’ve enough
to assume that any of these countries could possibly
be a victim. But I am certainly conscious of the fact
that what happened at Entebbe, if allowed, could be
repeated, be it by Israel or any other country, against
the smaller, less powerful countries and those countries whose strength depends upon scrupulous observance of the provisions of the Charter and the principles of international law as we understand them and
the international law to which we all adhere as Members of the United Nations.

112. That remains the position of Africa. Africa has
condemned hijacking in the past, Africa condemns
hijacking now, and we shall continue to do so in the
future. But the Colincil is not discussing the issue of
hijacking. If our colleagues the representatives of the
United Kingdom
and the United States had really
desired to discuss, with their usual eloquence, the
question of hijacking PL’I’ SLJ, they would have been
welcome to do so. They should have placed an item
on the subject on the Council’s agenda so that it could
discuss hijacking, and my delegation for one would
have considered the item on its merits. But in this
case Africa has come to the Council following the
aggression committed against Uganda, following the
blatant violation of Uganda’s sovereignty, and I think
it only fair that members of the Council should address
themselves squarely to that particular problem.

I 16. I know some have talked in terms of moral law.
I am no lawyer, so I will not venture into that field.
But certainly I would say that the same moral considerations and the same attachment we feel towards
the sanctity of human life generally should equally
apply to the sanctity of Ugandan human life. Many
Ugandans lost their lives as a result of the Israeli

I 13. I must say that my delegation is somewhat saddened by the way in which the violation of Uganda’s
sovereignty is being glossed over, I know there have
been some peripheral references to it in some cases,
13

-

action. Certainly, if we are determined to save hostages from hijackers-a
determination we all sharewe must equally be concerned at the senseless loss
of life inflicted upon the Ugandans. And not only upon
the Ugandans. In a sense, the Israeli action also led
to the killing of some of the very hostages the Israeli
Government attempted to save-in addition, of course,
to the killing of those who perpetrated the hijacking.

121. Mr. MIRZA (Pakistan): Mr. President, I join
my colleagues in congratulating you, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the current
month. We are certain that with your deep understanding of the current complex international scene
and the problems which are now before us, as well
as your high qualities as an accomplished diplomat of
a country which has contributed greatly to the evolution of modern diplomacy, the Council’s deliberations
on the issue before us will be conducted in an exemplary manner and the Council will acquit itself we11
in the tasks entrusted to it under the Charter.

117. We are concerned that, in the midst of the
euphoria that has been generated in some quarters as
a result of the action, very little has been said about
the damage done to Uganda and the destruction
caused in Uganda in terms of both human life and
material damage. We think such expressions of jubilation, such congratulations,
are most unfortunate,
because if we believe in the sanctity of human life,
then we must universalize that belief. We must not
demonstrate our happiness because the Israeli action
has been termed a daring raid, without taking due
account of the fact that in the course of that “daring
act” so many African lives were lost.

122. May I also express our admiration and thanks
to your predecessor as President of the Security
Council for the month of June, Ambassador Jackson
of Guyana, for the tact, patience, understanding and
energy with which he directed our almost continuous
deliberations last month. We were also indeed honoured to have the Foreign Minister of Guyana preside
over a part of our deliberations.
123. I also join previous speakers in expressing our
heartfelt condolences on the sad demise of Mr. Chouteh, Chairman of the Standing Committee of the
National People’s Congress of the People’s Republic
of China. Chairman Chou-teh was a distinguished son
of China and a brave fighter for its freedom from
foreign domination
and internal oppression. The
Government and the people of Pakistan share in
full measure the grief of the Government and the
people of China at this great loss.

118. This has, unfortunately, been a highly emotional debate. We would have preferred it to take place
in a calmer atmosphere. We would have preferred the
members of the Council to assume their responsibility
in a calm, deliberate and serious manner. We would
have preferred principles to be given priority over
expediency. We would have preferred the case of the
violation of Uganda’s sovereignty to be treated on its
merits. We would also have preferred the question
of hijacking, with all its implications, also to be treated
on its merits. Unfortunately,
we see a trend, and a
deliberate trend, to give priority to the question of the
hijacking without giving the same priority to the violation of Uganda’s sovereignty.

124. We also wish to convey our sincere condolences to the Government of the Federal Republic of
Germany on the untimely death of Mr. Gustav Heinemann, the former President of the Federal Republic
of Germany.

119. The draft resolution I have the honour to introduce on behalf of Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic
and my own delegation addresses itself squarely to
the problem raised by the African members of the’
Council on behalf of the Organization of African Unity
and the affected party.

125. The Security, Council is meeting at the request
of Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam,
Prime Minister of
Mauritius and the current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity. Speaking on behalf of all the
Heads of State and Government of that organization,
then assembled for a summit meeting in Mauritius,
he has asked the Council to consider a “wanton act
of aggression against a Member State of the United
Nations” [S/12/26, l/nne.r]. We had earlier been informed by the President of Uganda about the details
of this attack, which took place at 1 a.m. on 4 July
1976, when Israeli military aircraft carrying personnel
of the Israeli armed forces secured a landing at Entebbe
Airport in Uganda under false pretenses, launched
an armed attack on units of Uganda’s armed forces,
killing or wounding a hundred members of the Ugandan
army, destroyed a number of civilian and military
aircraft at the airport, and damaged the airport and its
installations.

120. In conclusion I should like to say that we know
that the issue of hijacking has been ‘discussed in several forums of the Organization. We want to make it
clear that we do not condone hijacking. We want to
make it clear that we condemn hijacking. We also
want to make it clear that we believe every effort
must be made to ensure that innocent travellers and
innocent lives are duly protected. But, with the same
strength and the same vehemence, we want to insist
that international
law and international
morality be
observed. As I said at the outset, either we have international law, either we have international morality or
we do not; either we respect the CharJer of the United
Nations, or we violate its provisions. And then we
cannot claim that we are operating on the basis of
law or on the basis of justice.

126. We have examined with great care the message
from the President of the Republic of Uganda and
listened attentively the statement of the distinguished
14

Foreign Minister of Uganda at our meeting on Friday
[I!93911 rnc~ling].
The facts narrated in the Ugandan
account have been fully corroborated by the other
accounts of the same events that have appeared in the
international
press-by
no means unfriendly
to
Israel-and,
equally important, by the statement of
the representative of France at our meeting on Friday.
127. The representative of Israel cas tried to justify
his country’s aggression against Uganda by accusing
its Government and its President of complicity with
the hijackers. Let US look at the facts.
128. The aircraft was allowed to land when it had
only 15 minutes’ fuel for flying, The only alternative,
in fact, for it was to crash with its more than 250 passengers. The permission to land was given by Uganda
not only at the request of the hijackers but also, and
this is perhaps more important, as the representative
of France informed us in his statement, in response
to the specific French request to the same effect. The
representative of France has told us:

a country which had just committed an act of aggression against Uganda has to be taken duly into account
in assessing their veracity.
132. We have been told that this armed raid was only
a rescue operation to release the remaining hostages
from the “terrorists”.
How then should one explain
the wanton destruction of Ugandan civilian and military aircraft stationed on Uganda’s national territory,
and other extensive damage caused to property by
the Israeli troops ? Further, in the euphoria over this
“brilliant rescue operation”, it should not be forgotten
that the 103 hostages could have lost their lives and
this so-called legend could have resulted in yet another
bloody massacre.
133. The Israeli Prime Minister has stated, “Terrorism will find us neither immobilized nor hidebound
by routine” [S//2/23, LIIV~ICX].In this instance, routine
appears to be the new term for the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and the established
norms of international state behaviour.

“The French authorities, when informed of this
hijacking, alerted some of their embassies, including
that in Kampala, asking them to take steps for the
plane to be given permission to land, since it was
soon going to run out of fuel. That is why our Ambassador in Kampala
approached the Ugandan
authorities about this, and permission to land was
given immediately.”
[Ihid., pant. 182.1

134. Without disregarding the other elements of
the situation, to which I shall return shortly, it cannot
be denied that this act of Israel’s constituted an act
of aggression as defined in the Definition of Aggression
in the annex to General Assembly resolution 3314
(XXIX). Article 1 reads as follows:
“‘Aggression is the use of armed force by a State
against the sovereignty, territorial integrity or
political independence of another State, or in any
other manner inconsistent with the Charter of the
United Nations, as set out in this Definition.”

129. The representative of Israel tried to establish
that the landing of the hijacked plane at Entebbe
Airport was an act of collusion between the hijackers
and the LJgandan authorities. We wonder whether,
in view of the French statement I have just quoted,
he would like to reconsider this allegation; otherwise,
it would lead to the obviously absurd conclusion that
France too was an accomplice in the scheme for the
hijacking of its own plane.

It is also relevant here to quote article 5, paragraph 1,
which reads:
“No consideration of whatever nature, whether
political, economic., , or otherwise, may serve as a
justification for aggression.”

130. The fact that President Idi Amin visited the
hostages almost -every day, provided them with all
possible amenities and secured the release of 47 hostages on 30 June and another 100 on 1 July, and was
able to obtain extension of the deadline, speak for
themselves. These were positive steps and have been
so acclaimed generally. According to The New York
Times of 5 July, the 12-member crew of the hijacked
Air France plane issued a statement on their return
home, praising President Amin of Uganda for his role
in the events at Entebbe Airport. Also, Captain Michel
Bacos scotched the assertion, made by Israel, that
Ugandan soldiers had been substituted for the hijackers guarding the hostages.

In the opinion of the Secretary-General, who has
spoken without fear or favour, “this constitutes a
serious violation of the sovereignty of a State Member of the United Nations.” We entirely endorse these
remarks of the Secretary-General.
135. The representative of Israel has attempted to
divert our attention from our main task by trying to
establish that the issue before the Council is the issue
of terrorism. In his statement he declared that he stood
here, as an accuser on behalf of free and decent people
in this world, against the forces of evil which have
unleashed a wave of piracy and terrorism that threaten
the very foundations of human society.

131. We are not unaware of the accusations against
Uganda which have appeared in the press and which
have been quoted by the Israeli representative here.
The fact that most of them were made by those who
were rescued by the Israeli task force and came from

136, This is indeed a strange claim from the representative of a country which the free and decent people of the world, through their representatives in the
United Nations, in both the General Assembly and the
1.5

Security Council, as well as in other international
organizations,
have repeatedly condemned and deplored for over two decades for its actions in Violation
of customary and conventional international law and
norms of conduct among civilized nations.
137. In fact, by the record of its own past deeds,
Israel falls into the category of the accused. For decades a sizeable portion of humanity, the Palestinian
people, a people who sought no more than to stay and
live in their own homes and hearths, have been subjected to terrorism, bloodshed and war by the forces
of Zionism, resulting in their expulsion from their own
homes. Not satisfied with this, Israel continues to
attack the Palestinian refugee camps, the pitiful shelters for the old, the women and the children-yes,
even babes in arms-causing
widespread death and
destruction.

,

138. The long catalogue of violent events and naked
acts of terrorism by the Zionists which preceded and
followed the establishment of Israel is too long and
too well known to be read out here. However, it conelusively established the fact that organized and wellplanned acts of terrorism were undertaken repeatedly,
first in establishing the State of Israel, then in enlarging its boundaries and, finally, in attempting to
intimidate its neighbours and the free and decent people of the world who dared to oppose Israel and its
policies. Further, the Zionists, now in this very city
where the United Nations is situated, commit acts of
violence and threaten the representatives of countries which do not support Israel. How can Israel
arrogate to itself the right to speak on behalf of the
free and decent people of the world, least of all on the
issue of terrorism?
139. We shall not hesitate to discuss, here and now
or later and elsewhere, the evil of terrorism. We in
Pakistan have never condoned or supported acts of
terrorism, nor have we ever countenanced acts of
State piracy. There is a clear and distinct difference
between an individual act of terrorism and an act
of aggression by a State through the use of its own
armed forces against the territory and sovereignty of
another State. This difference is visible to all except
those who prefer not to see it. But if we have to discuss
the issue of terrorism-and
we are willing to discuss
it now or at any time-it
has to be discussed in its
entirety and in all of its facets,
140. First, the term “terrorism”
is selectively employed in many cases. How many leaders of liberation struggles waged by different peoples of the world
have been branded as terrorists by the occupying
colonialist Powers? The inexorable march of history
having crowned these peoples’ struggles with victory
in Africa, Asia and Latin America, these same “terrorists” have rightly been acclaimed as heroes and are
now serving as Heads of State in many parts of the
world. Secondly, it has been reported that Israel is

considering
“terrorists”

the imposition of the death penalty on all
captured by it.

141. All of us understand that liberation movements
embody a people’s yearning for self-determinatian
and sovereignty, They are merely impelled to greater
effort by repression, which only intensifies their quest
for independence. The prolonged and sustained heroic
struggle of the people of Palestine
_. . ... will
. , continue, by
whatever name one may call It, till their wrongs are
redressed and injustices undone. One would have
expected the inevitability
of the outcome to be recognized. The inability of the Council, however, to
affirm the rights of the Palestinian people, the same
inalienable rights that we all recognize for other peoples of this world, can only strain their patience, If
some of them resort to senseless acts of violence in
sheer desperation, in all honesty we too, as members
of the Council, should share some of the blame. Naturally, one cannot and one does not condone such acts
by an individual or individuals,
but neither can we
accept them to be used as pretexts or justification for
an act of State aggression.
142. In any event, Israel has not been authorized to
act as a policeman of the world. No amount of rhetoric
and excellence of eloquence-which
we readily recognize and concede-can
be allowed to cloud the
issue now before the Council, which is aggression by
Israel against Uganda. This, in the opinion of my
delegation, is the issue on which the Security Council
has been asked to pronounce itself. The Council
cannot but pronounce in one way, that is, uphold the
principle of sovereignty and territorial
integrity of
States and condemn acts of State aggression. The
Council will be failing in its duty if it does not condemn the act of aggression committed by Israel against
Uganda. It has resulted in an extensive loss of life and
property, for which Israel should pay compensation.
The Council could do no less than demand that such
compensation be paid by Israel.
143. In view of these considerations,
my delegation
considers that the draft resolution which has just been
introduced in the Council by the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania in document S/12139 is
the minimum the Council could do, and we urge our
colleagues to endorse it and adopt it.
144. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (itzterpretation jkm Russinn): It is always
more difficult to speak last, but I have turned out to
be the last at the request of two previous speakers.
14.5. First of all I should like to congratulate you as
President of the Council for the month of July. You
do not have an easy task. The first matter which you
will have to deal with here, together with us, is not
an easy one. Nevertheless, your experience and all
your knowledge can be useful in helping to solve this
problem correctly, in accordance with the aspirations
of peoples and with the interests of strengthening

peace and security throughout the world, A wise
solution can only further enhance your prestige as
President of the Council for July.

150. When you, Mr. President, gave the floor to the
representative of Israel, I thought that the delegation
of Israel might have lit upon something unusual and
that it would help us to solve this matter in a positive
manner, would express its regrets at what had happened and perhaps would propose some kind of measures to settle this exceptionally unpleasant and dangerous phenomenon of a military incursion of Israel
into Uganda. None of the reasons which have been
adduced here can justify the fact that a small State
was subjected to aggression by Israel, armed and
supplied with everything necessary for this by other
States.

146. I should like, in passing, to note with satisfaction that in recent years Soviet-Italian
relations have
been developing favourably and on a stable basis. This
is in keeping with the interests of the peoples of both
our countries and with the interests of the easing of
international
tensions and the strengthening of peace
and international
security. Just as our relations as
States are making progress in other fields, our delegation is willing to copoperate with you here as well in
order to find a just and wise solution to the matter
under consideration.

151. The representative of Israel spoke here not as
the accused but in the role of the accuser; he blamed
everyone. One only ,has to look at the verbatim record
to see that all were guilty except Israel. Also guilty
in this regard is the United Nations, including naturally the Security Council.

147. The delegation of the Soviet Union would also
Iike to express its gratitude to your predecessor as
President of the Council for the month of June, the
representative of Guyana, Ambassador Jackson, as
well as to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guyana,
Mr. Wills, under whose skilful guidance the Council
did a great deal of arduous work and considered a
series of important and complex international problems, the positive solution of which would promote
and strengthen international peace and security.

152. What is the situation? The flight carried out, the
material destruction wrought, the substantial number
of Ugandans killed are all regarded by Israel as a
measure which is just or at least justified. But there
exist no such laws in the world, no moral or international laws, which could iustify such aggressive action.
The Israeli Air Force invaded the territory of Uganda
and violated the sovereignty of that small State. It
conducted an attack on Entebbe airport. This attack
resulted, as I have already said, in the loss of many
human lives and in substantial material destruction.
As is evident from the message of 4 July from the
President of Uganda to the President of the Security
Council and to the Secretary-General
[S/12,/24,
~IIVI~.Y] and from the information submitted to the
Council by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Uganda
[1939rh /ne~ti/r~], many innocent people perished as
a result of this piratical attack of the Israeli Air Force,
planes were destroyed which were not participating
in any operations against Israel and also the old airport of Entebbe.

148. In connexion with the death of the Chairman
of the Standing Committee of the National People’s
Congress of the People’s Republic of China, Comrade
Chu-teh, we would like to convey our condolences to
the Chinese delegation. At the same time, I would like
to quote the text of the message sent to the Standing
Committee by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet
of the Soviet Union, which reads as follows:
“The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics extends to you
and to the entire Chinese people its deepest condolences on the passing of the Chairman of the Standing
Committee of the National People’s Congress, a
glorious veteran of the Chinese revolution, Comrade
Chu-teh.

153. How can one appraise such actions? Whatevet
may be said here, whatever quotations and references
may be made, this is an act of aggression. And only
with this as a basis can we correctly assess what has
been done and think of ways to prevent similar acts
in the future.

“The memory of Comrade Chu-teh, an outstanding revolutionary and internationalist,
legendary commander and fighter for the liberation of
China, will always remain in the hearts of the Soviet
people.
We would ask that our sincere sympathy be
transmitted to the family and loved ones of the
deceased.”

154. The representative of Israel began his speech
[ihid.] with references to a principle of Roman law:
a State has the right and the duty to protect its citizens.
This is elementary. A State has among its tasks the
obligation to protect its citizens; otherwise, it would
not be a State. But the means of defence are different.
Perhaps the representative of Israel will recall that
based on this principle Roman troops appeared in the
territory where there is now a conflict that has not
yet been settled. Is that why he found a reference to
this principle appropriate?

149. The Security Council is yet again considering
matters related to the actions of a State represented
here, Israel, These are actions which on more than
one occasion have been judged to be aggressive. This
time the aggression has been committed against a
small sovereign African State, Uganda, located thousands of miles From Israel.
17

be able to justify the act of a aggression that was committed. It cannot be justified.

1.55. The delegation of the Soviet Union fully shares
the views expressed by 48 African countries in the
unanimously adopted resolution of the Conference of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity, which roundly condemns Israel’s
aggression against the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Uganda, The Soviet delegation also agrees
with the appraisal of this aggression given in the telegram which the Chairman of the Organization of
African Unity, the Prime Minister of Mauritius, addressed to the President of the Security Council on
6 July, wherein it is rightly stressed that “This unprecedented aggression against Uganda by .Israel constitutes a danger not only to Uganda and Africa but to
international peace and security” [S//2126, nnnexl.

161. If the representative of Israel really wanted to
accuse someone-and
this as mentioned
by someone who spoke before me-he
could, in accordance
with existing rules, have made a comp]aint to the
Council, and that complaint would have been considered. But no complaint was made. Why was that
not done? Because Israel cannot justify what was
done on the night of 3 to 4 July. It was an act of ag
gression, and nothing else.
162. However much the representative of Israel may
have tried to refute the irrefutable, the armed action
against Uganda is an act of direct, flagrant aggression
and an outright violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, especially of Article 2, paragraph 4, which
states:

156. The Soviet Union shares the view of the nonaligned countries with regard to Israel’s aggression
as set out in the message of the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Algeria, Mr. Bouteflika, addressed to the
Secretary-Genera] on 8 July, in which it is pointed out
that “This act cannot but arouse the indignation of
the non-aligned countries and constitutes a dangerous
precedent in the conduct of international relations,
opening the way to all kinds of adventures” [S//2132,
N/lIlCS].

“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations.”

157. As I have already mentioned, the representative
of Israel tried in every way possible to justify the
aggression committed against Uganda. He brought in
quotations from the pronouncements of various jurists
and referred to various,types of conclusions. But all
of that is purely subjective, for indeed we do have
laws adopted by the United Nations, decisions approved by the Security Council, by other international
organizations. Why did the representative of Israel
not quote those documents which prohibit the use of
force against any State?

Was this known to those who planned such a hostile
action against Uganda-against
the peoples of Africa?
It is known, and that is why Israel was not the one to
raise the matter in the Council. We are prepared ta
discuss any item which you might ask to have placed
on the agenda. Acts of international
terrorism are a
dangerous phenomenon against which we must fight,
and the Soviet Union is willing to do everything in its
power to create conditions whereby acts of international terrorism, the hijacking of planes, the death
of innocent people-the
elderly, women and children-would
no longer be possible.

158, The Soviet Union, concerned such acts of lawlessness, had earlier submitted to the United Nations
a proposal on the non-use of force in international
relations. We shall fight for its implementation,
and
we are certain that many countries will support us on
this.

163. Our position on this matter was set forth clearly
in the statement of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Soviet Union, A. A. Gromyko,
at the twentyseventh session of the General Assembly, on 26 September 1972. Comrade Gromyko stated:

159. The representative of Israel could not justify
the action carried out against the people of Uganda;
he made his accusations here in vain. He should have
p]ayed another role, and 1 think that perhaps it is not
too late for him to do this in the course of the discussions of the Council.

“On the basis of positions of principle, the Soviet
Union opposes acts of terrorism, which disrupt the
diplomatic activities of States and their representatives, transport communications
between them and
the normal course of international
contacts and
meetings, and it opposes acts of violence which
serve no positive end and cause loss of human
life.“’

160. Israel’s wanton attack comes fully within the
Definition of Aggression adopted without a vote by the
General Assembly in resolution 3314 (XXIX), which
was just quoted from by the representative of Pakistan.
It states outright that “Aggression is the use of armed
force by a State againsl the sovereignty... of another
State”. What more do we need? Make any references
YOU want here. Refer to anyone, beginning with Adam
and Eve and ending with our time, and you will never

The Soviet Union consistently opposes acts of terrorism, and we are prepared to do our part in order
to end this phenomenon and to find ways to fight it.
164. But we cannot replace one matter with another,

We are now considering not the matter of international
terrorism but an attack on Uganda, the killing of
Ugandans, the destruction of Entebbe Airport, and
18

other material destruction
action against that State.

inflicted

byv the Israeli
i

165. There is a great gap between indi&ual
acts of
terrorism and an attack by one State-in this case, by
Israel-against
another. Therefore a policy, approved
by a State cannot be considered exceptional, even in
the case in question. A unilateral attack byone State
on another without an appeal to’the Security Council
or to the United Nations is aggression. That.cannot
be denied.
I
.I
166. Official approval or justification of this Israeli
act against Uganda may arouse regret, and not only
regret for the very people who approve such,,acts are
encouraging new actions inimical to the peoples of
Africa-and
not only of Africa. Some organizations,
encouraged by the attitude of officials in the United
States, have committed acts against the United Nations and its eminent leaders. Does this not explain
the published newspaper reports of hostile attacks by
organizations well known to you, and the demands for
the resignation of the Secretary-General?
And things
will go even further; the consequences will go much
further than this act of aggression.
167. With regard to the statement of sympathy for
Israel made by one of the organizations in the United
States, we should ponder the fact that the campaign
of praise for such actions could have consequences
here in this country which would aggravate the difficulties encoutered by the Missions to the United
Nations. It has already been spoken of here, and
indeed I can say that on more than one occasion our
Mission and its living quarters, service facilities and
personnel have been subjected to attacks by various
types of organizations. How can these organizations
act this way in one case when, in another case, they
are prepared to justify an act sanctioned by a State?
This is a dangerous precedent with far-reaching consequences,
168. The Soviet delegation therefore feels that the
Council must condemn in the most vigorous manner
the Israeli aggression against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Uganda, an independent State and a Member of the United Nations.
It seems to me that the proposals made earlier orally
and now issued in a draft resolution are quite logical
in this connexion: to compel Israel to compensate
Uganda for the material damage done in connexion
with this attack. In addition, the Council must give a
serious warning to Israel that such acts of aggression
will not go unpunished in future.
169. We have just seen the draft resolution submitted
by Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic and the United
Republic of Tanzania [S//2139]. It seems to me that
this draft resolution could be a good basis for a just
and wise decision’ in the Council.
170. I should like to say in conclusion that the peoples not only of Africa but of the entire world must

and will draw conclusions from this act of aggression.
There cannot be a double standard with regard to different States. There is one standard international law
and it is set out in the documents and decisions of
the United Nations. Sooner or later, this will be understood by those who planned the Israeli action against
Uganda. It would be better if it were sooner rather
than later. Once a well-known English statesman,
Disraeli,’ who later became Lord Beaconsfield, said
that time was a great healer. I think that this applies
to Israel as well. But it would be better if the time were
short and not prolonged.
171. In our view, the authority of the Security Council will to a great extent depend on the decision it takes
and what it does on the question under discussion.
This decision must not be merely another document
for posterity.
172. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative
of the Soviet Union for his congratulations and kind
remarks about me. I especially appreciate the expression of confidence and solidarity which he conveyed
to me personally. I appreciate even more what Ambassador Kharlamov had to say about the improvement
in the relations between the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and Italy. Having had the great honour of
serving my country as Ambassador to Moscow in
1974 and 1975, I can bear witness to that effect and
even draw some satisfaction from having contributed
to the best of my capacity to the betterment of our
relations and to the establishment of more fruitful
relations, especially in the economic field, to the
advantage of both the Soviet and the Italian peoples.
173. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I am grateful to you for allowing me to speak
again today in this debate. I shall be brief. I have asked
to speak on instructions from my Government to
report to the Council on some disturbing developments which have taken place in Uganda since this
debate began today.
174. The Second Secretary in the British High Commission, who saw Mrs. Bloch in hospital, is to be
expelled with his wife as of the deadline of midnight
tomorrow. The High Commission has also been told
that two members of the British community are also
to be expelled tomorrow, and serious threats have
been made against the British community in general.
That small British community in Uganda has shown
its dedication to that country by their long service
there-indeed,
the highest single occupation now
being those involved in missionary work.
175. A particularly sinister aspect of these threats is
that action is to be taken after the Council’s debate.
May I add that we are fully convinced that our High
Commission has performed its diplomatic duties in a
proper manner and its reporting on recent events has
been accurate throughout.

least, espeA&lly those which created Israel and those
which have appointed themselves its protectors and
paymasters; were determined to try to broaden the
debate, interpret the item on our agenda broadly and
confuse the’issue so that they could provide a coverup for the naked aggression of their protege, the
Zionist entity.
:

176. It is fortunate that the Council is sitting on this
issue at this moment. It gives me the opportunity
of
bringing these facts to the attention of the international
community as a whole at the earliest possible moment.
177.

Mr,

CHOU
Nan (China) (trcrtdntion
$-on?
All the representatives who spoke at our
meeting this afternaon have expressed condolences
on the passing away of Chairman Chou-teh. On behalf
of the Chinese delegation, I wish to express deep
thanks to all of them for their kind sentiments.

Chinese):

185. The move made by the representative of the
United ‘Kingdom on his own behalf and on behalf of
the reprt$entative of the United States in proposing
the draftresolution
in document S/12138 confirmed
our doubts about a Machiavellian plan being prepared
in order to divert the Council’s attention from the
agreed agenda. The hasty introduction
of that draft
resolution, without any appropriate
consultations
-at a time when the representatives of the African
States on the Council had prepared a working paper
and were engaged in sincere and delicate informal
negotiations and consultations in order to arrive at an
agreed text-proves
that those two Powers are not
serious about the matter. They do not want to achieve
anything. They want only to use this debate for propaganda purposes. They plan to use it as an element
of demagogy and as a political fanfare to cover up the
Israeli aggression and to try to justify the Israeli raicI
and dangerous attack in violation of the Charter and
established international legal and moral principles.

178. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to exercise their right of
reply.
179. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): I have
listened, as have all the members of the Council, with
great interest and attention to the statement of Governor Scranton, the representative of the United
States. This statement, in the view of my delegation,
contains very serious and important elements and we
cannot take it lightly.
180. What Ambassador Scranton said merits deep
study by us, not only because of the importance of
the subject that we are discussing, but also because it
comes from the representative of one of the superPowers. The statement of the representative
of the
United States contains some serious threats and
pseudo-legal arguments in support of the Israeli
aggression. My delegation will reply to this statement
after careful study.

186. Once more the West is teaching us lessons.
We had a working paper. We were negotiating it with
them in all good faith. But their response was to propose a counter-draft resolution in order to sabotage
our action and, as I said this morning, to hijack the
debate and confuse the issue. They know their draft
will be still-born and has no chance of adoption. We
know, and they know, and everybody knows that they
can and will use the absurd right of veto to kill our
draft. But, as I have said, it is just an act of propaganda
and blackmail,

181. I said that it is very important to study this
declaration because it comes from a super-Power,
from a country which has a long and sinister record
of aggression against sovereign, independent
States
-1 may mention the Dominican Republic, Cuba and
many others-from
a State whose organizations and
secret services are very active in many regions of the
world, and-if we believe the American mass media
themselves-even
penetrate the so-called terrorist
groups.

187. Finally, I would express the deep concern anti
disappointment of my delegation that two responsible
permanent members of the Council have departed
from established practice and from the normal procedures as well as from the rules of fair play and courtesy among colleagues in this august body.
.

182. My delegation reserves the right to reply to the
statement of the representative of the United States.

188. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): Reluctantly,
in view of the diatribe we have just listened to, I feel
I must at least allow myself a few sentences.

183. Permit me also to place on record a statement
on behalf of my delegation. At the beginning of this
morning’s meeting I addressed an appeal to you,
Mr. President, to use your authority with a view to
limiting the debate to the item under discussion,
which is the wanton act of aggression committed
against Uganda by the Zionist entity.

189. I utterly and totally reject any allegation that
what the United States and the United Kingdom have
done is contrary to anybody’s established pratice.
With great respect to the representative of Libya, my
tenure on the Council has been short but it has been
somewhat longer than his, and from my limited experience I am mot aware of any rule of procedure I have
departed from.

184. It was not without reason that my delegation
made that appeal and expressed its reservations. The
Position of the Western countries was clear from the
outset. The general jubilation, the hysterical euphoria
and the language of the Western mass media indicated
that the Western Powers, or the majority of them at

190. It is quite untrue to say that anybody was negotiating with me about a draft. It is, however, true to
20

say that a large number of members of the Council
were shown our draft towards the end o$last week.

193. I know that the United Kingdom and the United
States are permanent members of the Security Council
and have been members since the inception of the
Council. They have long experience, and they therefore know they have no excuse. If they were new
States in the Council, as we are, they might be excused.
But they have long experience. They know full well
t,hat what they have done is not orthodox.

191. I think one perhaps also ought to say this. There
is a very simple rule in the Security Council, and it is
a very good one. If the representative of ‘Libya does
not like the draft resolution we have proposed, his
remedy is very simple. It is to vote against,it. And at
some stage, no doubt, he will do precisely that.

The meeting

192. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic):: I should
like only to correct the representative of the United
Kingdom. I did not say he did not have the right to
propose any draft resolution. I said it is a question of
courtesy, of the normal processes and of established
practice that we circulate a working paper, discuss it
and negotiate it. It is always a delicate matter. And
then, after that, any country can propose a draft resoIution.

me

trt 7.10 pm.

NOIPS
I United Nations, Twtrty Seric~s, vol. 860, p, 105.
2 AIC.6lL.850.
3 London,
Stevens and Sons, 1968.
4 The Corjr
Chm~d
Cme, J/rclg/mw/ o/’ April 9th, /94Y,
RcJports, 1949, p. 4.

..

21

I.C.J.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
des Nations
Units
monde cntier.
Inl’ormez-vous
auprts
des ventes.
New York ou GenEve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

PUBLICATIONS

DES NATlONS

sent en vente dens les librairies
de votrc libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Nacioncs
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New

DE LAS NACIONES

IJnidas
estan cn venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

004ocl

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et les agences
A : Nations

&positaires
du
IJnics. Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccibn de Ventas.

83-60801-February

1985~-2,200
