S/PV.8865

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8865

th meeting
Monday, 27 September 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Byrne . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ireland)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Tammsaar
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Shringla
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Laouani
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-26553 (E)
*2126553*

S/PV.8865

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

and some of the most vulnerable communities in our
international family. This alone should be enough
to outlaw nuclear testing in perpetuity, yet the more
than 2,000 tests that have been conducted since 1945
have also enabled the quantitative and qualitative
improvement of nuclear weapons, announcing the
arrival of new nuclear-armed States and facilitating
dangerous growth in the arsenals of their predecessors.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Italy and South Africa to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs; Mr. Robert Floyd, Executive Secretary of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization;
and Ms. Magdalene Wangui Wanyaga, Member of the
CTBTO Youth Group.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: At the outset, I would like
to thank the Irish presidency of the Council for its
initiative in convening today’s event. I also would like
to congratulate Mr. Floyd on his recent appointment
as Executive Secretary of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO). Allow me
also to commend him on the successful conclusion of
the twelfth Conference on Facilitating the Entry into
Force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT) — or the Article XIV Conference — which
was held last week in a virtual format for the first time
in the Conference’s history.
The norm against nuclear testing is one of the
most hard-won gains of the post-Cold War era. Yet
it exists today — violated by only one State in this
century — because of the CTBT. Three decades in the
making, a prohibition on nuclear testing has been a goal
of the international community almost since the dawn
of the atomic age. The CTBT represents the fulfilment
of that goal.
From the deserts of Nevada to the steppes of
Semipalatinsk to the outback of Australia and the
atolls of the South Pacific, nuclear testing has done
lasting damage to pristine environments, human health
2/17

27/09/2021

It is for this reason that the CTBT is recognized as an
essential element of nuclear disarmament and a building
block for a world free of nuclear weapons — the United
Nations highest disarmament priority. Negotiating the
CTBT was not easy. Its gestation lasted years, and
when negotiations finally did commence, it was only
by bringing the Treaty to the floor of the General
Assembly that success was achieved.
Yet the negotiation of the CTBT also stands
as a lesson for other multilateral disarmament
initiatives — one of patience and one of determination,
but also one of striking while the iron is hot. The twentyfifth anniversary of the Treaty’s negotiation brings us
reasons both to celebrate and to rethink what we can do
to overcome the challenges that still lie ahead.
Since its adoption by the General Assembly and
opening for signature in September 1996, the Treaty
has achieved near universal adherence, with 185
signatories and 170 ratifying States. It is one of the most
widely supported treaties, not just in the disarmament
and arms control field but in multilateral diplomacy.
The International Monitoring System (IMS), which
provides round-the-clock, real-time monitoring of any
explosive nuclear activities on Earth, is now more than
90 per cent complete, with over 300 stations certified.
The IMS is a towering achievement that has already
demonstrated its worth on multiple occasions. The
capacity-building benefits it provides are an excellent
example of how multilateral disarmament instruments
add value for all States and allow all States to participate
in achieving their ends.
The cumulative result of these achievements is that
no nuclear test conducted will ever evade the watchful
eyes of the CTBTO, buttressing the strong global norm
against any nuclear testing. Thanks to those States that
have signed and ratified the CTBT, the Provisional
Technical Secretariat has been transformed into a
professional hub of scientific and technical expertise. I
thank the staff of the Provisional Technical Secretariat
for their enduring dedication to their cause.
21-26553

27/09/2021

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Yet, despite all these remarkable achievements,
there are still many challenges that lie ahead of us. The
CTBT will play an important role in addressing those
challenges. In recent years, we have seen a worrisome
trend towards the modernization and expansion of
nuclear arsenals. As the global arms control regime has
crumbled, multilateral nuclear disarmament diplomacy
has atrophied. As relations continue to decline among
States that possess nuclear weapons, we cannot take
it for granted that the norm against nuclear testing
will hold.
Thus, a quarter of a century after States agreed
to ban all nuclear tests for good, it is as important as
ever to work towards upholding that norm and to pave
a way to a world free of nuclear weapons. The best
way to uphold the norm against testing is to reaffirm
and enhance support for the CTBT — to reinforce its
existing strengths and to strive to bring about its entry
into force. We can do so on several fronts.
First, we must empower the youth of the world,
on whose shoulders rests the responsibility to carry
on the important work of nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. The CTBTO has made great strides
in this area, with its CTBTO Youth Group initiative now
counting nearly 1,000 participants. I look forward to
hearing the Group’s representative speak today. For the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, young
people are an integral part of our activities in promoting
disarmament and arms control, including through our
own Youth4Disarmament initiative. Its members were
recently involved in various initiatives to commemorate
the International Day Against Nuclear Tests.
Secondly, we must not lose sight of the fact that
the CTBT does not operate in a vacuum and that its
full potential is realized when it works in tandem with
other processes related to nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. The forthcoming Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) is one occasion to do so. The
NPT and the CTBT are inextricably interlinked. A ban
on nuclear tests is considered the critical component
of both nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, as
stated in the preamble of the CTBT. Some of the old
hands in this Chamber may also recall that negotiation
of the CTBT was an essential element of the agreement
by States parties to indefinitely extend the NPT in 1995.
The Review Conference will, I hope, provide impetus
to strengthen support for the CTBT and the global ban
on nuclear tests.

S/PV. 8865

Thirdly, we must continue to provide support for
the IMS and further strengthen the CTBTO’s technical
capabilities to detect activities related to nuclear testing.
The enhanced technical capability of the System to
detect any and all nuclear tests would be a deterrent
to any State that may harbour plans to develop nuclear
weapons. Capacity-building activities undertaken by a
number of States also contribute to the transfer of these
technologies and expertise to developing countries.
Today, we rightly celebrate the twenty-fifth
anniversary of a hard-won victory in multilateral nuclear
disarmament diplomacy that has consistently benefited
the international community. I hope that today’s event
will prompt us to reinforce the achievements made so
far and provide a forum for the free exchange of ideas
and suggestions on how to strengthen the monitoring
regime, reinforce and solidify the global norm against
nuclear testing and, of course, achieve the earliest
possible entry-into-force of the Treaty.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Floyd.
Mr. Floyd: I am grateful to His Excellency Mr. Simon
Coveney for the invitation to address today’s Security
Council meeting held, under Ireland’s presidency, on
the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
opening for signature of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty (CTBT). I also thank Minister Byrne
for presiding over this meeting.
The significance of the CTBT, and indeed its
twenty-fifth anniversary, must be understood within
the broader context of our collective goal of universal,
non-discriminatory and verifiable nuclear disarmament.
And while there may be differing views on the best path
to achieve this goal, a verifiable and enforceable ban on
nuclear testing must be a core component of the legal
and technical architecture of a nuclear-weapon-free
world.
Anniversaries are a time for reflection. A
comprehensive ban on nuclear testing has long been
part and parcel of the nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament agenda. First proposed in 1954, this longawaited and eagerly anticipated measure has been
decades in the making.
With the opening for signature of the CTBT 25
years ago, the international community declared
unequivocally that the era of unrestrained nuclear

21-265533/17

S/PV.8865

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

27/09/2021

testing had come to an end. In the 25 years since its
adoption, the Treaty has created and sustained a norm
against nuclear testing so powerful that fewer than one
dozen tests have been conducted since adoption, and
only one country has violated it this millennium.

That will continue to strengthen the global norm
against nuclear testing and build momentum towards its
entry into force. Every signature and ratification we gain
this coming year will be a cause for great celebration,
and I trust that we will have much to celebrate.

Compare the situation today with the world before
the adoption of the Treaty, where the average explosive
yield of nuclear tests each year was equivalent to nearly
1,000 Fukushima-sized bombs. Nuclear testing not
only created geopolitical instability and supported
the development of more powerful and deadly nuclear
weapons; it also caused untold human suffering and
environmental damage. Because of the CTBT, we have
left that world far behind.

We have also seen that there is real appetite for
civil society and youth engagement on the CTBT.
Council members will shortly have the pleasure to
hear from Magdalene Wanyaga, a Kenyan member of
the CTBTO Youth Group, who will share her views on
how civil society and youth can creatively contribute to
our mission.

Anniversaries are also a time for celebration.
The CTBT is already a great success story. There is
near universal adherence to the Treaty’s prohibition
on nuclear explosions. With 185 signatures and 170
ratifications, there has been much progress towards
the universalization of the CTBT. The object and
purpose of the Treaty — a verifiable end to nuclear
explosions — is a common goal shared by the entire
international community.
Its state-of-the-art global verification regime is
nearly complete, and its ability to meet the verification
requirements of the Treaty has been proven time and
time again. More than 90 per cent of the 337 monitoring
facilities worldwide are in place, and our data processing
and analysis capabilities continue to improve. The
on-site inspection element of the verification regime is
already at an advanced stage of readiness.
In addition to the core mission of nuclear test
monitoring, the Treaty’s verification regime also
provides useful data for other civil and scientific
purposes, including tsunami warning and climate
change studies. All States signatories are entitled to
equal access to the data and to benefit from technical
training and capacity-building programmes.
Anniversaries are a time for renewal of commitments.
States signatories kicked-off our twenty-fifth year last
week at the Article XIV Conference by committing to
taking concrete actions to secure additional signatures
and ratifications. I congratulate Italy and South Africa
as co-Presidents of the Conference on a very successful
event and look forward to coordinating our efforts to
welcome even more States into the CTBT community.
4/17

Our ultimate objective — the total elimination
of nuclear weapons — is clear, but we cannot hope
to achieve a nuclear-weapon-free world without a
universally applied, non-discriminatory and verifiable
prohibition on nuclear testing. And what better way
to celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the CTBT
than by moving the world closer to that noble goal? Let
us join together in this twenty-fifth anniversary year to
turn the promise of the CTBT into a reality.
The President: I thank Mr. Floyd for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Wanyaga.
Ms. Wanyaga: I am very pleased to be with the
Security Council today.
My name is Magdalene Wangui Wanyaga. I am
from Kenya, and I am a member of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO) Youth
Group, where I am an education coordinator. I am also
a Project Manager at SandRose Ltd. where I am tasked
with providing environmentally friendly solutions in
the mining and other sectors in Kenya and East Africa.
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT) is a key part of the global non-proliferation and
disarmament architecture. It inhibits more countries
from developing nuclear weapons and represents
a meaningful step towards a world free of nuclear
weapons. Many CTBTO Youth Group members are the
same age as the CTBT, but the Treaty has yet to enter
into force.
Over the past 25 years the CTBTO, through
the
state-of-the-art
International
Monitoring
System — which consists of 337 seismic, hydroacoustic,
infrasound and radionuclide monitoring stations and
laboratories around the world — has proven its capacity
to act as a comprehensive global monitoring system.
21-26553

27/09/2021

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The organization ensures that no nuclear test explosion
goes unnoticed by the international community.
Apart from detecting nuclear explosions, the data
from the International Monitoring System has been
used in various scientific applications, which are not
limited to investigating climate change, tracking
radiation or warning about tsunamis. In my case, the
data has been of great help, especially in my training
as a seismic analyst, and in research by complementing
data from the local seismic stations.
Promoting and encouraging the usage of the data
from the International Monitoring System, especially
in the scientific community, is one of the ways we can
advance the CTBT.
There are various ways we can promote the CTBT,
and those include but are not limited to education to
provide the necessary awareness of disarmament,
since that is such a specialized sphere. Creating that
awareness will make it easier for people to advocate for
the CTBT in their capacities. An example is the work of
the CTBTO Youth Group, where young people from all
over the world and different professional backgrounds
have been educated on the importance and relevance
of the CTBT through the Youth Group’s introductory
curriculum, interactive webinars, research fellowship
programme and various initiatives, such as the Building
Bridges initiative, which gives us the ability to better
advocate for the CTBT’s entry into force. The former
First Lady of South Africa, Graça Machel, once said,
“Preventing the conflicts of tomorrow means changing
the mindset of youth today”.
Science and diplomacy are other tools that we can
use to promote the treaty. I attended the CTBT Science
and Technology Conferences in 2017, 2019 and 2021
and the second CTBT Science Diplomacy Symposium,
held in 2018, where, as a scientist, I got to learn and
appreciate the diplomacy aspect and how we can use
science communication to inform policymaking.
The second way of advancing the CTBT is by
including the younger generation in the sphere of
nuclear disarmament through dialogue, education
platforms and capacity-building events.
As President Franklin D. Roosevelt said, “We
cannot always build the future for our youth, but we
can build our youth for the future.” We, the younger
generation, play a cardinal role in promoting diversity,
pluralism, tolerance and building trust and interest in

S/PV. 8865

democracy and international peace. Young people have
always been agents of change because we are devoted,
passionate and eager to face challenges. That makes us
the best advocates for international disarmament and
non-proliferation, which will ultimately make the world
a more peaceful, just and sustainable place.
I therefore urge organizations and entities at
the national, regional and global levels to provide
the power and tools to young people to promote and
advocate those noble values, because our voice is worth
hearing. I also encourage senior leaders to include the
perspectives and ideas of young people in their work
and offer opportunities to the next generation of leaders
to deal with the complex issues of today in order to
prepare for a better tomorrow. We can close the door
to nuclear testing for good only if we keep reminding
our Government, communities and leaders that this is
one of the most urgent tasks before us. As Executive
Secretary Floyd has said, we should remain optimistic
realists.
I wholeheartedly believe that a world without
nuclear tests is a better world. The CTBT is our path to
get there. Let us finish what we started.
The President: I thank Ms. Wangui Wanyaga for
her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of State for European Affairs of Ireland.
It is an honour to chair today’s meeting to mark 25
years since the adoption of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty (CTBT). This meeting is a reflection
of the importance of the Treaty to global nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation.
Ireland is immensely proud of our long-standing
and continuing contribution to multilateral nuclear
disarmament, dating back to the early days of our
United Nations membership, when we put forward
the Irish resolutions that led to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
I thank High Representative Nakamitsu and
Executive Secretary Floyd for joining us today.
Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate
Mr. Floyd on his election as Executive Secretary and
to express Ireland’s strong support for him and the
work of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization (CTBTO). I would also like to sincerely
thank Ms. Magdalene Wangui Wanyaga for sharing
her invaluable insights. Her perspectives and ideas on

21-265535/17

S/PV.8865

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

engaging and mentoring youth to make use of what
the CTBT has to offer should inspire us. Over the past
five years, the CTBTO Youth Group has reminded
policymakers and leaders of the responsibility we
owe to this generation and the next. I recognize the
co-Presidents for the successful Article XIV Conference
last week and for the strong statement in support of the
Treaty’s entry into force.
Today’s meeting allows us to reflect on the
successes of the CTBT over its 25 years and to renew
our collective efforts to pursue the entry into force and
universalization of this key Treaty. The CTBT has 185
signatories and 170 ratifying States, highlighting the
strong global support for the Treaty. It is an essential
part of the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation
architecture and has been crucial in establishing and
upholding the international norm against nuclear
testing.
Nuclear-test explosions had been used to develop or
modernize nuclear warhead designs and to demonstrate
nuclear-weapons capabilities. These tests have affected
the lives and health of generations of people around
the globe. They also leave a lasting mark on the
environment. Since 1998, with one exception, all States
have respected the strong de facto international norm
created by the CTBT and upheld the moratorium on
nuclear weapons testing.
Importantly, each of the handful of nuclear tests
conducted since the CTBT’s opening for signature have
been condemned by the Council, which has imposed
sanctions in each case. By prohibiting all nuclear
testing, the CTBT inhibits States from developing new
nuclear weapons. It is therefore an important step along
the path to a world without nuclear weapons and their
devastating consequences for all of humankind.
I fully endorse the recent reiteration by President
Biden and President Putin that nuclear war cannot be
won and must never be fought, an important recognition
of the futility of nuclear weapons and the devastation
that a nuclear war would bring.
Five years ago, on the twentieth anniversary of
the CTBT, the Council adopted resolution 2310 (2016),
which affirmed the importance of entry into force
of the Treaty and the contribution that will make
to international peace and security. The resolution
repeated the statement of the five permanent members
of the Council that “a nuclear-weapon test explosion or
any other nuclear explosion would defeat the object and
6/17

27/09/2021

purpose of the CTBT”. I encourage the five permanent
members to renew and reiterate their commitment to a
moratorium on nuclear weapons testing.
The CTBT establishes a unique, comprehensive
global verification regime, to monitor compliance. This
comprises a global network of monitoring stations, the
International Monitoring System (IMS), consisting
of 337 seismic, hydroacoustic, infrasound and radionuclide monitoring stations around the world. The
global verification regime has repeatedly proven that
it works. The IMS has also demonstrated tangential
scientific and practical benefits by enhancing our
capacity to detect, analyse and warn about seismic
and tsunami activity. In this way, the Treaty is already
contributing significantly to disaster risk reduction and
reducing humanitarian need.
The IMS has also made a very real contribution to
regional stability as an important confidence-building
measure, strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation
and disarmament regime. This has all been achieved
without the Treaty’s entry into force.
For Ireland, it is very clear that, following its entry
into force, this Treaty can provide so much more in
cementing the international norm against testing and
providing reassurance and confidence — based on the
reliable and independent data offered by the verification
regime — that no prohibited activities are being carried
out. I urge all States that have not yet done so to sign
and ratify the Treaty without delay, in particular each
of the remaining eight States listed in annex 2 of the
Treaty.
The twenty-fifth anniversary of the Treaty is an
opportunity to demonstrate that the international
community can work together in pursuit of the common
good. Ireland firmly believes that the Treaty’s entry
into force would be an important step along the path
to a world without nuclear weapons. We look forward
to working with all partners to achieve the same, as we
have done every day since we joined the United Nations
Organization 65 years ago.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now call on the Deputy Foreign Minister of
Estonia.
Mr. Tammsaar (Estonia): I thank Ireland for
convening this very important meeting today in
support of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
21-26553

27/09/2021

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

(CTBT). I would also like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu,
Mr. Floyd and Ms. Wangui Wanyaga for their most
valuable insights and excellent briefings.
For Estonia, the CTBT is one of the key pillars of
the international disarmament and non-proliferation
architecture. The Treaty significantly curbs the ability
of States to obtain and further develop nuclear weapons,
thus contributing to our common goal of a world free of
nuclear weapons.
Regrettably, after 25 years, we still cannot celebrate
the Treaty’s entry into force. For that, we need the
remaining eight annex 2 States to sign and ratify the
Treaty. We urge them to do so without further delay.
Although the CTBT has not formally entered into
force yet, it has established a strong norm against
nuclear testing. The Treaty has 185 signatures and 170
ratifications, which shows that almost every member
of the United Nations has committed to ending nuclear
testing and reducing the dangers posed by nuclear
materials and nuclear weapons.
Furthermore, since 1998, all States but one have
de facto respected the global norm against nuclear
explosions and observed moratoriums on nuclear
weapons testing. Whenever a nuclear test was
conducted, it was strongly and unanimously condemned
by the Security Council.

S/PV. 8865

possibility of on-site inspections that can be requested
if there are suspicious activities.
In conclusion, the entry into force of the CTBT
has clear benefits for international peace and security.
Estonia continues to advocate its prompt entry into
force. Further ratifications, especially by annex 2 States,
would send an important message of the commitment to
ending nuclear-weapon programmes for good.
Mr. Shringla (India): Mr. President, I would like
to thank you for giving us this opportunity to express
our views on the issues of nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. I would also take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation of Ireland for
a very successful presidency of the Security Council
this month.
I would like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Robert
Floyd, Executive Secretary of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO), and
Ms. Magdalene Wangui Wanyaga, CTBTO youth group
member, for their briefings.

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
stated intentions and activities to develop its nuclear
and ballistic missile programme continue to be of
great concern. It is imperative that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea take concrete steps towards
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization.
We call on it to avoid any further provocations and
engage in meaningful discussions with all relevant
parties to achieve lasting peace and security on the
Korean peninsula.

India has played a leading role in global efforts
towards nuclear disarmament. India was the first
country to call for a ban on nuclear testing, in
1954, and for a non-discriminatory treaty on the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, as distinct from
non-dissemination, in 1965. India is committed to the
goal of a nuclear-weapon-free world and the complete
elimination of nuclear weapons, consistent with the
highest priority accorded to nuclear disarmament by
the final document of the first special session of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament. We believe
that this goal can be achieved through a step-by-step
process underwritten by universal commitment and
an agreed global and non-discriminatory multilateral
framework, as outlined in India’s working paper
on nuclear disarmament, submitted to the General
Assembly in 2006 (A/C.1/61/5, annex).

The CTBT has also provided the world with the
most valuable global system for monitoring nuclear
explosions. The International Monitoring System
ensures that no clandestine nuclear test will go
undetected and that the international community will
be able to respond appropriately and swiftly. The
system therefore serves as a strong deterrent against
nuclear testing. Once the Treaty enters into force,
additional verification and compliance measures will
become available. For instance, the Treaty foresees the

As to the theme of today’s discussion, India
participated in the negotiations of the draft
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) in the
Conference on Disarmament, but it could not join the
CTBT, as the Treaty did not address a number of core
concerns raised by India. India maintains a voluntary,
unilateral moratorium on nuclear-explosive testing.
Further, India would continue to work in the framework
of the disarmament triad consisting of the Conference
on Disarmament, the United Nations Disarmament

21-265537/17

S/PV.8865

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Commission and the First Committee of the General
Assembly to strengthen nuclear disarmament and the
non-proliferation architecture.
As the world’s sole multilateral disarmament
negotiating forum, the Conference on Disarmament is
well placed to advance the global disarmament agenda
and negotiate legally binding instruments on items on
its core agenda. Without prejudice to the priority we
attach to nuclear disarmament, India has expressed his
readiness to support the commencement of negotiations
on a draft fissile-material cut-off treaty (FMCT) in
the Conference on Disarmament on the basis of the
mandate contained in document CD/1299. In this
context, India has also participated in the work of the
Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) on the FMCT
and the high-level FMCT expert preparatory group.
Furthermore, through its membership in the earlier
and the current groups of governmental experts, India
has contributed to the GGE on nuclear disarmament
verification, which will meet later this year in Geneva.
India has actively supported and contributed
to the strengthening of the global nuclear security
architecture. India participates in the Nuclear Security
Summit process and has regularly participated in
the International Conference on Nuclear Security
organized by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
India is also a member of the Nuclear Security Contact
Group.
India is a key partner in global non-proliferation
efforts. One of the important steps we have undertaken
in this context is the piloting, since 2002, of an annual
General Assembly resolution on measures to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction,
which is adopted by consensus (see, e.g., General
Assembly resolution 75/58).
Resolution 1540 (2004) is an important instrument
for global non-proliferation efforts. There is a need for
the international community to pay closer attention to
the illicit proliferation of networks of nuclear weapons,
their delivery systems, components and relevant
technologies.
With the objective of strengthening the
non-proliferation architecture, India has also joined
various export-control regimes, namely, the Australia
Group, the Wassenaar Arrangement and the Missile
Technology Control Regime, and has harmonized its
controls with the Nuclear Suppliers Group lists. We
hope that the international community will continue to
8/17

27/09/2021

work towards realizing our collective aspiration for a
nuclear-weapon-free world.
In closing, I would like to recognize the efforts of
the United Nations Secretariat and the United Nations
Office of Disarmament Affairs towards the goal of a
nuclear-weapon-free world.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank High Representative Nakamitsu,
Executive Secretary Floyd — whom we congratulate
on his recent appointment and to whom I reiterate
my country’s support — and Ms. Magdalene Wangui
Wanyaga, for their valuable briefings.
Mexico congratulates Ireland for convening
today’s meeting of the Security Council, which raises
the political profile of the ban on all nuclear testing,
the dire humanitarian and environmental consequences
of which are well known. The Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty (CTBT), whose entry into force is
pending, restricts the development of nuclear weapons
and is therefore a key element in the non-proliferation
and disarmament regime.
We welcome the success of the CTBT Article
XIV meeting that took place less than a week ago,
25 years after the Treaty’s opening for signature
and congratulate Italy and South Africa, which so
successfully co-presided it.
Firm in its principles and convictions, my country
together with Australia and New Zealand, submits the
annual draft resolution to promote the CTBT in the
First Committee of the General Assembly, to reflect the
support of the international community for the nucleartest ban. At this year’s commemorative meeting to
celebrate International Day against Nuclear Tests, on
8 September, Mexico, on behalf of the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, reiterated
the region’s firm condemnation of any type of test
anywhere in the world and called for the early entry
into force of the Treaty.
For that reason, my country welcomes the fact
that the number of countries that have already ratified
it continues to increase. We are moving in the right
direction and therefore we call on those States that have
not yet done so, particularly the annex 2 States, to ratify
it so that it can enter into force.
The Security Council must not sidestep the
important role that falls to it in this respect. It has in
the past condemned a variety of nuclear tests, and we
21-26553

27/09/2021

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

trust that it will remain steadfast in that stance in case
any new incident occurs, something that we hope will
not take place.
Through its resolutions and presidential statements,
the Council has been clear in noting the threat
represented by nuclear tests, which go against efforts
to achieve nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament
in addition to representing a threat that intensifies the
arms race.
The Security Council has also called on States to
refrain from conducting tests and to join the CTBT and
other related treaties without any preconditions. As is
clearly recognized in resolution 2310 (2016), the CTBT
International Monitoring System facilities — five of
which are located in my own country — contribute to
regional stability as an important confidence-building
measure and strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation
and disarmament regime.
We hope that the Council will continue to
unequivocally support all international treaties on
disarmament and non-proliferation. We call on all
international actors to join forces and promote synergies
through the various components of the multinational
architecture. The next Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) and the first meeting of the States
parties to the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons are the forums best suited to strengthening
the interlinkage among all the legal instruments at our
disposal. The adoption of concrete measures with fixed
deadlines aimed at achieving the entry into force of the
CTBT will be a key deliverable that will contribute to
the success of the NPT Review Conference.
I shall conclude by saying that the CTBT’s entry
into force is a pending promise to all the survivors of
past nuclear tests. As we have noted previously, nuclear
weapons represent a threat to human existence, and we
therefore have the obligation to continue our efforts to
bring about a world free of nuclear weapons.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the three African members of the Security
Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as well as
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
We thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu and
the Executive Secretary of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO), Mr. Robert

S/PV. 8865

Floyd, for their comprehensive briefings. We are also
particularly pleased to have one of our very own young
women, Ms. Magdalene Wanyaga of the CTBTO Youth
Group, brief us today on the scientific aspects of
the Treaty.
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT) is a critical component of the nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation architecture and as
such remains a vital instrument in our quest to achieve
a world free of nuclear weapons. As we recognize the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the opening for signature of
the Treaty, we reaffirm our commitment to upholding
the global norm against nuclear testing.
The Caribbean and Africa have, through meaningful
action and partnership, remained unwavering in our call
for the total elimination and non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons and nuclear testing. Through the Tlatelolco
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America and the Caribbean and the African Treaty of
Pelindaba, our regions have vigorously pursued and
reinforced the objectives of the CTBT.
Underscoring the contribution of nuclearweapon-free zones across the world to the overall
objectives of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation,
the A3+1 welcomes the convening of a United Nations
conference on the establishment of a Middle East
zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction, pursuant to General Assembly
decision 73/546. We encourage all invited States to
constructively participate in the forthcoming sessions
of the Conference.
A world without nuclear weapons is fundamental
to the fulfilment of the legitimate aspirations of
humankind, such as peace, security and development.
Nuclear explosions not only threaten human lives
but also have disastrous long-term environmental
consequences. They can substantially undermine
biodiversity and destroy land and marine ecosystems.
The full implementation of the CTBT is therefore a
global imperative.
The existence, development and testing of nuclear
weapons threatens international peace and security,
and that threat is heightened by rising geopolitical
tensions and fragmentation across the multilateral
system. Nuclear science and technology ought to be
employed only for safe, secure and peaceful uses.
Indeed, the exploration of those technologies can assist
in our collective pursuit of achieving the Sustainable

21-265539/17

S/PV.8865

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Development Goals. We therefore recognize and respect
the sovereign right of States to do so, guided by the
oversight of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
We laud the professional and all-important work
of the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization to promote and
ensure compliance with the Treaty’s provisions, in
particular through the Treaty’s verification regime. The
CTBTO’s continued efforts bolster our confidence that
no nuclear explosion will escape detection. We further
commend and support the CTBTO’s activities aimed at
enhancing the national capabilities of signatories and
promoting international cooperation.
The CTBT has received overwhelming support from
the international community, as seen by the 185 States
that have so far signed and the 170 that have ratified
the instrument. We are, however, concerned about the
positions of the annex 2 States, whose ratifications are
required for the Treaty’s entry into force. We strongly
urge all States that have not yet done so to sign and
ratify the Treaty without delay so as to strengthen the
norm against nuclear testing. We recall resolution 2310
(2016) and implore States to remain fully committed
to the preservation of the agreement to end nuclear
testing, maintain moratoriums and continue to explore
all avenues, including through regional agreements and
legislation, to completely eliminate nuclear weapons.
Nuclear disarmament must remain a high priority
on the agenda of the international community. The
CTBT, along with other indispensable instruments
such as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, is essential to realizing our collective vision
of a safer world that is nuclear-weapon free. Today, let
us recommit ourselves to this goal of safeguarding the
future of humankind.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia is consistently committed to the goal
of a complete and irrevocable cessation of nuclear
testing throughout the world. Since 1991, our country
has observed a moratorium on nuclear testing, and
during that time has not conducted a single nuclear test.
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the opening for signature of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). The agreement on
the CTBT in 1996 was a major milestone in the context
of international efforts to impose a comprehensive ban
on nuclear testing. The Russian Federation actively
participated in drafting the Treaty and ratified it as
10/17

27/09/2021

early as 2000. Since then, we have strictly observed
its provisions and made a constructive contribution
to the work of the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization.
On the twenty-fifth anniversary of the CTBT,
Russian President Vladimir Putin issued a statement,
in which he stressed that:
“The drafting of this historic document, aimed
at a dramatic strengthening of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime, has confirmed that even
the most difficult global security issues can and
must be solved through talks.”
Twenty-five years later, the CTBT has become almost
universally accepted as the most advanced international
legal instrument against nuclear testing. Its universal
and unconditional ban of all nuclear tests, supported
by an effective verification system, can provide a
credible barrier against the proliferation and qualitative
improvement of nuclear weapons. For the vast majority
of countries, including Russia, the CTBT has become
an integral part of international security and stability.
We welcome the signing and the ratification of the
CTBT by Cuba and its ratification by the Union of the
Comoros. Each ratification is extremely important as
another step towards the universalization of the Treaty.
Nevertheless, the festive mood on the occasion of
the anniversary is overshadowed by the fact that the
CTBT has not yet entered into force and its prospects
remain very uncertain. States that have opted for
the Treaty cannot fully rely on it. We have already
expressed our concerns about that situation during
the twelfth Conference on Facilitating the Entry into
Force of the CTBT, held on 23 September of this year.
Unfortunately, eight annex 2 countries, whose
ratification is required for the Treaty’s entry into force,
have so far not taken effective steps towards signing
and/or ratifying it. That has created serious obstacles
for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. It is
hardly a normal situation that international agreements
cannot become fully operational 25 years after their
conclusion. We believe that any attempt to secure
strategic advantages by refusing to take part in key
international agreements is unacceptable.
In the light of some recent reports concerning the
development of certain military technologies by some
alliances, we are extremely concerned about the future
of the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
21-26553

27/09/2021

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The Russian Federation is committed to the
progressive development of the verification regime
under the CTBT and is making a significant contribution
to that end by establishing its second-largest national
monitoring programme, which will comprise 32
facilities upon completion. Twenty-nine of those are
already operational.
The capacity of the CTBTO Preparatory
Commission is unrivalled and has broad scope.
However, that does not provide grounds for its unlimited
and inappropriate use. The verification mechanism is
set up for specific tasks, which are clearly set out in
the Treaty. Its main purpose is to verify compliance
with the Treaty’s obligations, and the verification
mechanism must be implemented in strict compliance
with the provisions of the CTBT, the mandate of the
Preparatory Commission and taking into account the
realistic prospects for the Treaty’s entry into force.
I would like to recall that, pending the entry into
force of the CTBT, the elements of the verification
mechanism can function and operate only on a trial
and provisional basis. Any participation by CTBTO
Preparatory Commission member States in the relevant
activities, including the transmission of data from
International Monitoring System stations, is purely
voluntary until such time as the CTBT has entered into
force. By signing and ratifying the CTBT, we agreed to
participate in it under those conditions.
We trust that this situation, which has become a
necessary consequence of the CTBT’s non-entry into
force, will not continue for several years or decades.
We appeal to the leadership of the countries on which
the future of the CTBT depends to show the political
will and responsibility and to take concrete decisions
on signing and/or ratifying it as soon as possible.
It is essential that, until the CTBT enters into force,
all States adhere to its letter and spirit. It is also crucial
to ensure a moratorium on nuclear testing for the time
being. Russia intends to maintain that moratorium in
the future provided that other nuclear-weapon States
take a similar approach. It should be borne in mind
that a voluntary moratorium on nuclear testing is a
temporary, interim measure that cannot replace the
legal obligations of States under an international treaty
and underpin the strength of the world community’s
collective action in the event of its violation.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): Only
a few days ago, the Security Council met to address

S/PV. 8865

the threat to international peace and security posed
by North Korea’s nuclear proliferation. Today we are
gathered again, this time to celebrate 25 years since
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)
was opened for signature. That is a key instrument not
only for disarmament, but also for non-proliferation.
The CTBT has brought about remarkable discipline.
Voluntary adherence to the test ban is now a reality.
It should be remembered that only one State — North
Korea — has conducted nuclear tests in the twenty-first
century. It is up to us to safeguard this achievement.
France was one of the first nuclear-weapon States
to sign the CTBT, in 1996, and then to ratify it.
Since signing the CTBT, our commitment has been
translated into strong and specific actions. In 1998,
France irreversibly and transparently dismantled its
nuclear test site in French Polynesia, in partnership
with the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
(CTBTO). At the technical level, France is the only
nuclear-weapon State to have fulfilled its input to the
CTBTO verification system: it operates 16 stations on its
territory, eight abroad and one radionuclide laboratory.
Today the Treaty is equipped with all the necessary
instruments to be effective. The resources of the
Provisional Technical Secretariat are fully operational,
and the International Monitoring System is functioning.
Moreover, it has made it possible to accurately detect
North Korea’s most recent test, in 2017.
To date, 185 States have signed the CTBT.
The five nuclear-weapon States have adopted
moratoriums on testing. The challenge now is to
move towards the CTBT’s entry into force. Eight
so-called annex 2 States are still not on board and,
without them, the CTBT cannot enter into force.
Resolution 2310 (2016), adopted by the Security
Council five years ago and co-sponsored by France,
urged all States that have not yet done so to sign and
ratify the CTBT. That strong and unequivocal call by
the Security Council must be heard. On this twentyfifth anniversary, France, together with the European
Union and its partners, reiterates its firm commitment
to the CTBT’s entry into force as soon as possible.
In conclusion, allow me, on behalf of France, to
express my thanks to Mr. Lassina Zerbo for his resolute
action to promote the universalization of the Treaty and
to wish the new Executive Secretary of the CTBTO
every success.

21-2655311/17

S/PV.8865

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank you, Mr. President, for holding today’s briefing.
I want to congratulate Ireland and our Irish colleagues
as they near the end of an active, successful and
productive month as President of the Security Council.
And I thank today’s briefers for their valuable insights
and their dedication to this issue.
Today’s discussion brings to mind the seminal role
Ireland played 60 years ago in reducing the dangers
posed by nuclear weapons. The 1961 resolution
submitted by Ireland — General Assembly resolution
1665 (XVI) — led to the creation of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, leaving us far
more secure and more prosperous than we would be
without it. As we celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT),
it is important to recognize the paramount role of the
CTBT, even prior to its entry into force, in establishing
and maintaining a nearly universal political norm
against nuclear-explosive testing.
Let me affirm that the United States supports the
CTBT and is committed to working to achieve its entry
into force, while recognizing the significant challenges
that lie ahead in reaching that goal. In line with the goals
of the CTBT, the United States continues to observe its
zero-yield nuclear-explosive testing moratorium. We
call on all States possessing nuclear weapons to declare
or reiterate such a moratorium.
Maintaining the international norm against nuclearexplosive testing remains in the interest of all States.
That norm is essential for sustaining the international
non-proliferation regime and contributing to a more
peaceful and secure world.
As we look ahead to the future of the CTBT, the
United States is committed to taking a leading role
in revitalizing international arms control efforts. We
welcome engagement with all States that share our
commitment to implementing effective measures
towards achieving a world without nuclear weapons.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, and the Irish presidency for bringing
us together today to underline our support for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). Let
me also thank our three briefers for their presentations
and reiterate the United Kingdom’s congratulations to
Mr. Floyd on his election as Executive Secretary of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
(CTBTO).
12/17

27/09/2021

The United Kingdom views the CTBT and its entry
into force as a vital part of the step-by-step approach
to nuclear disarmament under the framework of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
We continue to be a faithful campaigner for its entry
into force, engaging by publicly and privately with the
remaining eight annex 2 States. The United Kingdom’s
Minister of State, Mr. Cleverly, underlined our
continued support just last week at the CTBT Article
XIV Conference.
Our goal is very simple: to bring an end to nuclearweapon test explosions anywhere on the planet. Each
signature and ratification takes us closer to that goal.
We therefore welcome the ratifications by Cuba and the
Union of the Comoros since the last Conference.
The United Kingdom has not carried out any
nuclear-weapon test explosions or any other nuclear
explosions since 1991. We played a central role in the
negotiation of the CTBT, being one of the first States to
sign it, and to complete ratification in 1998.
The United Kingdom condemns North Korea’s
continued development of illegal nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes, demonstrated most recently on
15 September by two ballistic missile launches, in
violation of Security Council resolutions, and their
six nuclear tests since 2006. We call for the complete,
verifiable and irreversible denuclearization of North
Korea, and I urge the country to resume dialogue with
the international community. We call on North Korea
to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty.
Turning to the CTBTO, it is our collective
responsibility to sustain the verification mechanism,
financially and technically, in order to ensure it is fit for
purpose upon the CTBT’s entry into force. The United
Kingdom is one of the largest financial contributors
to the CTBTO, providing £4.5 million annually. We
provide extensive technical and political support. We
maintain the United Kingdom National Data Centre
and host 13 facilities, which support the International
Monitoring System.
We must all take responsibility to promote the
Treaty’s entry into force, including engaging with the
remaining annex 2 States, but also with civil society and
youth, to demonstrate the crucial role that the Treaty
and its organization play in maintaining international
security and as a step towards our shared goal of a
world without nuclear weapons.
21-26553

27/09/2021

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Ireland for convening
this very important meeting. I also thank the briefers:
High Representative Izumi Nakamitsu, Executive
Secretary Robert Floyd and Ms. Magdalene Wanyaga
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization (CTBTO) Youth Group.
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT) has been a centrepiece of the disarmament
and non-proliferation regime for 25 years now. And
although the Treaty has still not entered into force, it
has established an important norm against nuclear tests.
Despite that, we cannot forget or ignore the utterly
unacceptable human and environmental consequences
of nuclear testing. That is also why a norm or a selfimposed moratorium on nuclear testing can never be
a substitute for a comprehensive, universally binding
legal agreement. It remains imperative that we spare no
effort to encourage further signatures and ratifications
of the Treaty, so that it may enter into force as soon as
possible. The tenth Review Conference of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons has an
important role to play. State parties should reaffirm
the essential role of the CTBT within the nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation regime and call for
its entry into force without delay.
We must also continue our efforts to complete the
verification regime. There are encouraging signs. Even
on a provisional basis, the monitoring and analytical
elements of the verification regime have contributed
to regional stability and represent a significant
confidence-building measure. The International
Monitoring System (IMS) and the International Data
Centre (IDC) have already brought about tangible
scientific and civil benefits, such as tsunami warning
systems.
Norway is proud to contribute. We have fulfilled
our responsibilities under the IMS: there are six
monitoring stations on Norwegian territory — all of
which are transmitting their data continuously to the
IDC. We also continue to contribute financially to
CTBT capacity-building, including training courses for
developing countries.
Norway welcomes the election of Mr. Floyd as
Executive Secretary of the CTBTO. I wish him the best
of luck in leading efforts to ensure that the verification
regime will be operational upon the Treaty’s entry into
force. In the interim period, it is important to uphold
the self-imposed moratorium on testing.

S/PV. 8865

In that regard, Norway notes with regret the
statement made by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea in January of last year, in which it declared
that it no longer considered itself bound by such a
commitment. We are gravely concerned about the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s publicly stated
intentions and continued efforts to develop weapons of
mass destruction.
Finally, allow me to underline the importance of
innovative partnerships in order to achieve the entry
into force of the CTBT. That cannot be a Governmentonly affair; we must involve civil society, academia and
the private sector if we want to achieve results.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): We thank Ireland for this
initiative and for its commendable efforts on nuclear
non-proliferation and disarmament. We also thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu, Mr. Floyd and Ms. Wanyaga for
their informative presentations. We welcome the
representatives of Italy and South Africa to our
briefing today.
We reaffirm that the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty (CTBT) plays an important role in the
global non-proliferation and disarmament architecture.
Since the first nuclear test in 1945, more than 2,000
tests have been conducted, with devastating effects
on human life and the environment. After the CTBT
opened for signature in 1996, the number of nuclear tests
decreased significantly, with only 10 tests in the past 25
years. That is thanks to the international community’s
efforts on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament
and the commitments of the nuclear-weapon States to
the moratoriums on nuclear testing.
We note the efforts of the Security Council to
address matters related to the CTBT, including the
adoption and implementation of resolution 2310 (2016).
We also note recent efforts by the Russian Federation
and the United States on the extension of the Treaty
between the United States of America and the Russian
Federation on Measures for the Further Reduction
and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms through
February 2021.
Despite the existing moratorium, the fact that the
CTBT has not yet come into force leaves the door open
for nuclear testing in various forms. For the interests
of humankind and the environment, especially for
generations to come, we urge all Member States that
have yet to do so, particularly the remaining States
listed in annex 2 of the CTBT, to sign and ratify the

21-2655313/17

S/PV.8865

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

CTBT as matter of urgency with a view to its entry
into force. As we celebrate 25 years of the CTBT, we
need to further strengthen the CTBT and other related
instruments. We welcome the efforts of States parties
to bolster the biennial Article XIV Conference process
and prepare for the upcoming tenth Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the first meeting
of State parties of the Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons.
Viet Nam reaffirms its consistent policy
of supporting all nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament efforts, with a view to the total
elimination of nuclear weapons. Viet Nam is a party
to the NPT, the CTBT, the Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons and the South-East Asia NuclearWeapon-Free Zone. We commit to fully meeting our
obligations under international law, including the
treaties I mentioned and all relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council.
We support the inalienable right of States to develop,
research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. We support the work of Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization and call for
further assistance, especially for developing countries,
to facilitate access to data from the International
Monitoring System and the International Data Centre
for socioeconomic development applications, as well as
for non-proliferation and disarmament. We commit to
continue to work with all Member States and regional
and subregional organizations on the CTBT in order
to further strengthen nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament for a better world with peace, cooperation
and development.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Mr. President, for presiding over today’s
meeting. I also thank High Representative Nakamitsu,
Executive Secretary Floyd and Ms. Wangui Wanyaga
for their briefings.
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT) is an important milestone in humankind’s
quest for a world free of nuclear weapons. In the 25
years since it opened for signature, the CTBT has
made significant contributions to curtail the nuclear
arms race, mitigating the risk of a nuclear war and
maintaining international peace and security. The
Treaty has become a major pillar of the international
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation architecture.
14/17

27/09/2021

The volatile and challenging dynamics of international
strategic security and stability that we are seeing today
highlight the importance of the CTBT.
In his Our Common Agenda report, SecretaryGeneral Guterres calls for a new agenda for peace
and new actions to, inter alia, reduce strategic risks.
Promoting the early entry into force of the CTBT ought
to be one of the many efforts to that end. In that regard,
China would like to propose the following.
First, we must firmly uphold multilateralism and
create an enabling security environment for the entry
into force of the Treaty. All States should practice
true multilateralism; stay committed to win-win
cooperation, equity and justice; reject the Cold War
mentality of zero-sum games; work towards common,
universal and durable security; and eliminate the root
causes of the existence, proliferation and testing of
nuclear weapons.
Secondly, in order to support the object and
purpose of the Treaty and build on the strong political
momentum for its entry into force, the international
community should continue to advocate for the
complete prohibition and total destruction of nuclear
weapons and enable the vision of a nuclear-test ban so
as to gain greater traction among the peoples. Nuclearweapon States should honour their commitment to a
moratorium on nuclear testing, genuinely reduce the
weight of nuclear weapons in their national security
policies and make a no-first-use pledge.
Thirdly, in order to preserve the international
armed conflict regime and provide more robust
institutional safeguards for the entry into force of
the Treaty, all States should work together to uphold
the international order based on international law,
strengthen the multilateral disarmament machinery
with the United Nations at its core, comply with and
fulfil their international obligations and commitments,
renounce double standards and discriminatory practices
and maintain the integrity, authority and effectiveness
of the international armed conflict treaty system.
Fourthly, in order to advance the preparations
for the implementation of the Treaty and reinforce a
robust foundation of capacity for its entry into force,
the international community should continue to push
ahead the development of the International Data
Centre, the International Monitoring System and the
on-site inspection mechanism, and must do so in a
comprehensive and balanced manner. The international
21-26553

27/09/2021

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

community must also assist development countries with
capacity-building with a view to ensuring their full
technical readiness for the operation of the verification
regime once the Treaty enters into force.
Both the CTBT and the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
are important pillars of the international nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation regime. While
promoting the early entry into force of the CTBT, the
international community should also conscientiously
safeguard the authority, universality and effectiveness
of the NPT. All States should demonstrate a responsible
attitude in that regard. China objects to a utilitarian
approach to the NPT or the application of double
standards in its implementation. It is wrong for a scant few
nuclear-weapon States to make noble pronouncements
about their commitment to the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime, while they assist non-nuclearweapon States to build nuclear submarines. Not only
will that intensify the arms race — to the detriment
of the international non-proliferation regime, as well as
international and regional security and stability — it
also runs counter to the spirit of the NPT. We hope
that the countries concerned will heed the call of
the international community, faithfully fulfil their
international non-proliferation obligations and put
greater effort towards regional peace and stability.
China was among the first signatories to the
CTBT and has conducted the fewest nuclear tests of all
nuclear-weapon States. The Chinese Government has
scrupulously upheld the moratorium on nuclear testing
since its announcement in 1996 and has never wavered
in its support for the Treaty at the political level. In its
own way, China has made its due contributions to the
entry into force of the Treaty, to the preparations for
its implementation and to international cooperation on
the Treaty.
I would like to reiterate that China will not become
an obstacle to the entry into force of the CTBT. Come
what may in the shifting international political climate,
China will remain staunchly committed to safeguarding
multilateralism, maintaining international peace and
security and preserving the international nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation regime. China will
continue to work with all other parties to continuously
consolidate the international consensus on a nucleartest ban, contribute to bringing the Treaty into force,
and make unremitting efforts towards our noble goal,

S/PV. 8865

namely, the complete prohibition and total destruction
of nuclear weapons at an early date.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): I would like to thank Ireland
for convening today’s Security Council briefing on
the topic of the entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). As pointed out by High
Representative Nakamitsu, Executive Secretary of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
(CTBTO) Floyd and many Council members, it is of the
utmost importance to come together to reach that key
goal for the sake of present and future generations.
I would also like to thank Ireland for inviting Italy
and South Africa to share with the Council the results
of the recent Article XIV ministerial conference that
we, Italy and South Africa, co-presided. As Council
members know, the Conference took place in New York
and Vienna on 23 and 24 September in a year that marks
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Treaty’s opening for
signature. Each ratifying State took the opportunity to
reaffirm the urgency of the entry into force of the CTBT
and the hope for its universalization, highlighting its
essential value as a landmark agreement on the path
towards disarmament and non-proliferation.
The Final Declaration of the Conference was adopted
by consensus. It reiterates States’ overwhelming support
for the Treaty’s universalization and the urgency of its
entry into force, recalling relevant General Assembly
resolutions and the recommendations for follow-up
actions from the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), as well as the calls for the entry into
force of the CTBT made during the process leading up
to the 2020 NPT Review Conference.
The Final Declaration also hails progress made
towards the CTBT’s universalization since the last
Article XIV conference and attaches importance to the
signature and ratification by Cuba and the ratification
by the Union of Comoros, which brought the number of
ratifying States to 170 and that of State signatories to
the Treaty to 185. It urged the eight remaining annex
2 states to sign and ratify the Treaty without further
delay and calls on all States to refrain from nuclear-test
explosions.
Furthermore, the Final Declaration expresses
condemnation for the six nuclear tests conducted by

21-2655315/17

S/PV.8865

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the Democratic Republic of Korea since 2006 and
reaffirms the significance of the full implementation
of all relevant Security Council resolutions and of the
complete denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
The Declaration reaffirms the commitment of all States
to providing political, technical, financial support to
the CTBTO Preparatory Commission and commencing
the establishment and functioning of the International
Monitoring System (IMS) and the International
Data Centre as core facilities that would enhance on
site-inspection capabilities and forge a global and fully
operational verification regime.
The Declaration also sets out concrete and
actionable steps towards the swift entry into force
of the Treaty and its universalization, including
encouraging further signatures and ratifications of
the Treaty through the designation of coordinators to
promote the Treaty’s universalization, recognizing the
role of the Group of Eminent Persons in assisting the
promotion of the Treaty’s objectives, encouraging the
organization of regional activities and education and
training initiatives, and supporting cooperation with
intergovernmental and non-government organizations
as well as civil society.
CTBT parties underscored the significant results
the CTBTO has accomplished to date: establishing a
global norm on nuclear testing, building an effective
verification regime, and identifying civil and scientific
applications. CTBT parties also invoked the need to
continue to observe the de facto moratorium on nuclear
tests and explosions and to redouble efforts in this
regard until entry into force of the Treaty. Signatory
parties reaffirmed the crucial role of the International
Monitoring System in providing a cost-effective,
verifiable and sustainable verification regime. They
also commended the verification regime as a key tool in
addressing broader challenges, as is the case for climate
change, thanks to the tsunami warning system.
In line with its role as an Article XIV Coordinator
for the upcoming two-year period, Italy reiterates the
plea to the eight remaining annex 2 States to sign and
ratify the CTBT in a timely manner. Italy also welcomes
the United States commitment expressed during
the Article XIV Conference to supporting the entry
into force of the CTBT through dedicated outreach
initiatives and education. Italy calls on the international
community to keep supporting the completion of the
CTBT’s monitoring system even prior to the entry into
force of the Treaty, in order to improve its capacity to
16/17

27/09/2021

provide accurate data analysis. In this regard, Italy
remains firmly committed to the strengthening of the
IMS, including through our national seismic station
and radionuclide laboratory.
Italy attaches great importance to the CTBT’s
contribution to multilateralism and the view that
disarmament and non-proliferation are undertakings
that involve responsibilities shared by all States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We thank Izumi
Nakamitsu, Robert Floyd and Magdalene Wangui
Wanyaga for their briefings today.
The Security Council’s convening of today’s open
debate to mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
opening for signature of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty (CTBT) is timely. Not only does it
mark a significant anniversary of the Treaty, but it also
follows very closely on the successful holding of the
twelfth Conference on Facilitating the Entry into Force
of the CTBT, also known as the Article XIV Conference,
on 23 and 24 September, over which South Africa and
Italy had the honour to preside. We are therefore grateful
to Ireland as President of the Security Council during
this very busy month for convening today’s debate. It is
our hope that the debate will form part of sustained and
enhanced efforts aimed at encouraging the signing and
the ratification of the Treaty.
Today’s Council meeting also provides us, as
the international community, with an opportunity to
once again highlight the dangers and threats posed to
international peace and security by nuclear weapons
and their tests and to pay tribute to those who have been
victims of the use of nuclear weapons. This meeting is
also consistent with the Final Declaration adopted by
the Article XIV Conference, in which States resolved
to
“[s]pare no effort and use all avenues open to us to
encourage further signature and ratification of the
Treaty, and urge all States to sustain the momentum
generated by this Conference and remain seized of
the issue at the highest political level”.
A quarter of a century is far too long a period for
the spectrum of nuclear-weapon tests to loom, despite
commitments made on a moratorium on these tests,
especially given the catastrophic humanitarian and
environmental consequences of a nuclear weapon
21-26553

27/09/2021

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

detonation, whether by accident or by design, and in
any environment. A moratorium should not be seen as
a viable long-term replacement for the legally binding
commitment of States signatories of the CTBT. In fact,
it may even distract from the urgency of such a binding
legal commitment. South Africa realized this urgency
early on, and the importance it attaches to the CTBT
and its objectives has been demonstrated by the fact
that we were one of the first countries to sign and ratify
the Treaty, and we will continue to strongly support its
entry into force.
However, it seems that for some the escalation in
vertical advancement and stockpiling, and the horizontal
spread of the development of nuclear arsenals and their
means of delivery remains an ill-conceived factor in
their strategic thinking. South Africa therefore urges
the nuclear-weapon States and those that possess these
horrific weapons to make urgent progress towards the
achievement of the total elimination of nuclear weapons.
For us, the CTBT serves as a solid foundation for
the achievement of a world free of nuclear weapons,
and we remain concerned about the lack of progress in
the ratification of the Treaty, in particular by the eight
remaining annex 2 States. However, we recognize the
positive developments that have taken place since 2019,

S/PV. 8865

such as the recent ratifications of the Treaty by the
Comoros and Cuba.
For its part, and as co-President of the article XIV
Conference and a participant in the Group of Eminent
Persons, South Africa will continue its active role in the
work of the CTBTO from both a technical and political
perspective. That includes support for concrete,
actionable steps towards the early entry into force and
universalization of the Treaty such as using avenues
to encourage further signatures and ratifications as
well as outreach activities, which our participation in
this Council meeting today illustrates. We encourage
the full implementation of and commitment to those
actionable steps by all States parties to the Treaty.
We look forward to working with all States parties
as well as with the Executive Secretary, Mr. Robert
Floyd, with whom we are glad to share this platform
today and whose work we support going forward. We
call on the Council, in the interests of its mandate
of maintaining international peace and security, to
support the efforts of all to realize the entry into force
of the CTBT as soon as possible. We cannot ignore the
catastrophic threat posed by these weapons and their
testing to our people and our environment.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

21-2655317/17
