UNITED NATIONS

UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX O·FFICloELS
OEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 18
,
,
l11eme seance
24 fevrier 1947

ll1th meeting
24 February 1947

Lake Success
New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES
"\ ~

Hundred and eleventh meeting

Cent-onzieme seance
Page

Pages

71. Provisional agenda ."................ 361
72. Adoption of the agenda. " ",' . "
361
73. Continuation of the discussion of the
United Kingdom complaint against
Albania . ,
"
, . . .. 361

71. Ordre du jour provisoire
361
72. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
361
73. Suite de la discussion de la plainte du
Royaume-Uni contre l'Albanie
361

Documents

Documents
Annex

The following documents relevant to the
hundred and eleventh meeting appear in
Supplement No. 3, Second Year:
Letter from the representative of the
United Kingdom on the Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
and enclosures (document S}247) ....
Communications from the Albanian Government concerning incidents in the
Corfu Channel (document 8/250). ... .

8
9

Annexes

Les documents suivants, se rapportant a. la
cent-onzieme seance, figurent au Supplement No 3, Deuxieme Annee:
Lettre en date du 10 janvier 1947 adressee
au Secretaire general par le representant
du Royaume-Uni au Conseil de securit6
et pieces jointes (document 5}247) .,..
Communications du Gouvernement albanais relatives aux incidents survenus dans
le detroit de Corfou (document 8}250).,

8
9

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
No. 18

SECOND YEAR

DEUXIEME ANNEE

No 18

HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH MEETING

CENT-ONZIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Monday, 24 February 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York, le lundi
24 fivrier 1947, a15 heures.

President: Mr. F. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium).

President: M. F. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaurne-Uni, Etats-U nis
cPAmerique.

71. Provisional agenda (document 5/285)

71. Ordre dujour provisoire (document
5/285)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. Letter from the representative of the United
Kingdom on the Security Council addressed
to the Secretary-General concerning incidents in the Corfu Channel (documents
S/247 and S/250).1

2. Lettre adressee au Secn£taire general par le
representant du Royaume-Uni au Conseil
de securite, relative aux incidents survenus
dans le detroit de Corfou (documents
8/247 et S/250)1,

72. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

72. Adoption de I'ordre du jour
L'ordre du jour est ado pte.

73. Continuation of the discussion of the
United Kingdom complaint against
Albania .

73. Suite de la discussion de la plainte
du Royaume-Uni contre I'Albanie

At the invitation of the President, Mr. H'ysni
Kapo, representative of Albania, took his place
at the Council table.

Sur [,in.vitation du President, M. Hysni Kapo,
relJresentant de l'Albanie, prend place ala table
du Conseil.
M. HASLUCK (Australie) (traduit de ['anglais): Notls avons entendu les deux parties en

Mr. HASLUCK (Australia): It seems to our
delegation that we have now heard a statement
of the case from the two parties interested in it,
a statement from the United Kingdom and a
statement from the representative of Albania.
It,seems to us that the next step to be taken by
~~I~ Council should be one to ensure the expehlti~~~ handling of the case, and above all, the
an mg of the case without introducing any
~xtr~eous matters, so that this Council may
t~' a le to concentrate on its single function in
IS matter, which in Our view is to bring about
.:peace~ settlement of the question before us.

Ye~~esuOpffitia! RecNords of the Security Council, Second
,

p ement

o. 3, Annexes 8 and 9.

cause, le Royaume-Uni et l'Albanie, exposer
leurs points de vue. Il nous semble que la premiere chose a faire est de mener les debats
rapidement, de lcs mener, surtout, sans y in~ro­
duire de considerations etrangeres la questIOn,
afin de pcrmettre au Conseil de s'attacher la
seule tache qui lui incombe en l'occurrence et
qui est, selon nous, d'assurer le rcgle~ent. I?acifique de la question dont nous avans ete SalS!S.

a

a

I Voir Ptoces-uerbaux officiels du Consei! de securit~,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexes 8 et 9.

362
Looking at the question before us, it seems to
us that it has two aspects. In the first place it
is a dispute between two nations. That dispute
has been properly brought to the attention of
the Council, and consequently the Council has
a responsibility to take all the measures possible
to bring about a peaceful settlement. As is well
known to members, the measures open to us
include negotiation, inquiry, mediation, conCiliation, arbitration and judicial settlement. And
among our obligations as a Council is the obligation to consider which of these m<;thods laid
down in the Charter is most likely to bring about
a peaceful settlement in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law. We
must do that. It seems to us that it is not a'
matter in which we have any choice. That
obligation is laid upon us by the Charter.

Si nous examinons cette question, nous voyons
qu'elIe presente un double aspect. En premier
lieu, il s'agit d'un differend entre deux nations.
Ce differend a ete porte devant le Cons~il par
les voies regulieres; le Conseil se doit donc de
faire tout ce qui est en son pouvoir pour en
assurer le reglement pacifique. Les membres du
Conseil n'ignorent pas que nous pouvons proceder de bien des fa~ons: par voie de negociation, d'enquete, de mediation, de conciliation,
d'arbitrage et de reglement judiciaire. En tant
que Conseil, nous avons entre autres obligations,
celIe d'examiner, parmi les methodes prevues
par la Charte, laquelle est le plus susceptible
d'amener un reglement pacifique du differend,
conformement aux principes de la justice et du
droit international. Nous devons nous acquitter .
de cette tache. Il nous semble que nous n'avons
pas le choix, car cette obligation nous est imposee par la Charte.

So much for the dispute. But it also seems to
us that, apart from this obligation to achieve a
peaceful settlement of the dispute, the Council
must be aware that, if the facts as alleged by
the United Kingdom are established, the
Council has before it not merely a dispute, but
an act which can only be characterized as an
international crime of the most serious sort. If,
in fact, it were true-and I should like to emphasize that at this stage the Australian delegation expresses no opinion whatever on that
aspect of the matter before us-if it were trueand I stress the "if" -that the Albanian Government is responsible for the deliberate laying of
mines in an international channel of navigation,
and by its action has brought about the death of
innocent persons, then the case amounts in substance to something very much of the character
of mass murder and requires the most serious
attention of the Council.

11 y a done d'une part un differend. Mais il
ya plus qu'une simple obligation pour le Conseil
de reglcr ce differend par des moyens pacifiques.
Le Conseil doit se rendre compte que, si les
faits allegues par le Royaume-Uni sont verifies,
il ne s'agit plus seulement d'un difIerend, mais
d'une action qu'on ne peut qualifier autrement
que de crime international de la plus haute
gravite. Si, en fait, il est vrai-et je tiens a
souligner qu'a ce stade des debats la delegation
australienne n'exprime aucune opinion sur cet
aspect de la question qui nous occupe, s'il est
vrai-et j'appuie sur le "si"-que le Gouvernement albanais est coupable d'avoir, de propos
detibere, mouille des mines dans un chenal international de navigation, causant ainsi la mort
de personnes innocentes, alors cette affaire se
ramene au fond a une sorte d'assassinat en
masse et exige l'examen le plus approfondi.

A mon avis, ce second aspect de la question
In regard to this second aspect of the matter,
I would suggest that it is not one that solely n'interesse pas seulement les parties en cause.
concerns the parties involved. It is not one that Il n'interesse pas uniquement le Royaume-Uni,
solely concerns the United Kingdom, for if the car, a supposer que les mines aient ete mouilmines had been so laid, they would have consti- ICes dans les circonstances indiquees, eIles
tuted a danger, not simply to the shipping or auraient constitue un danger non seulement
warships of the United Kingdom, but to the· pour les navires de commerce ou de guerre du
shipping, including merchant shipping, of· any Royaume-Uni, mais pour la navigation, y comseafaring country. And in this connexion, we pris les navires marchands, de taus les pays mari·
would point out what has been recognized by times. A cet 'egard, nous voudrions rappeler
the Council before; namely, that a dispute which une decision anterieure du Conseil, a savoir
has been brought to the Council does not remain qu'un differend porte devant lui cesse d'etre une
the private concern of the parties involved, but affaire privee entre les parties et devient l'affaire
becomes the business of the Council, and the du Conseil, qui est lui-meme tenu de veiller,
Security Council itself has an obligation to see, dans les limites des pouvoirs qui lui ont ete
within the .limits of the powers given to it, that confeI'es, a ce que la paix et la securite ipterinternational peace and security are preserved.
nationales soient sauvegardees.
Now the statements already made to the
Council have revealed that we have before us
a question of fact and a question of law. The
two parties have made conflicting statements,
both as regards the facts and as regards the
interpretation to be given to the law. It would
thus seem to us that it would be first necessary
for this Council to establish the facts, or at
least to obtain some sort of conspectus of the

Or, il ressort des declarations deja faites ici
,
d' une quesque nous nous trouvons en presence
tion de· fait aussi bien que d'une question de
droit. Les deux parties ont fait des declarations
contradictoires, a la fois quant aux faits et
quant a l'interpretation qu'il convient de donner
aux textes juridiques. 11 faut d'abord, nouS
semble-toil, que le Conseil verifie les faits, ou du
moins se fasse une idee d'ensemble sur cette

363
Case before us, in order that it can determine
'What is the appropriate method of resolving the
dispute before us.

affaire, afin de pouvoir determiner le meilleur
moyen de regler ce differend.

Now, in suggesting that the Security Council
should therefore first of all try to establish the
facts of the case, we are not attempting in any
way to anticipate the decision of the Council.
Nor do we use the expression "establish the
facts" in the sense of proceeding to a judgment
of tile dispute. We have already indicated that
there seem to 'us to be various procedures open
to this Council, but it is impossible for us at this
stage to say which of the many courses open to
lIS is the most appropriate one to be followed.
'Ne simply suggest, as a matter of procedure,
that the first duty of the Council is to find out
the facts of the case, to its own satisfaction, so
far as these can be found out in the Council, and
that we should do that before we proceed
farther.

Quand nous disons que le Conseil de securite
devrait avant tout essayer de verifier les faits,
nous ne cherchol1s en aucune maniere a prejuger la decision du Conseil. De meme, "verifier les faits" ne signifie pas porter un jugement
sur le differend. Nous avons deja indique que
le Conseil avait le choix entre plusieurs methodes
et qu'il etait impossible, a ce stade des debats,
de dire q uelle etait la meilleure fa<;on de proceder. Nous suggerons seulement une methode
de travail: le premier devoir du Conseil est
de verifier les faits d'une maniere satisfaisante,
dans la mesure ou il peut le faire. Telle doit
ctre notre tache avant d'aller plus loin.

Now there are two ways in which we might
find out the facts of the case. It may be that
in full session the Security Council would be
prepared to reach a conclusion such as that
which the representative of the United Kingdom
has asked us to reach; namely, that an undeclared mine field was laid in the Corfu Straits
by the Albanian Government, or with its connivance, and that this action resulted in serious
damage to British ships and loss of life and injury to their crews. For our part, however, in
view of the conflict of testimony, we doubt that
the Security Council in full session can, or will
be prepared to, reach such a conclusion immediately. Before we can resolve the conflicting testimony, it would be necessary for us to ask the
representative of Albania and the representative
of the United Kingdom various questions. It
would be necessary for us to try to reconcile one
statement with the other, and possibly on some
points it might be necessary for us to seek additional information. As I doubt very much
whether that kind of cross-examination can be
carried out expeditiously and satisfactorily in full
session of the Council, it seems that it will be
necessary for the Council to find some agency
to carry out this fact-finding task on its behalf.

Il y a deux methodes qui pourraient nous
permettre d"etablir les faits. I1 se peut que le
Conseil de securite, en seance pIeniere, soit
pret a conclure dans le sens demande par le
representant ciu Royaume-Uni, a savoir qu'un
champ de mines a ete pose sans avertissement
dans le detroit de Corfou par le Gouvernement
albanais ou de connivence avec lui, et que cette
action a cause de graves degats aux navires britanniques, faisant des marts et des blesses parmi
leurs equipages. Nous doutons, cependant, etant
clonne les temoignages contradictoires, que le
Conseil de securite, en session pIeniere, puisse
ou veuille immediatement en arriver la. Avant
de pouvoir resoudre ces contradictions, il faudrait poser au representant de l'Albanie et au
representant du Royaume-Uni differentes questions. 11 faudrait essayer de concilier telle et
telle affirmation, et peut-etre rechercher sur certains points un complement d'information. Je
doute fort que ce genre d'interrogatoire puisse
ctre mene rapidement et d'une maniere satisfaisante en seance pIeniere. Il faut donc,
semble-toil, que le Conseil charge un intermediaire quelconque de verifier les faits pour lui.

After giving considerable thought to this matter, it would appear to our delegation that the
simplest way for the Council to obtain a statement of all the facts which can be established
from the material at present before us, would be
to appoint a small sub-committee of, say, three
members, to examine the material which has already been presented to us, and report to us in
the c~urse of not more than two weeks, possibly
evC? m a shorter time, on the case as it appearS
to ItS members after a close examination of, the
material before them and after further discussion
with the parties concerned. It is our opinion
that
. .the report of such a sub-committee, assummg It could be set up, might result in the presentation to the Council of a clear statement, setting
out those facts which can be established from
the material at present
, before us. It might draw

Tout murement pese, ma delegation estime
que la maniere la plus simple de fournir au
Conseil un expose de tous les faits qui peuvent
etre verifies d'apres les elements dont nous disposons en ce moment est de charger une souscommission restreinte, composee par exemple de
trois membres, d'~tudier les elements qui nous
ont deja ete soumis et de nous faire connaltre,
dans les quinze jours au plus tard ou meme
avant, ses vues sur cette affaire apres un examen
minutieux des faits de la cause et de nouveaux
entretiens avec les parties interessees. Cette
sous-commission, a supposer que nous puissions
la creer, pI'csenterait peut-ctre un rapport exposant clairement les faits qu'il est possible de
verifier d'apres les elements dont nous disposons.
Ce rapport pourrait indiquer quels sont les
faits douteux, et mentionner aussi, a titre d'indi-

364
attention to those facts on which doubt still exists.
It might also state, for the guidance of the Council, the legal issues on which there seems to be
a conflict of opinion.
But that would seem to us to be the bare
minimum of the work of this sub-committee,
and if it could proceed thu~ far, it might als?
proceed to draw the attentIOn of th~ Council
to the appropriate lines of action whIch would
be open to the Council according to the ~atu~e
of the case as disclosed by the sub-commIttee s
work. Of ~ourse, it would be for the Council
itself, and only for the Council, to make the decision as to which of the several courses could be
adopted.
At the commencement of my remarks, I mentioned the various courses that were open: calling on the parties to negotiate, referring the
matter in its entirety to the International Court
of Justice, reaching certain conclusions here and
seeking an advisory opinion from the Court. Various possibilities will occur to all me~bers. ~t
this present moment, I suggest that this CouncIl
cannot decide which of those possibilities is the
best to take in order to achieve a peaceful settlement, but if we had the benefit of the work
of such a sub-committee as that which I have
suggested, then it should be possible for the
Council, without raising extraneous issues, without engaging in long debates, to reach a decision
promptly and to make a recommendation or call
upon the parties to take that course which would
seem to lead most promptly towards a peaceful
settlement of the case.
I would again stress that we are not, at this
stage, attempting to pass any judgment, nor are
we proposing that the suggested sub-committee
should pass judgment on the merits of the case.
We are proposing a means which would enable
the Council without fuss, without acrimony and
in an orderly way, to arrive at an early decision.
On behalf of the Australian delegation I have
the honour to submit to the members of the
Council the draft ora resolution, which reads as
follows:
"As a preliminary step in the consideration
of the incidents in the Corfu Channel which
are the subject of a dispute between the United
Kingdom and Albania,
"The Security Council
"Resolves:
"To appoint a sub-committee of three members to examine all the available evidence
concerning the above-mentioned incidents and
to make a report to the Security Council not
later than 3 March 1947, on the facts of the
case as disclosed by such evidence.

"The sub-committee is empowered to request further information as it deems necessary from the parties to the dispute, and the
representatives of the United Kingdom and

cation pour le Conseil, les points juridiques sur
lesquels les opinions sont partagees.

A notre avis, c'est la le minimum qu'on puisse
demander a cette sous-commission. Si elle peut
vraiment assumer la tache ci-dessus, eUe pourra
egalement attirer l'attention du Conseil sur les
methodes d'action qu'il conviendrait d'adopter
selon la nature du diffierend, telle qu'elles ressorti!::,aient de son enquete. Il appartiendrait
naturellement au Conseillui-meme, et a lui seul,
de decider de la methode a adopter.
J'ai pade tout a l'heure des differentes moyens
de reglement qui s'offraient a nous: inviter les
parties a negocier, renvoyer l'ensemble de la
question a la Cour internationale de Justice, se
faire ici certaines opinions et demander un
avis consultatif a la COUT internationale. Les
membres du Conseil pourront constater qu'il
existe plusieurs possibilites. Je suis d'avis que
le Conseil ne peut en ce moment decider que!
est le meilleur moyen de realiser un reglement
pacifique. Toutefois, s'il etait aide par une
sous-commission comme celle dont je viens de
proposer la creation, le Conseil devrait pouvoir,
sans faire intervenir des considerations etrangeres
au sujet et sans debats prolonges, parvenir rapidement a une decision et formuler une recommandation ou bien demander aux parties de
suivre la ligne d'action qui semble offrir le plus
de chance de regler promptement ce differend
par des moyens pacifiques.
Je tiens a repeter que nous n'essayons pas,
pour le moment, de porter un jugement et qu'il
n'est pas question, dans notre esprit,. que cette
sous-commission porte un jugement sur le fond
meme du differend. Nous proposons simplement
un moyen qui permettra au Conseil de parvenir
rapidement a une decision, avec calme et methode et sans acrimonie.
Au nom de la delegation australienne, j'ai
donc l'honneur de soumettre aux membres du
Conseil le projet de rCsolution suivant:
"En ce qui concerne l'examen des incidents survenus dans le detroit de Corfou qui
font l'objet d'un differend entre le RoyaumeDni et l'Albanie,
"Le Conseil de securite
"Decide, a titre de mesure preliminaire:
"De cI'cer une sous-commission composee
de trois membres et chargee d'examiner taus
les temoignages dont on dispose sur les incidents en question et de faire rapport au
Conseil de securite a u plus tard le 3 mars
1947 sur les faits qui sont a l'origine du
differend, tels qu'ils se degagent des temoignages dont on dispose.
"La sous-commission pourra demander
aux Etats qui sont parties au differend les
nouveaux renseignements qu'elle jugera necessaires, et les representants du Royaume-

365
Albania are requested to give every assistance
to the sub-committee in its work."

Dni et de l'Albanie sont pries de faciliter la
tache de la sous-commission dans toute la
mesure du possible."

There are two or three explanatory remarks
which I should like to make on the text of that
resolution. It will be seen that, as I have insisted
throughout, it does not prejudge the case. It
will be seen that it is a means of enabling the
Security Council to carry out its obligation to
bring about the peaceful settlement of this dispute in accordance with the principles of justice
and international law. It will be seen also that
the work of this sub-committee is regarded as a
preliminary step, and not in any way as the
final or even as the major step. It will be seen
further that it is proposed that this sub-committee should work on the evidence at present available, namely, the documents which have been
brought to this Council and the statements which
have been made before this Council, and that it
should supplement that evidence by reference to
the two parties to the dispute, but not by undertaking 'an investigation beyond those limits.
It is our hope that if such a committee were
set up, it would be able to return after a very
short period with a clear analysis of the case,
a clear indication of where the difficulties and
the points of difference lie, and could also give
some indication to the Council of the possible
courses of action open to us, and in particular,
which of those courses would seem to be most
applicable to the facts of the dispute.
I submit the resolution for the consideration of
he Council.

.1' ai deux ou trois remarques explicatives a
faIre sur cette resolution. Vous constaterez
c?mm: je l'ai repete maintes fois, que cett~
:resolutIOn ne prejuge pas le differend mais
qu'elle fournit au Conseil de securite un'moyen
de s'acquitter de l'obligation qui lui incombe
d'assurer un reglement pacifique de ce differend
con~0~m6nen~ aux principes de la justice et d~
drOIt mternatlOnal. Vous constaterez egalement
que les travaux de cette sous-commission sont
consideres comme une mesure preliminaire et
non pas du tout comme une mesure definitive ou
meme decisive. Enfin, aux termes de cette resolution, la Sous-c?mmission utilisera les temoignages dont on dIspose actuellement, c'est-a-dire,
les documents soumis au Conseil et les declarations qu'il a entendues, et elle aura recours,
pour completer ces temoignages, aux deux
Etats parties au differend, sans entreprendre
d'enquete qui sorte du cadre ainsi defini.
Nous esperons qu'une telle sous-commission
si elle est creee, pourra, a tres brei delai nou~
fournir sur le differend une etude qui fasse
toute la lumiere, en nous indiquant clairement
les difficultes et les points de desaccord, et meme
en suggerant au Conseil les diverses manieres
possibles de proceder, et en particulier celle qui
semble la mieux appropriee aux faits de la
cause.
Jc soumets cette resolution a l'examen du
ConseiI.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (translated from Russian): In, my
statement on 20 January last during the discussion of the question of placing the complaint of
the United Kingdom Government against
Albania on the agenda, l I drew the Security
Council's attention to the fact that the British
Government had rejected the proposal of the
Albanian Government for the establishment of a
mixed commission for the settlement of questions
regarding mine-sweeping in the Corfu Channel.
This proposal had been made by the Albanian
Government in its note of 11 November 1946
addressed to the British Government. 2 A similar
attitude was adopted by the British Government
to the proposal made by the Albanian Government in which it expressed its readiness to cooperate in questions of international maritime
navigation, in reply to the British Government's
note of 9 December 1946. s

This shows that the British Government did
not take the course of settling this question by
bilateral negotiation with the Government of
Albania and by giving the latter the choice of
co-operating in questions of maritime navigation, although this procedure would have been

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (tmduit du russe): Dans la
declaration que j'ai faite le 20 .janvier dernier,
au moment OU nous examinions la question de
savoir s'il falIait inscrire a notre ordre du jour
la plainte du Royaume.Uni contre l'Albanie\
j'ai deja fait remarquer au ConseiI de securite
que le Gouvernement britannique avait rejete
une proposition du Gouvernement albanais qui
prevoyait la creation d'une commission mixte
chargee de regler la question du dragage des
mines dans le detroit de Corfoll. Cette proposition avait ete faite par le Gouvernement albanais, dans une note datee du 11 novembre 1946
et adressee au Gouvernement britannique 2. Le
Gouvernemcnt britannique a pris une attitude
analogue a l'egard d'une autre proposition que
le Gouvernement albanais a faite' en reponse a
la note britannique du 9 decembre 1946, et
dans laqudle il s'est declare pret a collaborer
avec les autres Etats dans le domaine de la
navigation internationale8 •
Ces faits montrent que le Gouvernement britannique n'a pas cherche a regler cette question
par des negociations bilaterales avec le Gouvernement albanais et en offrant a ce dernier la
possibilite de cooperer avec les autres Etats dans
le domaine de la navigation maritime, bien que

I See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 6, ninety-fifth meeting,
, Ibid., Supplement No. 6, Annex 15, Exhibit IV.
'[bid., Supplement No. 3, Annex 8, page 36.

I Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Gonseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee No 6, quatre-vingt-quinzieme seance.
• Ibid., Supple~ent No 6, Annexe 15, piece No IV.
8 Ibid., Supplement No 3, Annexe 8, page 36.

366
the most appropriate for settling the dispute
which has arisen between the United Kingdom
and Albania. Thus the British Government acted
without regard to Article 33, paragraph 1, of the
United Nations Charter, which tequires that
parties to a dispute should, "first of all, seek a
solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to
regional agencies or arrangements, or other
peaceful means of their own choice".

The reference to Article 35 of the United
Nations Charter contained in the British representative's note of 10 Januaryl is not convincing
proof that this question should be considered by
the Security Council. A knowledge of the material and facts relating to the question raised in
the United Kingdom appeal shows that the damaging of British destroyers in the Corfu Channel,
and the behaviour of Albania in connexion with
this case do not constitute a threat to peace and
security, in spite of the fact that efforts are being
made to prove the contrary and to raise a clamour over this question in the United Nations.

It is for the above-mentioned reasons that I
did not consider it possible to support the proposal to place the United Kingdom appeal on
the Security Council's agenda. The Soviet delegation still does not see any reason for discussing
this question in the Security Council.
A consideration of the facts of this question
shows that the accusation made by the British
Government against Albania is absolutely unjustified. The facts refute the statement that
Albania was responsible for the damage to the
British destroyers. I should like to draw the
Security Council's attention to the circumstance
that Albania was deprived, without any relevant
legal reasons, of the right and possibility of assuming the responsibility for mine-sweeping and
safety of navigation in her territorial waters in
the Corfu Channel. The Mediterranean Zone
Board of the International Mine Clearance Organization, without the knowledge and consent
of Albania, conferred the responsibility for minesweeping in the Albanian waters of this channel
not upon Albania, but upon Greece.
The injustice of such a decision would seem
obvious; nevertheless, that decision was taken, to
the detriment of the legal rights and interests of
Albania as a sovereign State. It was taken contrary to article 12 of the statutes of the International Mine Clearance Organization, which
provides that each nation must itself assume responsibility for the mine-sweeping of its coastal
waters. 2
When this question was under consideration
by the Board, the representatives of certain countries drew its attention to the necessity of acting
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 3, Annex 8, page 36.
'See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 6, Annex 15, Exhibit Ill.

ce flit la la methode la plus appropriee pour
regler le differend survenu entre le RoyaumeUni et l'Albanie. Ce faisant, le Gouvernement
du Royaume-Uni a agi sans tenir compte du
paragraphe 1 de l'Article 33 de la Charte des
Nations Unies OU il est stipule que Ies parties a
un differend "doivent en rechercher la solution, avant tout, par voie de negociation, d'enquete, de mediation, de conciliation, d'arbitrage,
de reglement judiciaire, de recours aux organismes ou accords regionaux, ou par d'autres
moyens p'acifiques de leur choix".
Le renvoi a l'Article 35 de la Charte, que
nous trouvons dans la note du representant britannique en date du 10 janvier \ ne suffit pas
a prouver que cette question releve de la competence du Conseil de securite. L'examen des
documents et des faits qui se rapportenta la
question soulevee par la communication britannique montre que 1'incident survenu aux contretorpilleurs britanniques qui ant ete endommages
dans le detroit de Corfou et l'attitude prise par
l' Albanie a la suite de cet incident, ne consti~
tuent pas une menace a la paix et a la securitc,
bien que l'on s'efforce de prouver le contraire
et de faire du bruit autour de cette question, au
sein de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
C'est pour ces raisons que je n'ai pas cru possible d'appuyer la proposition qui tendait a inscrire la plainte du Royaume-Uni a l'ordre du
jour du Conseil de securite. La delegation sovietique continue a ne pas voir de raison pour que
le Conseil de securite examine cette question.
L'examen des faits relatifs a cette question
montre que I'accusation portee par le Gouvernement britannique contre l'Albanie est denuee de
tout fondement. Ces faits contredisent la these
selon laquelle l'Albanie serait responsable des
dommages causes aux contre-torpilleurs britanniques. Je voudrais attirer l'attention du Conseil
de securite sur le fait que, sans aucune raison
fondee en droit, l'Albanie a ete privee du droit
et de la possibilite de veiller a la securite de la
navigation et au dragage des mines dans les
eaux territoria1es albanaises du detroit de Corfou.
A l'insu de I'Albanie et sans sont consentement,
le Bureau mediterraneen de I'Organisation internationale de deminage a rendu responsable la
Grece et non l'Albanie du dragage des mines
dans les eaux albanaises de ce detroit.
Il semble que l'injustice d'une telle decision
soit evidente. Neanmoins, cette decision a ete
prise au detriment des droits legitimes et ~es
interets de l'Albanie en tant qu'Etat souveram.
EUe a ete prise en violation de 1'article 12 des
statuts de 1'0rganisation internationale de deminage, qui prevoit que chaque pays doit assumer
Iui-meme la responsabilite du dragage dans ses
eaux territoriales 2 •
Lors de I'examen de cette question par le
Bureau, 1es repn~sentants de certains pays ont
attire I'attention de cet organisme sur la necesI Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe 8, page 36.
• Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securitc,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 6, Annexe 15, piece
No Ill.

367
in conformity with the above-mentioned article
12 of the statutes of the International Mine
Clearance Organization, and of recognizing Albania's legal rights and responsibilities in the
sweeping of Albanian coastal waters in the Corfu
Channel. At the Board meetings, the Yugoslav
representative repeatedly suggested inviting Albania to join the Mediterranean Zone Board.
Such proposals were submitted by the Yugoslav
representative on 26 February, 9 April and 2
July 1946. These proposals, however, were
systematically side-tracked by the British and
Greek representatives on the groundless pretext
that the Greek attitude towards the invitation
required clarification. These representatives accordingly made the invitation of Albania to the
Mediterranean Zone Board dependent on the
Greek attitude towards this invitation. Thus
Greece was to decide the question whether'
Albania should be admitted or not. Is it not
clear that this procedure is more than strange?

The Soviet Government's repeated proposals
of 22 May, 3 July and 26 July 1946, pressing for
the invitation of Albania to participate in the
mine-sweeping of her coastal waters did not meet
with any more success. The representatives of
the United Kingdom and Greece made no little
effort, during the discussion of these proposals,
to prevent Albania's participation in mine-sweeping measures, although it would seem obvious to
all that the participation of Albania in the organized conduct of mine-sweeping could not but
be beneficial to all the nations concerned in this
question, including the United Kingdom and
Albania.
The representatives of certain States on the
Mediterranean Zone Board, who wished to make
the participation of Albania in the mine-sweeping dependent on the attitude of Greece to the
invitation of Albania, and who objected to the
admission of Albania to the Board, also tried to
justify their position by stating that there were
objections on the part of the Supreme Allied
Commander in the Mediterranean to the invitation of Albania. Such an argument, however, is
without foundation, since the competence of the
Allied Command covers mine-sweeping only in
the territorial waters of the nations which have
capitulated. The competence of the Allied Command in the Mediterranean is limited to the
territorial waters of those nations and does not
extend to Albanian territorial waters.
Other equally unjustifiable arguments were
put forward against the admission of Albania to
the Mediterranean Zone Board and against entrusting her with the responsibility of mine-sweeping in her territorial waters in the Corfu Channel. In particular, it was pointed out that the
incident of the firing on the British cruisers on
15 May 1946 had not been settled, and reference
was made to Albania's lack of mine-sweepers of
her own. But, one may ask, why should the
opinion of one party regarding the non-settlement of the incident of the firing on the British

site de se confonner a l'article 12 des statuts de
l'Organisation internationale de deminage et de
reconnaltre les droits et la responsabilite de
I'Albanie en ce qui concerne -le dragage des
mines dans les ,eaux cotieres albanaises du detroit
de Corfou. Au cours des reunions du Bureau,
le representant de la Yougoslavie a propose 11
plusieurs reprises d'inviter l'Albanie 11. faire partie du Bureau mediterraneen. Des propositions
dans ce sens ont ete £aites par le representant
yougoslave les 26 fevrier, 9 avril et 2 juillet 1946.
Ces propositions ont cependant ete systematique.
ment ecartees par les representants britannique
et grec sous le pretexte inadmissible que la Grece
avait besoin de preciser son attitude 11. l'egard de
cette invitation. Ainsi done, ces representants
faisaient dependre de l'attitude de la Grece I'invitation de l'Albanie a venir siegeI' au Bureau
de deminage mediterraneen. Par consequent,
c'est la Grece qui devait decider s'il fallait ou
non admettre l'Albanie au sein de ce Bureau.
N'est-il pas clair que c'est la une fagon de
proceder bien etrange?
Les propositions reiterees du Gouvernement
sovietique, qui insista les 22 mai, 3 et 26 juillet
1946 pour que l'Albanie ffit invitee a participcr
au dragage des mines dans ses eaux cotieres,
n'eurent pas plus de succes. Au cours de la discussion de ces propositions, les representants du
Royaume-Uni et de la Grece deployerent a nouveau de grands efforts pour empecher l' Albanie
de participer aux operations de dragage, bien
qu'il dut sembleI' clair a tous que la participation de l'Albanie a l'execution systematique des
operations de dragage ne pouvait qu'etre profitable a tous les Etats interesses, y compris le
Royaume-Uni et l' Albanie.
Les representants de certains Etats au Bureau
mediterraneen, .qui ont voulu faire dependre la
participation de l'Albanie au dragage des mines
de I'attitude prise par la Grece a l'egard de I'invitation a adresser a I'Albanie et qui se sont
opposes a l'admission de I'Albanie au sein du
Bureau, ont tente egalement de justifier leur
position en affirmant que le commandant en
chef allie en Mediterranee avait des objections
a ce que l'Albanie flit invitee. Cependant, un
tel argument est denue de tout fondement, etant
donne que la competence du comm~ndement
allie ne s'etend qu'au dragage des mmes dans
les eaux territoriales des pays qui ont capitule.
La competence du commandement allie en Mediterranee se limite aux eaux territoriales de ces
pays et ne s'etend pas aux eaux territoriales de
I'Albanie.
D'autres arguments encore, tout aussi denues
de fondement ont ete presentes contre l'admission de I'Alba~ie au Bureau de deminage medi.
terraneen et pour empecher ce pays d'assum<;
la responsabilite du dragage de ses eaux ten:toriales dans le detroit de Corfou. On a faIt
valoir, en particulier, que l'incident des coups
de feu tires sur des croiseurs britariniques, le
15 mai 1946, n'Ctait pas encore regIe. On a fait
remarquer egalement que l'Albanie ne possedait
pas de dragueurs de mines. Mais meme si une
des parties interessees estime que l'incident des

368
cruisers be a sufficient reason for not admitting
Albania to participation in the Mediterranean
Zone Board?
The argument based on the fact that Albania
had no mine-sweepers of her own/ is also unconvincing and unjustifiable. It is unjustifiable
if only for the reason that her notorious lack. of
mine-sweepers did not prevent Egypt from bemg
invited to the Mediterranean Zone Board.

Thus the history of this question and the facts
r;elevant to it show that Albania has been systematically ignored in the adoption of decisions
on questions of mine~sweeping and in the organization of the entire matter. As a result, under
the pretext of mine-sweeping, foreign warships
made themselves at home in Albanian waters in
the Corfu Channel and by their actions they repeatedly violated the sovereignty of Albanian
waters and ports. In the Albanian note, communicated to the United Kingdom on 21 December 1946/ it is pointed out that up to 21
December there had been more than ten such
violations. I ask whether the Security Council
can overlook this circumstance. The Security
Council cannot but give its attention to these
facts if it really wishes to approach fairly the
consideration of the question raised by the
United Kingdom Government, and inquire carefully and impartially into all the relevant facts.

The authorities of other countries made a
more correct approach in similar cases to countries whose territorial waters it was essential to
clear of mines. For example, on 9 April 1946 the
. Mediterranean Zone Board considered the ques""
tion of sweeping the mines in the channel northeast of the island of Samothrace in the frontier
area between Turkey and Greece. The Turkish
authorities had previously expressed their desire
to sweep the obstacles which were in Greek
waters. The operation, however, was started only
after the Greek representative had stated that the
Greek authorities had no objection to the
carrying out of such an operation.
And now for another analogous example, in
which the 'British authorities are concerned. In
the course of mine-sweeping in the Straits of
Gibraltar in April 1946, it was necessary for the
British mine-sweepers to penetrate some hundred
metres in Spanish territorial waters. The British
ships did this only after receiving the necessary
permission from the Franco authorities. As you
see, the British authorities also showed courtesy,
when Albania was not involved. However, in
r:egardto the People's Republic of Albania, not
only was any kind of courtesy lacking, but there
was crude and systematic violation of its sovereignty.

1 See OfJicial Recol'ds of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 3, Annex 8, page 41.

coups de feu essuyes par les croiseurs britanniques n'est pas regIe, son opinion doit-elle constituer une raison suffisante pour ne pas admettre
l'Albanie au sein du Bureau mediterraneen?
Quant a. la demiere raison invoquee, a savolr
que l'Albanie ne possede pas de dragueurs de
mines, elle n'est pas non plus convaincante et
elle est egalement sans fondement. Cet argu"
ment est sans valeur, ne serait-ce que parce que
l'Egypte qui, on le sait, ne possede pas non plus
de dragueurs, a ete invitee a. faire partfe du
Bureau mediterraneen.
A revoir ainsi l'historique de la question et
les faits qui s'y rapportent, on se rend compte
qu'on a ignore systematiquement l'Albanie en
prenant les decisions concernant le dragage et
en organisant toute cette operation. Cela a eu
pour resultat que, sous pretexte de draguer les
mines, les navires de guerre etrangers en ont pris
a. leur aise dans les eaux albanaises du detroit
de Corfou et, par leurs operations ont vioIe, a.
plusieurs reprises, la souverainete des eaux et
des ports albanais. La note du 21 decembre
1946 adressee par I'Albanie au Royaume-Uni t
indique que plus de dix violations de ce genre
avaient eu lieu a. cette date. Le Conseil de
securite peut-il, je vous le demande, perdre de
vue ce fait? Le Conseil de securite ne saurait
manquer d'en tenir compte s'il veut reellement
aborder dans un esprit de justice l'etude de la
question soulevee par le Gouvernement du
Royaume-Uni et s'il desire verifier consciencieusement et impartialement tous les faits de la
cause.
Dans des cas analogues, les autorites d'autres
Etats ont montre plus de correction envers les
pays dont les eaux territoriaIes avaient besoin
d'etre draguees. En void un exemple: le 9 avril
1946, le Bureau de deminage mediterraneen a
discute la question du dragage des mines dans
le detroit situe au nord-est de l'ile de Samothrace, pres de la frontihe greco-turque. Les
autorites turques avaient exprime le desir d'enlever ces barrages de mines qui se trouvaient
dans les eaux grecques. L'operation ne commenc;a cependant que lorsque le representant
grec cut indique que les autorites grecques ne s'y
opposaient pas.
Void un autre exemple analogue, qui interesse cette fois les autorites britanniques. Au
cours du dragage du detroit de Gilbraltar, en
avril 1946, les dragueurs de mines britanniques
durent penetrer dans les eaux territoriales espagnoles sur quelques centaines de metres. Les
navires britanniques ne le firent, cependant,
qu'apres avail' obtenu l'autorisation des autorites franquistes. Comme vous le voyez, les autorites britanniques ont fait preuve de correction
lorsqu'il s'est agi d'un pays autre que I'Albanie.
Vis-a.-vis de la Republique populaire d'Albanie,
au contraire, elIes ont, non seulement, manque
totalement de correction, mais se sont meme
livrees a. une violation grossiere et systematique
de la souverainete de ce pays.
I Voir Proc~s-verbaux ofJiciels du Conseil de securittf,
Demdeme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe 8, p'age 41.

369
Il est notoire que, sans consulter l'Albanie au
prealable, les autorites britanniques ont, a plusieurs reprises au cours de l'annee 1946, deplace
le chenal vers l'interieur des eaux albanaises du
detroit de Corfou, continuant ainsi a meconnaitre les droits souverains de l'Albanie. A cet
egard, il faut noter ce fait important que le
chenal dans leque1 les contre-torpiIleurs britanniques ont ete endommages, le' 22 octobre
1946, n'est pas le meme que ce1ui avait ete
drague en 1944-1945 et que mentionne la note
britannique du 9 decembre 1946 1 • Par conse- \
quent, la reference au dragage de 1944-1945,
contenue dans la note britannique susmentionnee, ne se justifie pas.
Statements can be heard from the British side
Du cote britannique, on affirme que les mines
to the effect that the mines which had been qui ont ete trouvees avaient ete mouillees recemfOlmd were laid recently, and that this had been ment et que le mouillage avait ete opere par les
done by the Albanian authorities or with their autorites albanaises, ou au su de ces dernieres.
knowledge. There is, however, no proof to con- Il n'y a cependant aucune preuve a l'appui de
firm this conclusion. Such a unilateral statement cette conclusion. L'affirmation d'une seule des
cannot be considered as a basis for the accusa- parties ne peut servir de base aux accusations
tions against Albania. Yet it is upon this very portees contre l'Albanie. Or, c'est precisement
statement that the United Kingdom's charge sur cette affirmation que se fonde la plainte
against Albania is based.
britannigue contre I'Albanie.
In his speech to the Security Council on 18
Dans le discours qu'il a prononce le 18 fevrier
February,2 Sir Alexander Cadogan was unable au Conseil de securite 2, Sir Alexander Cadogan
to put forward any facts proving that Albania n'a pu citeI' aucun fait prouvant que l' Albanie
was actually guilty of damaging the British etait coupable des dommages subis par les
destroyers. How can the Security Council agree contre-torpilleurs britanniques. Mais comment
with statements which are not supported by le Conseil de securite pourrait-il accepter des
facts? On what basis can the conclusion be affirmations qui ne sont pas corroborees par des
reached that Albania is to blame for the damage faits? Sur quels elements p~ut-on se fonder pour
to British ships by mines? Leaving aside the conclure que l'Albanie est responsable des defact that, as a result of the procedure adopted gats in.fliges par les mines aux navires britanby the Mediterranean Zone Board, foreign ships niques? Je laisse de cote le fait que des navires
often appeared in Albanian waters, it is well etrangers ont traverse frequemment les eaux
known that ships have blown up on mines albanaises, etant donne les dispositions prises par
elsewhere, even in places which were considered le Bureau de deminage mediterraneen, mais,
to have been cleared of mines. For example, on comme on sait, des accidents causes par les
26 July 1946 the French ship Compiegne struck. mines ont eu lieu dans d'autres parages egalea mine in the fairway which had been swept by ment, et meme dans des endroits que 1'0n
considerait comme entihement debarrasses des
the British in the Dieppe area.
mines. C'est ainsi que le 26 juillet 1946, par
exemple, le navire fran~ais Compiegne a heurtc
une mine pres de Dieppe, dans un chanel qui
avait ete drague par la marine britaimique.

It is generally known' that during 1946 the
British authorities, continuing to ignore Albanian sovereignty, repeatedly moved the fairway
deeper into Albanian waters in the Corfu Channel without any previous consultation with Albania. In this connexion, it is important to note
that the fairway in which the British destroyers
were damaged on 22 October 1946 does not
coincide with the fairway which was swept in
1944-1945, and which is mentioned in the
United Kingdom note of 9 December 1946.1
Therefore the reference to the sweeping of 19441945, contained in the above-mentioned United
Kingdom note, is unjustifiable.

i

Another example: on 26 August 1945 the
Dutch ship Christians Higgins struck.a mine in
the swept fairway. in the region of Walcheren
Island, for the sweeping of which Belgium is
responsible. These we;re cases involving damage
to large ships.
Can it be said that there is any reasonable
justification for accusing France and Belgium of
"crimes against humanity"? This was the phrase
used by Sir Alexander Cadogan in connexion
with Albania. Obviously there is no justification
for such an accusation against these countries.
May we ask why' the damaging by mines of
British ships on the coast of Albania, a country
which had been completely ignored by the
United Kingdom during the mine-sweeping,

Autre exemple: le 26 aout 1945, le navire
hollandais Christians Higgins a heurte une mine
dans un chenal drague, voisin de I'ile de Walcheren, chenal dont le dragage incombait a la
BeIgique. II s'agissait dans les deux cas de
dommages causes a des navires de gros tonnage.
Peut-on considerer qu'il y ait lieu ici d'accuser la France et la Belgique de "crimes contre
I'humanite"? Telle est l'expression employee
par Sir Alexander Cadogan en parIant de
l'Albanie. Il est evident qu'il n'y a aucune raison de formuler une accusation de ce genre
contre ces deux pays. On se demande alors
pourquoi les dommages causes par des mines a
des navires britanniques, au large des cotes de
l'Albanie, pays que le Royaume.Uni avait tenu

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 3, Annex 8, page 36.
Z Ibid.) No. 15, 107th meeting.

I Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de sBcurite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe 8, page 36.
3 Ibid., No 15, 107eme seance.

370
should be a justification for accusing Albania of
"crimes' against humanity"?

Here are some more facts concerning accidents caused by mines. Within the period 8 May
1945 to 31 August 1946, 196 ships of various
natidnalities were damaged by mines in European waters. Of these, thirty struck mines in
swept fairways. The Soviet delegation is not,
however, aware that any countries which carried
out mine-sweeping in the fairways concerned or
any countries off whose coast sweeping was
carried out have been accused of "crimes against
humanity". Such a thought probably never
entered anyone's mind in regard to those countries. For some reason, however, the United
Kingdom sees nothing odd in levelling such an
accusation at Albania.

The sweeping of Albanian waters was carried
out by the British authorities unilaterally in
violation of the statutes of the International
Mine Clearance Organization, article 7 ( b),
which provides that mine-sweeping should be
carried out on the decision of the Mediterranean
Zone Board. As there was no such decision by
the Board, the above-mentioned. article was
violated by the British authorities.
.
Now, it is obvious that the statement in the
United Kingdom note of 10 November 19461 to
the effect that the sweeping of Albanian waters
on 12 November 1946 would be carried out in
accordance with "the unanimous decision of the
Central Mine Clearance Board" is ref~ted by
the Board's resolution of 14 November 1946 in
which it was stated that the mine-sweeping w~
carried out "not on the instructions of the
Board and without its sanction".
The explanation of why the mine-sweeping
was carried out without instructions from the
Board and without its sanction, should be best
known to the United Kingdom representative.
I, .for my ~art, consider it necessary merely to
pomt to this fact, as in my opinion it merits
serious attention. Apart from this, no Albanian
representative was invited to the mine-sweeping
or the examination of the swept mines, but a
French officer figured in the capacity of the
Board's representative i this officer, ~lthough a
member of the Board, was invited by the British
Command without the knowledge or authority
of the Board. In view of all of this, the result
of the mine-sweeping of 12 November 1946
announced by the British authorities cannot
serve as confirmation of the charges levelled
by the United Kingdom against Albania.
Thus, a study of the actual state of affairs and
all the facts relating to the question under
discussion shows that the claims put forward by
the JJnited Kingdom Government in regard to
Albania are, to say the least, unjust. The facts
1 Sce Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 6, Annex 15, Exhibit IV.

completement a l'ecart lors des operations de
dragage, devraient eonstituer une raison valable
pour accuser l'Albanie de "crimes contre
1'humanite".
Voici encore quelques donnees concernant des
accidents dus aux mines. Entre le 8 mai 1945
et le 31 aout 1946, 196 navires de diverses nationalites ant ete endOlmnages par des mines
dans 1es eaux europeennes. Trente de ccs navires
ont heurte des mines alors qu'il naviguaient dans
des chenaux demines. Cependant, a la connaissance de la delegation sovietique, aucun des
pays qui ant procede au dragage des chenaux
en question, ni aucun des pays au large desquels
se trouvaient les chenaux dragues, n'a ete accuse
de "crimes contre 1'humanite." Cette idee ne
s'est probablement jamais presentee a l'esprit de
personne'lorsqu'il s'est agi de ces pays. Neanmoins, le Royaume-Uni, pour je ne sais queUe
raison, ne voit rien d'etrange a porter une teUe
accusation contre l' Albanie.
Le dragage des eaux albanaises a ete effectue
par les autorites britanniques de fa~on unilaterale et en violation de l'article 7 b) des statuts
de l'Organisation internationale de deminage,
aux termes duquelle deminage doit se faire sur
decision du Bureau mediterraneen. Or il n'y a
pas eu de decision du Bureau dans ce sens, et
la disposition que je viens de citer a ete violee
par les autorites britanniques.
11 est done clair que 1'affirmation contenue
dans la note britannique du 10 novernbre 1946 \
seIon laquelle le deminage des eaux albanaises
prevu pour le 12 novembre 1946 serait effectue
conformement a une "decision unanime du
Bureau central de deminage," est contredite par
la resolution que le Bureau a adoptee le 14 novembre 1946 et ou il est dit que le deminage a
ete fait "sans instructions du Bureau et sans son
approbation."
Le representant du Royaume-Uni doit savoir
mieux que nous comment s'explique le fait que
le deminage ait eu lieu sans instructions du
Bureau et sons son approbation. Quant a mo~,
je crois necessaire de signaler simplement ce faIt
qui, a mon avis, merite une attention toute particuliere. D'autre part, on a procede au dragage
et a 1'examen des mines trouvees sans qu'un
representant de l' Albanie ait ete in:vite a y.assisteri pour representer le Bureau, 11 y avalt un
offider fran~ais qui, bien que membre du Bureau , avait ete invite par le commandement
.
britannique a l'insu du Bureau et sans avorr r~~u
d'ordres de ceIui-ci. En raison de tous ces faits,
le resultat annonce par les autorites britanniques,
a la suite du deminage effectue le 12 novembre
1946, ne peut etre considere comme une con~ir­
mation des accusations que le RoyauI?e-Um a
portees contre l' Albanie.
Ainsi done, l' etude de la situation reelle et de
tous les faits se rapportant au probleme que nous
sommes en train d' examiner montre que les
revendications du Royaume-Uni a l'egard de
l'Albanie sont, pour le moins, injustes. Les faits
I Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securitti,
Deuxibne Annee, Supplement No 6, Annexe 15, piece
No IV.

371
show that Albania was systematically ignored
in the organization of mine-sweeping, and that
the United Kingdom representatives on the
Mediterranean Zone Board did all they coulq
to injure the legitimate interests of Albania in
the organization of mine-sweeping, creating a
situation in which, as I have already pointed
out, foreign warships made themselves at home
in Albanian territorial waters. For the actions
of those vessels, Albania and the Albanian Government cannot bear any responsibility. The
extent to which the Greek authorities are able
to cope with their task of mine-sweeping is
shown by the tragic case of the Greek passenger
ship Chimara which struck a mine and sank on
19 January 1947. This took place off the Greek
coast. If the Greek authorities could not ensure
the safety of navigation at home for their own
vessels, how can Greece be entrusted with the
matter of ensuring the safety of navigation of
ships beyond her own waters, and in Albanian
territorial waters?

montrent que l'Albanie a ete systematiquement
te!lU; a I'ecart lorsqu'il s'est agi d'organiser le
demmage, que les representants britanniques au
Bureau de deminage mediterraneen ont tout fait
pour heurter les interets legitimes de l'Albanie
dans ~oute. cette affaire et qu'ils ont ainsi cree
une sItuatlOn teIle que les navires de guerre
etrangers, comme je l'ai deja dit tout a I'heure
ont pu en prendre a leur aise dans les eaux ter:
ritoriales albanaises. On ne peut rendre l'Albanie
et le Gouvernement albanais responsables des
actions de ces navires. On peut voir comment
les autorites grecques s'acquittent de leur t§.che
en ~e qui concerne le deminage, par le tragique
aCCIdent survenu au paquebot grec Chimara
qui a coule sur une mine le 19 janvier 1947:
Cet accident s'est produit au large des cotes' de
la Grece. Si les autorites grecques ont ete incapabIes d'assurer la securite de la navigation
chez elles, pour leurs propres navires, comment
peut-on confier a la Grece le soin d'assurer la
securite de la navigation en dehors de ses
eaux et notamment dans les eaux territoriales
albanaises?

The facts which I have submitted, and, in
particular, the fact that, in spite of the readiness
of Albania to study the possibilities of settling
the question of mine-sweeping in the Corfu
Channel by means of the establishment of a
mixed commission, the British Government rejected Albania's proposal, show that the British
Government's accusations in regard to Albania
are unfounded. The questions of the safety of
navigation in the Corfu Channel and the responsibility for sweeping Albanian waters in the
Channel must be decided by direct negotiations
between the countries concerned, with the participation of the International Mine Clearance
Organization. The method to which the British
Government resorted cannot facilitate the solution of this question. On the contrary, it tends
to complicate and confuse the situation, and
this is not in the interests of the United Nations
or of the countries directlr concerned.
In the light of what I have said, it is evident
that the reference in the British appeal to Article 35 of the Charter has nothing to do with
the question. Article 35 is inapplicable, as there
are no facts which would come within the
provisions of this Article. Any statement to the
effect that the behaviour of Albania in connexion
with the damage done by mines to the British
destroyers in the Corfu Channel constitutes or
may constitute a threat to peace is devoid of all
foundation.

Les faits que je viens de citeI' et plus particulihement le fait que le Gouvernement britannique a rejete les propositions albanaises alors
que I'Albanie s'etait declaree prcte a etudier les
possibilites de regler la question du deminage
du detroit de Corfou par l'entremise d'une commission mixte, montrent que les accusations
portees par le Gouvernement britannique contre
l'Albanie sont sans fondement. La question de
la securite de la navigation dans le detroit de
Corfou et celle de savoir qui est responsable du
deminage des eaux albanaises du detroit doivent
ctre reglees par voie de negociations directes
entre les pays interesses, avec le concours de
l'Organisation internationale de deminage. La
methode adoptee par le Gouvernement britannique ne pennet pas de resoudrc cette question.
BIle complique plutot la situation, cc qui est
contraire a la fois aux intercts des Nations Unies
et a ceux des pays directement interesses.
A la lumiere de tous les faits que je viens
d'exposer il est evident que la reference a l' Article 35 de la Charte, contenue dans la plainte
britannique, n'a aucun rapport avec la question.
11 n'y a pas lieu de se re£erer a l'Article 35, car
il n'y a pas de faits qui tomberaient sous le coup
de cet Article. L'affirmation selon laquelle I'at.
titude de l'Albanie dans l'incident des contretorpilleurs britanniques qui ont ete endommages
par des mines dans le cletroit de Codou, cons- .
titue ou pourrait constituer une menace a la
paix, est denuee de tout fondement.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The Australian representative has put before the
Council a proposal that a sub-committee be instructed to report to it on the facts of the case.
Under rule 33 of the rules of procedure, motions referring a matter to a committee have
precedence over all other motions. The Council
should therefore take a decision, on the motion
proposed by the Australian representative.

Le PRESIDENT: Le Conseil a ete saisi par le
representant de l'Australie d'une motion tcndant
a charger une sous-commission de lui fa!re rap,.
port sur les faits de la ca~se., ~onformement .a
l'article 33 du reglement mteneur, les propOSItions tendant a renvoyer une question a une
commission ont priorite sur les propositions principales. Le Conseil devrait donc se prononcer
sur la motion formulee par le representant de
l' Australie.

372
Mr. JOHNSON (United. States of America):
Sir Alexander Cadogail, in the statement whIch
he made at the opening of this case/ referre~ to
action which had been taken by the Umted
States authorities in the circumstances. He said
that in November 1946 a navigational warning
known as a hydrolant was broadcast int:~ation.
ally by the United States naval authontles, declaring the entrances to Durazzo and Valona
unsafe. He observed that he understood that this
broadcast was made in consequence of a United
States ship's having observed floating mines in
the swept channel to Durazzo.

It is true that United States destroyers reported that they had sighted two floating mines
on 14 November 1946, during the evacuation of
. the informal United States mission to Albania.
On the basis of that report, the Commander of
the United States Naval Forces in Europe notified the Navy Department of his intention to
advise the International Routing and Reporting
Authority that he considered the Medri route
17/1 to Durazzo unsafe owing to mines, and, by
inference, the Medri route 17/2 entering
. Valona
.
was also considered doubtful. Followmg receIpt
of this information, the United States Navy issued a warning in regard to these waters in the
broadcast message or hydrolant referred to by
Sir Alexander Cadogan.

With respect to the case now before the Security Council, we strongly support the British
contention that mine-laying in peacetime for any
reason; without notification, is intolerable for
humanitarian and security reasons. Such activities endanger all users of the high seas. The
British case as presented seems to us convincing.
We find it difficult to believe the professed Albanian ignorance regarding these mines and their
laying. While it seems clear to us that Albania
must at least have known of the existence of the
mines, we feel that sound practice requires very
careful examination of all the evidence pertinent
to disputes before the Security Council. We
would, therefore, favour further examination of
the facts.

The representative of the Soviet Union and
the representative of Australia have both spoken
this afternoon. The representative of Australia
has proposed a simple solution, the formation of
a sub-committee to inquire into all the facts and
to report. After hearing the exposition of Mr.
Hasluck and that of the representative of the
Soviet Union-and I am taking these statements
in conjunction with the original allegations of
the repres~ntative of the United Kingdom-it
1 See Official RiJcords 0/ the SiJcurity Council, Second
Year, No. 15, 107th meeting.

M. JOHNSoN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l' anglais) : Sir Alexander Cadogan,
dans la declaration qu'il a faite lorsque nous
avons commence I'examen de cette affaire\ a
parle des mesures qui ont ete prises dans ces
circonstances par les autorites des Etats-Unis.
11 a indique qu'en novembre 1946, un avis aux
navigateurs, appele hydrolant, a ete radiodiffuse
dans le monde entier par les autorites navales
des Etats-Unis, annongant que I'entree des ports
de Durazzo et de Valona etait dangereuse.. Il
a fait remarquer que, d'apres ses renseignements,
cet avis avait ete radiodiffuse parce qu'un navire
americain avait constate la presence de mines
flottantes dans le chenal drague qui mene a
Durazzo.
Il est exact que des contre-torpilleurs americains ont apergu deux mines flottantes le 14 novembre 1946 au cours de l'evacuation de la
mission officieuse des Etats-Unis aupres du
Gouvernement albanais. Sur la base de ce rapport, le commandant des forces navales des
Etats-Unis en Europe a rendu compte au
Departement de la Marine qu'il allait faire
savoir a 1'0rganisation internationale des voies
navigables, qu'a son avis, la route Medri 17/1
qui permet cl'entrer a Durazzo etait dangereuse
par suite de la presence de mines et .que, par
deduction, il considerait egalement camme peu
sure la route Medri 17/2 qui permet d'entrer a
Valona. Apres avoir regu ces renseignements,
la marine americaine a diffuse taus 1es navigateurs l'hydrolant mentionne par Sir Alexander
Cadogan.
Dans l'affaire dont est saisi le Conseil de
securite, nous soutenons avec force le point de
vue britannique selon lequel, en temps de paix,
la pose de mines effectuee sans avertissement,
pour quelque raison que ce soit, n'est pas tolerable, pour des raisons humanitaires et des
raisons de securite. De telles pratiques constituent un danger pour tous les navigateurs. Les
preuves fournies par le Royaume-Uni nous
semblent convaincantes. Il nous est difficile de
croire l'Albanie, quand elIe declare qu'elle ignorait tout de la presence de ces mines et des
circonstances dans lesqueIles eUes avaient ete
posees. Bien qu'il nous paraisse evident que
I'Albanie a du, au moins, avoir connaissance de
l' existence de ces mines, nous pensons cependant
qu'il est de saine pratique d'examiner minutieusement tous les faits qui ont trait aux
differends portes devant le Conseil de securite.
En consequence, nous serions partisans d'un plus
ample examen des' faits.
Le representant de l'Union sovi€tique et CelUl
de l' Australie ont tous deux pris la parole cet
apres-midi. Le representant de l'Australie a
propose une solution simple, qui est de former
une sous-commission chargee d'etudier tous les
faits et de soumettre un rapport. Apres avoir
entendu les exposes de M. Hasluck et du representant de l'Union sovietiquc (je rapproche ces
Qeclarations des assertions formulees auparavant
par le representant du Royaume-Uni), i1 me

a

1 Voir Proces.verbaux officiels du Conseil de SBcurite,
Deuxieme Anne~, No 15, lO7eme seance.

373
seems to me that it would be useful to have a
small committee which could examine all the
evidence, question the interested parties and
formulate a succinct report on the facts as they
appear to it. Therefore I would support the proposal of Mr. Hasluck for the formation of a subcommittee by the Council, with the simple terms
of reference which he has laid down.

semble qu'il serait utile de creel'. une commission
restreinte qui pourrait etudier tous les temoignages, interroger les parties interessees et rediger
un rapport succinct des faits tels qu'ils lui apparaissent. rapprouve done la creation de la souscommission proposee par M. Hasluck, avec le
mandat tres simple qU'il suggere de lui donner.

The Council may recall that the resolution
establishing the committee on Spain was couched
in very similar terms; that is to say the actual
operative part of the resolution, not the preamble. This sub-committee will have full freedom to sift the evidence,to bring the conflicting
statements into sharp contrast with each other,
and to call for a clarification from the members
of the Council, at t,his table, who are parties to
the dispute. The sub-committee can give the
Council the benefit of its analysis of the facts
and, we hope, of its recommendation as to a
suitable course of action.

Le Conseil se souviendra peut-etre que la
resolution creant la sous-commission chargee de
la question espagnole etait redigee en des termes
presque identiques; je parle de la resolution
proprement dite et non du preambule. Cette
sous-commission aura toute latitude pour passeI'
au crible tous les temoignages, faire ressortir les
divergences qui existent entre les declarations
contradictoires, demander des ec1airc1ssernents
aux membres du Conseil qui sont parties au
differend. Elle pourra fournir au Conseil le
benefice de son analyse des faits et, esperons-Ie,
recommander les mesures que l'on pourrait
prendre par la suite.

Mr. MICHALOWSKI (Poland): The question
which is being dealt with at present by the Security Council is of a different nature and
character from all the problems of which the
Security Council was seized during the first yea,r
of its existence. In all the questions previously
discussed by us here, we have been dealing with
certain facts established beyond doubt, or charges
based on specific proofs. The problems were
always those of' political interpretation, and we
had to determine their effect on the maintenance
of the security and peace of the world. The aim
of the resolutions adopted by the Security Council was always to establish in what relation the
given facts stood to the Charter and what mea-'
sures were to be taken in order to prevent threats
to peace.

M. MICHALOWSKI (Pologne ) ( traduit de
l'ang1ais): La question dont est saisi actuelle-

ment le Conseil de securite differe, par sa nature
et son caractere, de tous lesproblemes qui lui
ont ete soumis'pendant la premiere annee de son
existence. Dans toutes les questions precedemment disc;utees ici, nous avions a traiter de certains faits etablis sans l'ombre d'un doute ou
d'accusations reposant sur des preuves bien
nettes. Les problemes etaient toujours des problemes d'interpretation politique et il s'agissait
de determiner dans quelle mesure ils affectaient
le maintien de la securite et de la paix internationales. Les resolutions adoptees par le Conseil
de securite avaient toujours pour but de determiner quel rapport existait entre les faits donnes et
la Charte et les mesures qu'il fallait prendre
pour ecarter les menaces contre la paix.
In the dispute now under consideration the
Dans le differend que nous examinons mainsituation appears to be quite different. Only one tenant, la situation apparalt toute differente.
fact exists beyond doubt, that is the loss which Un seul fait est indiscutable, c'est la perte qu'a
the British Navy has suffered. Our common at- subie la marine britannique. Notre attitude a
titude toward this fact is very simple: we deeply tous en cette matiere est tres simple: nous regretregret the loss of life of the seamen of the British tons profondement la mort des marins britanNavy, a loss which occurred after the cessation niques, qui s'est produite apres la fin d:s
of hostilities. I am certain that I am expressing hostilites. Je suis certain d'interpreter le sentIthe feeling of all members of this Council in ment de tous les membres du Conseil en expriconveying my deepest sympathy to the British mant ma profonde sympathie au Gouvemement
Government, whose concern we can perfectly britannique. Nous comprenons parfaitement
understand.
1'emotion qu'il a ressentie.
Cependant, si 1'on met a part ce seul fait sur
However, apart from this one fact on which
we all agree, we seem to hold contradictory opin- lequel nous soyons tous d'accord, il semble que
ions. Allow me to mention only the most sur les autres, nous ayons des opinions contraimportant points here.
dictoires. Permettez-moi de ne vous, citeI' que
les points les plus importants.
Premier' point. Le Gouvemement du RoyauPoint one. The Government of the United
Kingdom states that the mines were laid by the me-Uni affirme que les mines ont ete mouillees
Albanian Government, or at least with its knowl- par le Gouvernement albanais ou que tout au
edge. The Government of Albania, on the other moins ce Gouvernement etait au courant. Le
hand, categorically denies any connexion with GOllvernement albanais, de son cote, affirme
the mine-laying. I should like to draw your at- categoriquement qu'il n'est pour rien dans cette
tention to what was said by Sir Alexander in his operation. J'attire votre attention sur le passage
statement-namely, that "If the Albanian Gov- suivant de la declaration de Sir Alexander: "Si
ervment were in good conscience innocent and le Gouvernement albanais ignorait en toute sin-

374
ignorant of this mine-laying it would have denied
the charge."!
In its note of 21 December 1946, the Albanian
Government clearly stated:
"With regard to the accusations that the Albanian Government itself placed the mines or
was aware that others had placed them or
again, knew of the presence of mines in the
Corfu Channel, these accusations are completely without foundation and are profoundly
wounding to the peaceful aspirations and feelings of the Albanian people and the Albanian
Government." 2
In his statement Sir Alexander said: "The
Greek denial has already been published. I will
therefore say no more about it." 3
I do not wish to be' misunderstood; I am not
trying even for a moment to accuse the Government of Greece of laying the mines; we have no
proof to substantiate such an allegation; but if
the Governments of the countries on the Straits
of Corfu have denied the fact of mine-laying, I
cannot understand why an accusation has been
raised against Albania alone. It could only be
justified if the Government of the United Kingdom possessed certain and definite proof to this
effect. Personally, I fail to find such proof in
the British statement.
Point two. There is yet another contradiction.
The Government of the United Kingdom stated
that the mine-sweeping carried out on 12 and 13
November 1946 was the result of a unanimous
decision of the Mediterranean Zone Board,
confirmed by the Central Board in London on
1 December 1946. The Albanian Government
has quoted a denial issued in that respect on
14 December.
I understand that these facts are not the most
essential for establishing the responsibility for
the mine-laying. I am mentioning them only because they constitute a proof of the goodwill of
the Albanian Government on the question of the
mine-sweeping of the channel and contradict the
facts contained in the British statement..

Point three. The third difference of opinion
concerns the accusation made by the Government of Albania that on the day after the explosion of the mines in the channel British planes
flew over Albanian territory, thus infringing its
sovereignty. The British Government denied
these facts and again neither side has presented
satisfactory proof of its respective charges. 4

, See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 15, 107th meeting, page 302.
, See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 3, Annex 8, page 43.
3 Ibid., No. 15, 107th meeting, page 302.
4 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 3, Annex 8: note of 21 December 1946, from the Albanian Government to His Majesty's Government, page 42, and Official Records of the
Security Council, No. 15, page 304: statement made
at l07th meeting by representative of the United Kingdom.

cerite ce mouillage de mines et etait innocent en
cette affaire, il aurait oppose un dementi a
l'accusation: portee contre lui1. "
,
Dans sa note du 21 decembre 1946, le Gouvernement albanais a nettement declare:
"On a accuse le Gouvemement albanais
d'avoir lui-meme fait poser les mines ou eu
connaissance du fait que d'autres les avaient
posees, ou encore, d'etre au courant de la
presence de ces mines dans le detroit de
Corfou; ces accusations sont depourvues de
tout fondement et blessent profondement les
aspirations et les sentiments pacifiques du
peuple et du Gouvernement albanais 2 ."
Sir Alexander a dit egalement: "Le dementi
grec a deja ete publie. Par consequent, je n'en
dirai pas davantage 3 ."
J e ne voudrais pas qu'on se meprenne sur mes
paroles. J e ne songe pas un instant a accuser
le Gouvernement grec d'avoir pose les mines.
Nous ne possedons aucune preuve a l'appui
d'une telle allegation, rnais si les Gouvernements
des deux pays bordant le detroit de Corfou ont
nie avoir pose les mines, je ne vois pas pourquoi,
seule, l' Albanie a ete accusee. Cette accusation
ne pourrait etre justifiee que si le Gouvernement
du Royaume-Uni avait une preuve certaine et
precise. Personnellement, je n'ai pas trouve cette
preuve dans la declaration britannique.
Deuxieme point. I1 y a une autre contradiction. Le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni declare que l' operation de dragage des 12 et 13 novembre 1946 a ete effectuee a la suite d'une
decision unanime du Bureau de deminage
rnediterraneen, confirmee le ler decembre 1946
par le Bureau central de Londres. Le Gouvernement albanais cite un dementi publie sur ce
point le 14 decembre.
Je veux bien admettre que ces faits n'aient
pas une importance capitale quand il s'agit de
determiner qui est responsable du mouillage des
mines. J e les cite seulement parce qu'ils constituent une preuve de la bonne volonte du GOllvernement albanais en ce qui conceme le
dragage des mines dans le chenal et, en outre,
parce qu'ils sont en contradiction avec les faits
enonces dans la declaration britannique.
Troisieme point. La troisieme divergence
d'opinions est la suivante: le Gouvernement
albanais accuse des avions britanniques d'avoir,
le lendemain de l' explosion des mines dans le
detroit, survole le territoire albanais, portant
ainsi atteinte a la souverainete de ce territoire.
Le Gouvernement britannique nie ces faits et,
la encore, aucune des parties n'a presente de
preuves satisfaisantes a I'appui des accllsations
qu'elles formulent<l.
1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de stfcuritl,
Deuxieme Annee, No 15, 107eme seance, page 302.
2 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de slcurittl,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe 8, page 43.
B Ibid., No 15, 107eme seance, page 302.
.
4 Voir Proces-verbaux offieiels du Conseil de sicuritl,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe 8: note en
date du 21 decembre 1946 adressee par le Gouvernement albariais au Gouvernement de Sa Majeste britannique, page 4·2, et Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de
securite, No 15, lO7eme seance, page 304.

375
Point four. A similar situation exists in regard
to the incident of 15 May 1946. One of the
parties claims that the vessels which were approaching the Albanian shore were flying no
flag, and that the flag was hoisted only after the
first warning shots had been fired. The British
Government denied this also. ~
Point fiVe. There are certain doubts whether
the channel in question is the international channel mentioned here by the representative of the
United Kingdom as route 18/32 and 18/34. We
do not know whether this route is a recognized
international route, and it rather surprises me
that this international route passes only three
hundred yards from the Port of Saranda. The
Albanian Government claims that this channel
is a part of the waters of the Port of Saranda.
Point six. The Government of the United
Kingdom claims that this channel had been
swept of mines in 1944. On the other hand,
according to the statement of the Albanian representative, the British note of 25 January 1945
sent to the Albanian Government by General
Hodgson stated clearly that the navigational
lines declared open were not safe and that vessels
using them did so at their own risk. 2 I am certain that the clearing up of this point is essential
to a proper solution of the dispute.
Point seven. As another proof of Albanian
guilt, the British Government cites the fact that
the Albanian Government maintains "vigilant
defences . . . along their coast". a I believe it is
customary for all countries whose frontiers lie
along sea-coasts to maintain such defences. At
the same time, the maintenance of such defences
is not proof of mine-laying.

Quatrieme point. 11 en va de meme pour
l'incident du 15 mai 1946. Dne des parties
pretend que les navires qui s'approchaient de
la cote albanaise n'arboraient pas de pavilion
et qu'ils n'ont hisse les couleurs qu'apres les
premiers coups de semonce. Le Gouvernement
britannique nie egalement cela1 •
Cinquieme point. Il n'est pas etabli que le
chenal en cause soit bien le chenal international
que le representant du Royaume-Dni a appele
ici la route 18/32 et 18/34. Nous ne savons pas
si cette route est une route internationale reconnue et je suis plutat surpris que cette route
internationale passe seulement a 300 yards du
port de Saranda. Le Gouvernement albanais
pretend gue ce chenal fait partie des eaux du
port de Saranda.
Sixieme point. Le Gouvemement du Royaume-Dni pretend que ce chenal a ete drague en
1944. D'autre part, d'apres la declaration du
representant albanais, la note britannique du
25 janvier 1945 adressee au Gouvernement albanais par le general Hodgson precise nettement
que les routes maritimes declacees ouvertes sont
dangereuses et que les navires ne peuvent les
utiliser qu'a leurs risques et perils2 • Je suis certain qu'il est essenticl d'eclaircir ce point pour
donner a cc differend une solution correcte.
Septieme point. Le Gouvernement britannique voit une nouvelle preuve de la culpabilite
de l'Albanie, dans le fait que le Gouvernement
albanais maintient des "defenses vigilantes . . .
le long de la cotes." Je crois que tous les pays
qui ont des frontieres maritimes maintiennent
normalement des de£enses de ce genre. De plus,
maintenir des defenses de ce genre ne prouve pas
qu'on ait pose des mines.
La delegation polonaise ne peut non plus
The Polish delegation cannot accept the description of the mines as a proof, either. German accepter le fait que la description des mines
mines, as well as many other weapons of German constitue une preuve. Les mines allemandes, de
make, are common in Europe and can be found meme que de nombreuses autres armes de fabrialmost anywhere. The description of the mines cation allemande, sont tres repandues en Europe
and the fact stated here by Sir Alexander- "the· et on en trouve presque partout. La description
paint shone brightly in the sun"-do not throw des mines et le detail cite id par Sir Alexander
-"la peinture brillait au soleil"-ne jettent
any light on the essence of the question.
aucune lumiere sur le fond de la question.
J'ai cite ici quelques points seulement, qui
I have mentioned here only a few points to
prouvent
que nous savons fort peu de chose sur
prove that as regards the most essential quesle
fond
du
probleme que nous discutons, qu'il
tion involved in this discussion, we know very
Httle; also, that there are no proofs at all and n' existe absolument aucune preuve et que les
that the charges contradict one another. There accusations se contredisent. En outre, certaines
are, besides, certain questions of law which are ,questions juridiques restent imprecises, comme
in doubt, such as the question of innocent pas- celle du droit de passage inoffensif dans les eaux
sage through territorial waters. The responsibil- territoriales. 11 faut egalement elucider la quesity for incidents in such waters and the reason tion de la responsabilite des incidents survenus
why Albania is not a member of the Mediter- dans des eaux territoriales et la question de
ranean Minesweeping Board, must also be savoir pourquoi 1'Albanie n'est pas membre du
Bureau de deminage mediterraneen.
cleared up.
'
De 1'avis de, notre delegation, le Conseil, ne
In the opinion of our delegation, we cannot
decide upon all these legal problems in this peut resoudre tous ces problemes juridiques.
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 3, Annex 8, paragraph 8, page 37.
2 Ibid., Supplement No. 3, Annex 8, page 44. See also
Mr. Hysni Kapo's statement at the 109th meeting,
re~ord. No. 16, page 398.
Ibid., No. 15, 107th meeting, page 300. See also Supplement No. 6, Annex 15, Exhibit VIII.

1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe 8, paragraphe 8, page 37.
.
• Ibid., Supplement No 3, Annexe 8, page 44. VOll'
aussi la declaration faite par M. Hysni Kapo ala 10geme
seance Proc(:s-verbal No 16, page 398.
3 Ibid., No 15, lO7eme seance, page 300. Voir aussi
Supplement No 6, Annexe 15, piece No VIII.

376
Council. We cannot discuss here all these facts
which, as in a detective story, first prove and
then disprove various theories. Such deliberations are not required of this Council. Its task
is to decide upon essential questions connected
~ith the maintenance of international peace and
security. For instance, we have before us the
problem of disarmament, and we are now in the
midst of the discussion on the control of atomic
energy.
This, of course, does not mean that the Security Council is helpless in the British-Albanian
dispute, but it is not our task to solve puzzles.
Article 34 of the Charter states clearly that "The
Security Council may investigate any dispute ...
in order to determine whether the continuance of
the dispute or situation is likely to endanger the
mai.ntenance of international peace and security."
There is no danger to peace in this dispute.
The Corfu Channel has been cleared, and there
remains only the question of indemnities and not
one of world war or peace. We do not believe
that a threat to peace can result from that unfortunate incident, which took place many
months ago.

No definite proofs have been established.
There are no facts which the Security Council
could use as a basis for a decision. We are
neither a court of justice nor a jury, and we
cannot pass a verdict one way or the other on the
basis of our convictions alone. Therefore the
Polish delegation believes that the most appropriate course of action would be to proceed according to Article 33 of the Charter, where it is
provided that: "The parties to any dispute ...
shall, first of all, seek a solution by negotiation,
enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or
arrangements, or other peaceful means of their
own choice. The Security Council shall, when
it deems necessary, call upon the parties to settle
their dispute by such means."
Only the first of the possible means mentioned
in Article 33 has been used in this dispute:
negotiation. And if the members of the Security
Council deem it necessary, we can still approach
the parties to the dispute and call upon them to
use some other. means of peaceful settlement of
the controversy.
There remains another way out, of course.
We can use Article 36, paragraph 3, of the
Charter and call upon the parties to direct their
dispute to the International Court of Justice.
May I remind you that paragraph 2 of Article
36 of the Statute provides that it lies within the
competence of the International Court of Justice
to settle the "legal disputes concerning: . . . the
existence of any fact which, if established, would
constitute a breach of an international obligation"?
The Polish delegation considers the first possibility as the more desirable, but if it is the wish
of this Council to call upon the parties to direct

Nous ne pouvons discuter ici taus les faits qui,
comme dans un roman policier, tour a tour
prouvent ou detruisent telle ou telle theorie. Ce
Conseil n'a pas ete cree pour des deliberations
de ce genre. Le role de ce Conseil est de trancher des questions essentielles qui ont trait au
maintien de la paix et de' la securite internationales. Nous avons a examiner le probleme du
desarmement. Nous sommes actuellement' au
milieu de la discussion sur le controle de
l'energie atomique.
Evidemment, cela ne signifie pas que le
Conseil de securite ne puisse rien faire dans le
differend britanno-albanais. Mais nous ne
sommes pas charges de resoudre des enigmes.
L'Article 34 de la Charte stipule clairement que
"le Conseil de securite peut enqueter Sur tout
differend ... afin de determiner si la prolongation de ce differend ou de cette situation semble
devoir menacer le maintien de la paix et de la
securite internationales".
Ce differend ne comporte aucune menace
contre la paix. Le detroit· de Corfou a ete
drague et il ne reste a resoudre que la question
des indemnites; il ne s' agit ici ni de la guerre
mondiale, ni de la paix du monde. Nous ne
croyons pas qu'une menace contre la .paix puisse
naitre d'un incident regrettable Survenu il y a
de nombreux mois.
Aucune preuve definitive n'a ete fournie. IJ
n'existe pas un seul fait sur. lequel le Conseil
de securite puisse fonder sa decision. Nous ne
sommes, ni un tribunal, ni un jury et nous ne
pouvons rendre un verdict, dans un sens ou
dans un autre, en nous fondant sur nos seules
convictions. En consequence, la delegation polonaise considere qu'il vaudrait mieux proceder
conformement a l'Article 33 de la Charte qui
stipule: "Les parties a tout differend ... doivent
en rechercher la solution, avant tout, par voie
de negociation, d'enquete, de mediation, de
conciliation, d'arbitrage, de reglement judiciaire,
de recours aux organismes ou accords regionaux,
ou par d'autres moyens padfiques de leur choix.
Le Conseil de securite, s'il le juge necessaire,
invite les parties a regler leurs differends par de
tels moyens."
On n'a jusqu'ici eu recours, a l'occasion de
ce differend, qu'au premier des moyens enonces
a l' Article 33: la negociation. Si les membres
du Conseil de securite le jugent necessaire, nous
pouvons inviter les parties a utiliser d'autres
moyens pacifiques de reglement du differend.
Il reste encore evidemment une autre solution.
Nous pouvons, en vertu du paragraphe 3 de
l' Article 36 de la Charte, inviter les parties a.
soumettre leur differend a la COUT internationale de Justice. Puis-je vous rappeler que le
paragraphe 2 de l' Article 36 du Statut stipule
qu'il entre dans la competence de la Cour de
juger "tous les differends d'ordre juridique ayant
pour objet: ... la realite de tout fait qui, s'il
etait etabli, constituerait la violation d'un
engagement international".
La delegation polonaise estime que de ces
deux methodes, la premiere est preferable. Si
toutefois le Conseil desire inviter les parties a.

377
the dispute to the International Court of Justice,
we shall not oppose this ,action.
With regard to the Australian resolution, I do
not think it is advisable to establish a sub-committee. All of us are aware that, on the basis of
documents available at the present moment here
in New York, it is impossible to find any convincing evidence. We are certain that the Council will be in just the same position in a week's
time as it is now.

soumettre le differend a la Cour internationale
de Justice, nous n'eleverons pas d'objection.
J e ne pense pas qu'il soit desirable de creel'
une sous-commission comme le propose la resolution de la delegation australienne. Nous savons
tous que, sur la base des documents disponibles
actueUement ici a New-York, il est impossible
de decouvrir une seule preuve convaincante.
Nous sommes persuades que dans une semaine
le Conseil en sera exactement au meme point
qu'aujourd'hui.

Mr. ZULETA ANGEL (Colombia) (translated
from French): I wish to raise a point of order.
The Australian delegation has proposed the appoin~ment of a sub-committee. According to the
rules of procedure, a motion of that sort has
precedence over principal motions, as you have
reminded us, Mr. President.
That being so, I should like to know whether
we could not discuss that motion only, and vote
on it, rather than continue consideration of the
whole question.

M. ZULETA ANGEL (Colombie): Je demande
la parole sur une motion d'ordre. La delegation
australienne a propose la creation d'une souscommission. SeIon le reglement interieur, une
telle proposition a la primite sur les propositions
principales, comme vous-meme I'avez rappeIe,
Monsieur le President.
Dans ces conditions, je voudrais savoir si nous
ne pourrions pas discuter seulement cette proposition et la mettre aux voix, plutot que de
poursuivre l'examen de l'ensemble de la question.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
In the spirit ·of rule 33, I think that for the
time being the discussion should be confined to
the Australian motion regarding the appointment of a sub-committee of the Council.

Le PRESIDENT: Dans 1'esprit de l'article 33,
je crois qu'i! conviendrait de limiter pour l'instant la discussion a la proposition australienne
tendant a creel' une sous-commission du Conseil.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I doubt
whether it is necessary to take an immediate decision on the Australian representative's proposal
even thougp. some of us might wish to speak on
the substance of the matter. It seems to me that
this proposal is not of a nature to be interpreted
as a proposal to close the discussion. However, I
am making no formal proposal to that effect.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je doute
qu'il soit necessaire de prendre immediatement
une decision sur la proposition du representant
de l' Australie, alors que certains de nos com~gues
desirent prendre la parole sur le fond de la question. I1 me semble que cette proposition n'est
pas telle. qu'on puisse I'interpreter comme une
demande de cloture des debats. Je ne soumets
cependant, pour ma part, aucune proposition
formeIle.
En ce qui concerne le fond de la proposition
australienne, je ne puis l'appuyer, car j'estime
que cette proposition est incorrecte et qu'elle ne
contribue pas a maintenir l'autorite du Conseil
de securite a un niveau eleve. Les accusations
portees par le Gouvernement du Royau·me-Uni
contre l'Albanie ne sont pas prouvees et ne peuvent pas 1'etre. C'est pourquoi, en depit de
toutes les tentatives faites pour grossir l'affaire
et pour faire du bruit autour d'elle, au C0I?-seil
de securite, dans la presse, etc., ces accusations
sont sans fondement. Si on le veut, il est aise
de faire beaucoup de bruit autour de I'accusation la plus absurde; il suffit pour ccIa d'en avoir
le desir. En ma qualite de" representant de
1':Union sovietique, je ne veux pas m'associer a
ceux qui sont prets, sans la moindre raison, a
faire du bruit autour de cette affaire.
Le representant des Etats.Unis juge indispensable de Creel' une sous-commission. I1 a donne
lecture d'une declaration dans laquelle il exprimait a l'avance la position de son Gouverne..:
ment. Tout en estimant qu'il y a des raisons
pour accuser l'Albanie, il n'en eroit pas moins
necessaire d'etudier encore la question.
Je comprends la position de ceux des membres
du Conseil de securite qui s'abstiennent d'emettre

So far as the substance of the Australian proposal is concerned, I cannot support it, as I consider it incorrect a,nd incompatible with the need
for keeping the Security Council's authority at
a high level. The accusations levelled at Albania
by the United Kingdom Government are not
proved, and it is impossible to prove them. They
are therefore unfounded, in spite of the effort
to make much of the question and create a stir
in the Security Council, in the Press, etc. If one
wishes, one can make a great deal of noise about
the most absurd accusation; all that is required
is the desire to do so. As the representative of
the Soviet Union, I do not wish to join those
who are ready to create a stir about this matter
without any justification.

The United States representative considers the
appointment of a sub-committee necessary. He
read a statement in which his position was already defined. He considers that there are
grounds for the accusations against Albania and
nevertheless considers it necessary to study the
question further.
I understand the position of those representatives on the Council who refrain from express-

378
ing any opinion on the s;ubstance of the question
and propose appointing a sub-committee. But
I cannot in any way understand the position of
those representatives who clearly have more or
less definite opinions and who nevertheless propose to appoint a sub-committee, and wis~ to
complicate this matter still more and to raIse a
clamour for a number of reasons which have
nothing to do with the interests of the United
Nations.
I cannot, therefore, support the proposal to
appoint a sub-committee, as I do not see the
necessity for it. Albania is not guilty in this
matter. If there are points in dispute or misunderstandings, they can be settled by bilateral
negotiation between Albania and the United
Kingdom.

le moindre avis sur le fond de la question et
proposent la creation d'une sous-commission.
Mais je ne comprends pas du tout l'attitude de
ceux des membres du Conseil qui, tout en ayant
evidemment certaines opinions plus ou moins
arretees, demandent neeanmoins la creation
d'une sous-commission et desirent compliquer
l'affaire et faire encore plus de bruit autour
d'eIle, pour certaines raisons etrangeres aux interets des Nations Unies.
C'est pourquoi je ne puis me rallier a la proposition tendant a creel' une sous-commission dont
je ne vois pas la necessite. L' Albanie n'est pas
coupable dans cette affaire. S'il y a des points
litigieux ou des malentendus, ces questions peuvent etre resolues au moyen de negociations bilaterales entre l'Albanie et le Roya;ume-Uni.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon the representative of the United
States on a point of order.

Le PRESIDENT: J e donne la parole au representant des Etats-Unis pour une motion d'ordre.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America) :
Mr. President, foUowing the reference made by
the representative of the Soviet Union to my
former statement, I only wish to make clear
what the attitude of the United States is in this
case. May I make that statement?

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Monsieur le President, le
representant de l'Union sovietique s'etant rHere
a ma declaration anterieure, je d6lirerais eclaircir
l'attitude des Etats-Unis dans cette affaire.
Puis-je faire cette declaration?

The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
I should like first to settle a point of order. I
did not propose that the general discussion should
be closed, but merely that priority be given to
the Australian representative's motion. My interpretation of rule 33 of the rules of procedure
seems to me reasonable; it is such as to avoid
repetitions and, consequently, loss of time. If
we continue to discuss the main issue and the
Australian motion is subsequently adopted, these
discussions will be repeated in the sub-committee,
and again when the Council discusses the latter's
report. It is therefore desirable that the Council
should take a decision on the Australian motion
before deciding how the discussion should be
'
continued.

Le PRESIDENT: Je voudrais, d'abord, regler
une question d'ordre. Je n'ai pas propose la
c](lture de la discussion generale, maLe; simplement que priorite soit accordee a la proposition
du representant de l'Australie. L'interpretation
de l'article 33 du reglement interieur me semble
raisonnable; eIle est de nature a eviter des repetitions et, par consequent, des pertes de temps. Si
nous poursuivons maintenant les discussions sur
le fond et qu'ensuite la proposition de l'Australie
soit adoptee, ces discussions reprendront devant
la sous-commission, puis une troisieme fois quand
le Conseil discutera le rapport de cette derniere.
11 serait done desirable que le Conseil se prononce
d'abord sur la proposition australienne avant de
decider de la suite a donner au debat.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist ReM. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sociapublics) (translated from Russian): It seems listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Il me
to me that it would not be quite logical to take a semble qu'il ne serait pas tout a fait logique de
decision on a proposal without first hearing prendre une decision sur une proposition, sans
other representatives who may wish to speak, as avoir entendu les membres du Conseil de securite
another proposal differing from the Australian qui desireraient prendre la parole. 11 se peut en
proposal may be submitted by other representa- effet que d'autres representants veuillent pretives. If another proposal is submitted, how will senter une proposition qui differe de la proposithe Council act? Will a decision on the other tion australienne. Si 1'0n soumet au Conseil de
proposal be taken or not, bearing in mind that securite une autre proposition, que doit-il faire?
a decision has been taken on the Australian Devra-t-il prendre une decision sur cette nouvellc
proposal? If we take a decision on the Austra- 'proposition ou devra-t-il s'abstenir, etant donne
lian proposal, the possibility of voting on any qu'une decision aura deja ete prise sur la propoother proposal will be automatically excluded.
sition australienne? Si nous prenons une decision
au sujet de la proposition australienne, nous
exclurons ipso facto la possibilite de mettre aux
voix toute autre proposition.
It seems to me, therefore, more logical to hear
Il me semble par consequent que, s'il y a des
any other members who may wish to speak representants qui desirent faire une declarabefore we take a decision on the Australian tion, il serait plus logique de les entendre avant
proposal.
.
de prendre une decision sur la proposition
australienne.

379
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
Mr. President, I only want to be quite clear as
to what your ruling was. Was it that the Council
has first to take a decision upon the Australian
proposal? And would that mean tha~, if ~he
Council adopted that proposal, further dIScuSSIOn
would take place only in the sub-committee, and
that there would be no further discussion of the
substance of the question here at this table? If
that is the interpretation, then I must point out
that the whole of the statement made by the
representative of the Soviet Union earlier in the
afternoon, and nearly all of the statement made
by the representative of Poland, should have
been ruled out of order, because they have dealt
with the substance of the question. Now, if that
is your ruling, I find myself in rather a difficult
position, because both those stateme~ts, to say
nothing, of course, of the statement made the
other day by the Albanian representative, contain certain serious inaccuracies which I should
like to correct, and it will be rather hard on me
if,· they having been allowed to make their
statements, the Council now votes in favour of
establishing a sub-committee and I am no longer
allowed to put those inaccuracies right.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royame-Uni) (traduit de l'anglais): Monsieur le President, je voudrais simplement savoir la portee exacte de
votre decision. Veut-elle dire que le Conseil
doit, en premier lieu, se prononcer sur la proposition australienne? Dans l'affirmative, si le
Conseil adopte cette proposition, doit-on
conclure que les discussions n'auront plus lieu
desormais qu'a la sous-commission et qu'on
ne pourra plus discuter du fond de cette affaire
au sein du Conseil? S'il en est ainsi, je me
vois dans l'obligation de faire remarquer que
la totalite de la declaration faite par le representant de l'Union sovietique au debut de
I'apres-midi et la presque totalite de la declaration faite par le representant de la Pologne
devraient etre considerees comme non conformes a la procedureetablie, car dIes ont traite
du fond de la question. Si vous en decidez ainsi,
je vais me trouver dans l'embarras, car ces deux
declarations, sans parler naturellement de la declaration prononcee I'autre jour par le·· repre- .
sentant de l'Albanie, contiennent certaines
inexactitudes importantes que je voudrais rectifier, et je me trouverais desavantage si, apres
avoir autorise ces representants a faire leurs
declarations, le Conseil decidait de voter maintenant en faveur de la creation d'une souscommission et me privait ainsi du droit de rectifier ces inexactitudes.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
In reply to the question which the United Kingdom representative has just raised, I should like
to draw his attention to two points: first, as I
said just now, it is not a question of closing the
general discussion, but simply of giving priority
to the Australian motion. If the latter is adopted,
the Council will be free, if it wishes, to go on with
the general discussion. Secondly, the representatives of the United States and of Poland dealt, in
their remarks, with the Australian motion. They
raised points which call for rectification by the
United Kingdom representative; the latter is
obviously entitled to participate in the discussion.
As a matter of fact, I also intended to call on the
United States representative, who asked to be allowed to correct a point in the statement made
by the representative of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics.

Le PRESIDENT: En reponse a la question qu'il
vient de poser, je voudrais attirer l'attention du
representant du Royaume-Uni sur deux points:
tout d'abord, comme je l'ai dit tout a l'heure, il
ne s'agit pas de clore la discussion generale, mais
simplement de donner la priorite a la proposition de l'Australie. Celle-ci adoptee, le Conseil
est libre, s'il le desire, de poursuivre la discussion generale. D'autre part, les representants
des Etats-Unis et de la Pologne ont vise, dans
leurs interventions, la proposition de I'Australie.
11s ont souleve des points qui appellent une rectification de la part du representant du
Royaume-Uni; celui-ci a evidemment la faculte
d'intervenir dans le debat. Je comptais, du
reste, donner aussi la parole au representant des
Etats-Unis qui a demande a rectifier un point
de l'intervention du representant de l'Union des
Republiques so~ialistes sovietiques.

Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): Mr. President, I
agree with your ruling on the priority of the
proposal made by the representative of Australia.
I shall therefore confine my remarks to that
proposal itself.

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais): Monsieur le President, j'accepte votre
decision donnant priOl'ite a la proposition presentee par le representant de l'Australie. C'est
pourquoi je me bornerai a quelques observations sur cette proposition elle-meme.

The representative of Australia proposed that
the matter should be referred to a sub-committee
composed of three members in order to investigate and make interrogations on certain ambiguities which exist in the case before us, before
we proceed to formulate an opinion on the substance of the question.
In fact, he has not specified the questions or
the points which call for a sub-committee of
investigation and interrogation, and which could

Le representant de l'Australie a suggere de
renvoyer la question a une sous-commission
composee de trois membres charges d'etudier le
cas et de questionner les parties au differend
pour eliminer certaines ambiguites, avant meme
qu'on puisse se faire une opinion sur le fond de
la question.
En fait, le representant de I'Australie n'a pas
precise les questions ou les points qui devront
faire l'objet d'une enquete par une sous-com-

380
not be solved, understood and appreciated in a
plenary meeting of the Security Council.
As it happens, I have been thinking of a number of questions which I think it will be necessary
to clarify before we can proceed to formulate an
opinion on the subject. I have them before me.
But I consider that all the questions which I
have in mind can be presented here to both parties, and can be explained and clarified in a
plenary meeting, without the necessity of referring them to a sub-committee on this special
point.
If the representative of Australia gave us an
indication of the points of importance which can
be clarified by a sub-committee, but which cannot be clarified in a plenary meeting of the Security Council, that would be another thing. But
until now he has not done so. For this reason
I am not going to vote in favour of his proposal.

mission et qui ne peuvent etre resalus, compris
et apprecies par le Conseil de securite en seance
pIeniere.
En fait, j'ai presente a l'esprit une serie de
questions qu'a mon avis, il sera necessaire d'€lucider avant d'exprimer une opinion en la matiere. J'ai ces questions sous les yeux. J'estime
cependant que toutes les questions auxquelles je
pense peuvent etre posees ici aux deux parties
et que nous pourrons elucider et aplanir les difficultes qu'elles soulevent, en seance pIeniere,
sans qu'il soit necessaire de les renvoyer specialement a une sous-commission.
Si le representant de l'Australie veut bien preciseI' les. points importants qui peuvent etre
elucides par une sous-commission, mais qui ne
peuvent l'etre en seance pleniere du Conseil de
securite, la question se presentera autrement.
Jusqu'ici, il n'en a rien fait. C'est pourquoi je
ne voterai pa8 en faveur de sa proposition.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (t1'anslated from Russian): Apparently my statement did not please Sir Alexander
Cadogan, and he would like it to be declared
null and void. I can only say that Sir Alexander
Cadogan has an extremely keen sense of humor.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Apparemment, ma declaration a deplu it Sir Alexander
Cadogan et il voudrait qu'elle fut declaree nune
et non avenue. Tout ce que je peux dire a ce
propos, c'est que Sir Alexander Cadogan a Ull
sens de l'humour tres developpe.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I think we had better confine ourselves to the
point of order which has been raised. As nobody has suggested amending the motion which
I proposed to the Council, I shall take it as
adopted.
I would point out that the hour is now late,
and the representatives of Albania and of the
United States have asked to speak. I should
like to ask the Albanian representative whether
he feels he must speak today. I understand that
the remarks of the United States representative
will be short and will be limited to the rectification of a point raised by one of the members of
the Security Council.

Le PRESIDENT: Je croisqu'il vaudrait mieux
que nous restions dans la limite de la question
d'ordre qui a et'e posee tout a l'heure. A cet
egard, puisque personne n'a propose de modifier
la proposition que j'ai presentee tout a l'heure
au Con~eil, je la considere comme etant adoptee.
Je constate que l'heure est deja assez tardive.
Les representants de l'Albanie et des Etats-Unis
ont encore demande la parole. Je voudrais demander au representant de l'Albanie s'il tient
parler de nouveau aujourd'hui. J e crois que
l'intervention du representant des Etats-Unis
sera assez breve et tendra simplement a rectifier un point souleve dans une intervention d'un
des membres du Conseil de securite.

Mr. HYSNI KAPo (Albania) (translated from
French): I wish again to show the Security
Council that the accusation made by the British
Government is part of the hostile policy pursued
by the United Kingdom with regard to Albania.
The political facts which I brought to your notice
clearly demonstrate this tendency.

M. HYSNI KAPO (Albanie): Je veux a nouveau mettre en evidence devant le Conseil de
securite le fait que 1'accusation portee par le
Gouvernement britannique entre dans le cadre
de la politique inamicale suivie par le RoyaumeDni a l'egard de I'Albanie. Les faits politiques
que j'ai exposes devant vous montrent clairement cette tendance.
Indiquer les causes reelIes ne signifie pas
s'6loigner du probleme dont se preoccupe le
Conseil de securite. Un expose le plus large possible des faits vous permettra de tirer des conclusions d'autant plus justes et completes.
Ce qu'il ne faut pas perdre de vue, c'est que
lorsque les' navires de guerre britanniques ont
navigue dans les eaux albanaises a des fins de
provocation et d'intimidation, la souverainete
de l'Albanie a ete atteinte. Le Gouvernement
britannique, en niant cet acte illegal, cherche
a rejeter la responsabilite sur le Gouvernement
albanais, qui ne respecterait pas les lois internationales. Je repete encore une fois que le
Gouvernement albanais respecte les lois inter-

To indicate the real causes is not to deviate
from the problem with which the Security Council is dealing. The fullest possible statement of
the facts will help it to reach conclusions which
are accurate and complete.
What must not be forgotten, is that when the
British warships proceeded through Albanian
waters for purposes of provocation and intimidation, Albanian sovereignty was infringed. The
British Government is attempting to throw back
the responsibility on to the Albanian Government by denying that illegal act and saying that
Albania did not respect international laws. I
repeat once again that the Albanian Government does respect international laws. It respects

a

381
the innocent passage of any ship belonging to
any nation, on condition that the sovereignty of
the Albanian State is respected.
The significant facts which the Security Council should bear in mind are: (1) the tone of the
British notes, for example that of 2 August 1946,
which ends with a threat;l and that of the other
notes which attempt to confront Albania with a
fait accompli; (2) the rejection of the Albanian
proposals for sweeping the Channel; (3) the
arbitrary way in which the mine-clearing operations were carried out.
In this connexion, it must be pointed out that
even before the problem of clearance had been
discussed by the Mediterranean Board, and before a decision had been taken on the subject,
the British Government, in its note of 26 October 1946, informed the Albanian Government
that the Corfu Channel would be swept. 2 This
impatience, and 'this arbitrary procedure, were
again in evidence when, during the mine-sweeping operations, the British commander invited an
officer of the French Navy, who was not a competent representative of the Board, to be present.

r

nationales; i1 respecte le passage inoffensif de
n'importe quel navire, appartenant a n'importe
quelle nation, a la condition que la souverainete
de l'Etat albanais soit respectee.
Les faits caracteristiques qui doivent retenir
l'attention du Conseil de securite sont: 1) le ton
des notes britanniques, celle du 2 aout 1946, par
exemple, qui .finit par une menace 1; celui des
autres notes qui s'efforcent de mettre l'Albanie
devant le fait accompli; 2) le rejet des propositions albanaises relatives au dragage du chenal;
3) la maniere arbitraire dont furent effectuees
les operations de nettoyage des mines.
A cette occasion, i1 faut signaler qu'avant
m~me que le probleme du nettoyage eut ete mis
en discussion devant le Bureau mediterraneen,
et avant qu'une decision eut ete prise a ce sujet,
le Gouvernement britannique, par sa note du
26 octobre 1946, informait le Gouvernement
albanais que le qetroit de Corfou serait nettoye 2.
Cette hate et cette maniere de faire arbitraire
se scnt a nouveau manifestees lorsque, au cours
de l'operation de deminage, le commandant britannique invita a assister aux operations un
officier de la marine franc;aise, qui n'etait pas
un representant competent du Bureau.
En accusant l'Albanie d'avoir empeche la
navigation dans le detroit alors qu'en realite,
aucune mesure n' etait prise; en affirmant, sans
base legale, que la vigilance exercee par l' Albanie, le long de la c8te, doit entrainer la responsabilite du Gouvernement albanais pour tout ce
qui se passe dans ses eaux; en rappelarit, sans
raison dans le cas qui nous occupe, la Convention de Barcelone s, que l'Albanie a signee et
qu'elle respecte; en qualifiant tout sirnplement
d'inoffensif le passage des navires britanniques
qui ont fait acte de provocation et viole nos eaux
territoriales; en rappelallt certains articles de la
Convention de La Haye que l'Albanie respecte,
et qu'elle verrait sans objection appliquer a un
Etat qui violerait ladite Convention, le representant du Royaume-Uni fait, sans aucune
preuve serieuse, des suppositions et des deductions erronces, puis, en fin de compte, vous
propose cl'adopter une resolution.

In accusing 'Albania of having prevented the
Channel from being used when in reality no
action was taken; in supposing, without any legal
basis that the vigilance of Albania along the
coast must imply the responsibility of the Albanian Government for everything which happens within its waters; in referring, without any
justification in the case with which we are dealing, to the Convention of Barcelona,s which Albania signed, and which she respects; in qualifying as merely innocent the passage of the British
ships which committed an act of provocation and
violated our territorial waters; in referring to
certain articles of the Hague Convention which
Albania respects, and of which she would in no
way oppose the application to a State violating
the said Convention, the representative of the
United Kingdom, without any real evidence, is
making false assumptions and deductions, and
he concludes by suggesting that you adopt a
resolution.
.
I do not wish to argue about a problem
Je ne veux pas argumenter sur un probleme
which has nothing to do with Albania; I would qui est etranger a I'Albanie; je vous rappelle
only remind you once again that the Albanian seulement, une fois de plus, que le peuple albapeople, which made so many sacrifices for nais, qui fit tant de sacrifices pour la paix et la
peace and democracy, still remains faithful to democratie, reste toujours fidele a ses principes
its principles, and is firm in its endeavour to et cherche fermement a renforcer ses relations
ensure that its friendly relations with all peoples, . amicales avec tous les peuples et surtout avec
and above all with the great Allies, shall be les grands Allies.
still further strengthened.
The British Government's accusation has
L'accusation du Gouvernement britannique
deeply wounded the peaceful feelings of the a profondement blesse les sentiments pacifiques
Albanian people towards all other peoples; that que le peuple albanais nourrit envers tous les
autres peuples; c,est la raison pour laquelle je
is why I refute it categorically.
la refute categoriquement.
I See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 3, Annex 8, paragraph 11,
page 38.
• Ibid., paragraph 13.
o Convention on Freedom of Transit, opened for signature at Barcelona, 20 April 1921, and ratified by
j\lbania by 1 September 1931.

I Voir Proces-uerbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
De,llxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe' 8, paragraphe 11, page 38.
• Ibid., paraghaphe 13.
B Convention sur la libel'te du transit, ouverte
a la
signature des interesses a Barcelone, le 20 .avril 1921, et
ratifiee par l'Albanie au leI' septembl'c 1931.
.

382
The Albanian Government refuses to be accused and held responsible: it did not lay the
mines, and it does not know who did lay them.
I suggest that the British resolution, which is
based on a trumped~up charge, be purely and
simply rejected by the Security Council; at the
same time, I take the liberty of recommending
to you that particular attention be paid to the
acts of violation and provocation committed by
the British Government in our territorial waters.
The representative of the United States expressed his. conviction that the Albani~n Government had knowledge of the existence of the
mines found in the Corfu Channel. That conviction was based on the warning given over the
wireless of the existence of floating mines in the
sea routes to Durazzo and Valona. That does
not constitute a serious argument, because as I
have already pointed out, the head of the
British Mission in Albania, General Hodgson, in
his letter of 25 January 1946 to the Albanian
General Staff, stated that shipping routes declared open were not safe, and that ships sailing in those waters must do so at their own risk.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) :
Mr. President, it seems to me that in the light
of the ruling which you gave just now, every
word of that speech was out of order, since the
Albanian representative did not even mention
the Australian proposal. Therefore I think it is
absolutely out of order.
I rather want to know what our situation is
now. Are we to confine ourselves to the
Australian proposal for the reference of this
question to a sub-committee, or are we to go on
discussing the substance of the question?
The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
must acknowledge that the United Kingdom
representative's observation is correct. The Albanian representative's statement is not in conformity with the decision taken by the Council,
and I would have stopped him if his remarks
had not been relatively short.
We have to abide by the decision we have just
taken, and I must earnestly request members of
the Council taking part in this discussion to
observe it.
As I said before, if members of the Council
wish to speak in order to correct or to clarify
statements or declarations made during this discussion, I shall, of course, have no objection.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America) : I
shall ask the indulgence of the Council for only
a few moments to give a more accurate idea of
the position of the United States than that suggested by the references. made by the representative of the Soviet Union. I am sorry that Mr.
Gromyko missed what I think was the true
intent of my former statement.
There is no question that mines of recent

Le Gouvernement albanais n'accepte pas
d'Stre accuse et tenu pour responsable; il n'a pas
pose les mines, et il ne sait pas qui les a placees.
je suggere que la resolution britannique, fruit
d'une accusation mdntee, soit purement et simplement rejetee par le Conseil de securite; en
mSme temps, je me permets de vous recommandel' qu'une attention particuliere soit accordee
aux actes de violation et de provocation effectues
par le Gouvernement britannique dans nos eaux
territoriales.
Le representant des Etats- U nis a exprime sa
conviction que le Gouvernement albanais devait
avoir connaissance de l'existence des mines trouvees dans le canal de Carfou. Il a acquis cette
conviction en se basant sur l'avertissement donne
par la radio, qui signalait l'existence de mines
flottantes dans les routes maritimes conduisant
a Durazzo et Valona. Ceai. ne constitue pas un
argument serieux parce que, comme je l'ai deja
indique, le chef de la mission britannique en
Albanie, le general Hodgson, dans sa lettre du
25 janvier 1946 adressee a l'etat-major albanais,
affirme que les lignes de navigation declarees
ouvertes ne sont pas sures, et que les navires
naviguant dans ces eaux doivent le faire a leurs
risques et perils.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de I' anglais): Monsieur le President, il
me semble, a la lumiere de la decision que vous
avez prise tout a l'heure, que la declaration tout
entiere du representant de l'Albanie est en dehors des regles, car dIe ne mentionne meme pas
la proposition australienne. Elle n'est donc
absolutnent pas conforme a la procedure etablie.
Je voudrais savoir ou nous en sommes maintenant. Devons-nous nous borner a discuter la
proposition australienne qui tend a renvoyer la
question a la sous-commission, ou allons-nolls
continuer a discuter du fonds de la question?
Le PRESIDENT: Je dais reconnahre que la
rcmarque du representant du Royaume-Uni est
fondee. L'expose du representant de l'Albanie
ne correspond pas a la decision prise par le
Conseil, et je l'aurais arrete si son intervention
n'avait ete relativement courte.
Nous devons nous en tenir a la decision adoptee tout a l'heure, et je dais conjurer les membres
du Conseil qui participent a ceUe discussion de
s'y conformer.
Comme je l'ai dit tout a l'heure, si les membres du Conseil desirent intervenir pour rectifier
ou mettre au point les affirmations ou Ies declarations faites au cours de cette discussion, je ne
m'y opposerai naturellement pas.
M. JOHNSON (Etats- Unis d'Amerique) (tmduit de fanglais): Je demande au Conseil de
m'accorder quelques instants pour donner, de
l'attitude des Etats-Unis, une idee plus exacte
que celle suggeree par les allusions du representant de I'Union sovietique. Je regrette que
M. Gromyko n'ait pas saisi la portee reeUe de
ma declaration anterieure.
Il est hors de doute que des mines de fabrica-

383

ori~in "Vere in Albanian waters and very close
to the Coast. I say that simply as a statement of
what appears to be an established fact.
The lJnited States supports the contention
l~~itde . by the United- Kingdom representative,
SII'
~exander Cadogan, that mine-laying in
pcacetune, without notification, is intolerable
for h urnanitarian and security reasons. I further
stated that the British case, as presented by Sir
Alexander Cadogan, seems to the United States
delegation convincing, and we find it difficult
to believe in the ignorance professed by the
AI~anian delegation with regard to the minelaYIng.
\Vhile it seems clear to us that Albania must
at least have known of the existence of the
mines so close to her coast, we feel that sound
pr?-ctice .requires careful examination of all
mdence pertinent to all disputes before the
Security Council. Our mind is not finally made
lip. We have stated our position, as it can now
be formulated, on the basis of the evidence so
far presented. We favour a further and careful
cxaluination of the facts, particularly after hearingthe conflicting statements of other members
of the Council on this subject.

I t '\Vas for that reason that I stressed the
opinion that the sub-committee suggested by
the representative of Australia might provide
a convenient mechanism for bringing together
the contradictions in the statements made at
this table and for giving to the Council a precise statement of the facts as presented, together -with the differences of opinion based on
the results of the interrogations which the subcOlurnittee might make. The Council should then
have a basis for formulating a final decision to
dispose of this case. Such a course would avoid
an open debate in plenary session of the Council on highly controversial matters, and at the
~ame tiIlle obviate a situation in which each
mCluber can make his declarations without having to conform to the pattern that might be set
by a COIlllllittee in handling this case.

I t is a nlatter of convenience rather than of
mbstance, it seems to me. I do not think it indispensable to have the sub-committee; but I
think it 'Would be highly useful.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
With regard to the Australian proposal, while I
am not entirely convinced that it is useful or
necessary, I should certainly not wish to oppose
it, and if th~ Council decides in favour of setting
up a cornrmttee, I shall, of course, place myself
entirely at its disposal and give it any information
it desires which may be in my possesion.
I should like, however, to make one brief commen t on a remark made by the Australian representative. I .think he said that there was before
the council a question of fact and a question of

tion recente se trouvaient dans les eaux albanaises, tout pres des cCltes. Je ne fais que
rappeler ce qui me semble etre un fait etabli.
Les Etats-Unis appuient le representant du
Royaume-Uni, Sir Alexander Cadogan, quand
il affirme que, pour des raisons humanitaires et
des motifs de securite, on ne saurait tolerer qu'en
temps de paix, des mines soient posees sans avertissement. J'ajoute que l'expose britannique, tel
que l'a presente Sir Alexander Cadogan, semble
convaincant a la delegation des Etats- Unis, et
nous estimons qu'il est difficile de croire que
l'Albanie ignorait la pose de ces mines, comme
elle l'a affirme.
S'il nous parait evident que l'Albanie devait
au moins avoir connaissance de l'existence de
mines posees si pres de ses cCltes, nous estimons
neanmoins qu'il est de saine pratique d'examiner avec beaucoup d'attention tous les temoignages relatifs a un differend, quel qu'il soit,
dont le Conseil de securite est saisi. Nous ne
nous sommes pas encore fait d'opinion definitive.
Nous avons defini notre position, telle qu'il nous
semble pouvoir la formuler maintenant, d'apres
les temoignages presentes jusqu'ici. Nous sommes
partisans d'un nouvel examen approfondi des
faits, particulierement apres avoir entendu les
declarations contradictoires des autres membres
du Conseil sur cette question.
C'est pourquoi nous avons souligne qu'a notre
avis, la sous-commission dont la creation est
proposee par le representant de l'Australie
pourra fournir un moyen commode de confronter les contradictions contenues dans les exposes
faits devant le Conseil et d'offrir a celui-ci un
expose precis des faits tels qu'i}s ont ete pre~entes
et des divergences de vues decoulant des mterrogatoires auxquels la sous-commission pourrait
proceder. Le Conseil disposerait alars d'une base
sur laquelle il pourrait faire reposer sa decision
finale dans cette affaire. Ainsi seraientevites a
la fois des debats publics en seance pleniere sur
des questions pretant grandement a controverse,
et une situation dans laquelle chacun des membres pourrait faire ses ~eclarat~ons sans ayo~r a
tenir compte des indicatIOns qu une commISSIOn,
qui aurait discute la question prealablement,
pourrait lui donner.
Il me semble qu'il s'agit Ht d'une question de
commodite plutClt que d'une question de principe
et bien que je ne juge pas indispensable de
cdnstituer cette sous-commission, je pense qu'elle
nous rendrait de grands services.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume- U ni) :
(traduit de I'anglais): Bien que je ne sois pas
absolument convaincu de l'utilite ou de la necessite de la proposition australienne, 'je ~'ai
nullement l'intention de m'y opposer et, SI le
Conseil decide de Creel' une sous-commission, je
me mettrai naturellement a la disposition de
celle-ci et je lui fournirai, dans la mesure ou je
les possede moi-meme, les renseignements qu' elle
desire.
Je tiens toutefois a faire une breve ,observation
apropos d'une remarque du representant d~
l'Australie. Je crois qu'il a dit que le Consell
avait a considerer une question de fait et une

384
\,

law, and I think he added that conflicting statements have been made both on the points of fact
and on the points of law. In my view, the point
of law at issue here is the rule of the Hague
Convention which makes it illegal to lay mines
without notification. 1 The case I have brought
against the Albanian Government is that, without notification, a new mine field has been recently laid, either by the Albanian Government
or with its connivance. I have not heard anyone
here question that it would be illegal to lay an
undeclared mine field. I do not think there is
any conflict at all on that point.
Now, Mr. President, as you said a moment
ago, it would be in order for the representatives
here to correct points of fact. Permit me, therefore, merely to refer to one or two things that
have been said today which I think are inaccurate, reserving to myself the right, of course,
to make further statements and provide further
information, if the Council decides to refer the
question to a sub-committee. Now, in the first
place, the representative of the Soviet Union said
again today that "the British Government acted
without taking into consideration Article 33,
paragraph 1, of the United Nations Charter,
which requires that the parties concerned should
endeavour to settle their dispute, first of all, by
means of negotiation, etc."2 He also referred
to "the fact that the British Government had rejected the proposal of the Albanian Government
for the establishment of a mixed commission for
the settlement of questions concerning minesweeping in the Corfu Channel."2 He referred
to that proposal for a commission, as if the latter
had been intended to settle the whole dispute.
But its proposed function was confined solely to
the following: to determine what area of the sea
should be considered to constitute the channel of
navigation. That is what the Albanians asked.

In my statement the other day, I said that my
Government was wholly at a loss to understand
this proposal. The limits of the Channel were
perfectly well known, and have been so to every
Government in Europe. Since October 1935,
thirty copies of the Mediterranean Routing Instructions have been sent by the International
Routing and Reporting Authority to the Minister
of Public Works at Tirana. Therefore there
really was no sense in establishing a commission
to try to define a channel which was perfectly
well known and clearly laid down.

What I want to emphasize is that the rejection
of that proposal, for that reason, does not show
that we, in the words of the Soviet representative,
I Quoted in Sir Alexander Cadogan's speech at the
107th meeting. See Official Records of the Security
Council, Second Year, No. 15.

• The United Kingdom representative was quoting the
interpretation made at the time of the USSR representative's speech, the wording of which differs slightly from
the official translation which appears in this recori:1.

question de droit, et il a ajoute que des
declarations contradictoires ont ete presentees,
tant sur les donnees de fait que sur les points de
droit. A mon avis, le point de droit qui est en jeu
est la regIe posee par la Clonvention de La Haye
qui declare illegal le fait de poser des mines sans
avertissement1 • L'accusation que nous portons
contre le Gouvernement albanais est qu'un nouveau champ de mines a ete recemment pose sans
avertissement, soit par le Gouvernement albanais
lui-meme, soit de connivence avec lui. Je n'ai
entendu ici personne contester qu'il soit illegal de
poser un champ de mines sans avertissement. Je
ne crois pas qu'il y ait la moindre divergence de
vues a ce sujet.
Or, comme vous l'avez dit il Y a un instant,
Monsieur le President, les representants ici presents ant le droit de rectifier des donnees de fait.
Permettez-moi de revenir sur une ou deux allegations faites aujourd'hui qui, a man avis, sont
inexactes, en me rcservant naturellement le droit,
au cas Oll le Conseil deciderait de renvoyer la
question a une sous-commission, de faire de nouvelles declarations et de fournir de nouveaux renseignements. En premier lieu, le representant de
l'Union sovietique a repete aujourd'hui que "le
Gouvernement britannique a agi sans tenil'
compte de l'Article 33, paragraphe 1, de la
Charte des Nations Unies qui stipule que les
parties intcressees doivent s'efforcer de regIer
1eurs differends, avant tout par voie de ncgociation, etc. 211 Il a de plus indique que "le Gouvernement britannique a rejete la proposition
du Gouvernement albanais relative a l'etablissement d'une commission mixte chargee de l'€gler
la question du dragage des mines dans le detroit
dc Corfou 2 ." 11 a pade de la proposition albanaise comme si cette commission avait pour objct
de regler le differend dans son ensemble. Mais
cette commission n'avait qu'une seule tache:
determiner quelle partie de la mer doh Ctre
considcree comme constituant le chenal ouvcrt
a la navigation. C'est ce qu'ont demande les
Albanais.
Dans la declaration de l'autre jour, j'ai dit que
mon Gouvernement trouvait cette proposition
absolument incomprehensible. Les limites du
chenal ,etaient parfaitement connues et l'etaient
notamment de tous les Gouvernements en
Europe. Depuis octobre 1935, trentc exemplaires du "Bulletin des voies navigables en
Mediterranee" ont ete envoycs par l'Organisation internationale des voies navigab1es au
Ministere des Travaux publics a Tirana. Par
consequent, il n'y avait pas lieu de Creel' une
commission chargee de definir les limites da
chenal. Ce chenal est parfaitement connu et
d€limitc.
Je tiens a souligner id que le fait que cette
proposition ait ete rejetee pour le motif indique
ne prouve pas que, comme l'a declare le rcpre1 Cette regie est citee dans le discours prononce par
Sir Alexander Cadogan lors de la 107eme seance. Voir
P,·oces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, Demdeme
Annee, No 15.
• Le representant du Royaume-Uni cite l'interpretation
faite lors du discours du representant de l'URSS, et dont
le texte est legerement different de la traduction officiclle
figurant dans ce proces-verbal.

385
"acted without taking into consideration Article
33 of the Charter". That accusation comes
rather strangely from the representative of the
Soviet Union. We wished to bring the matter
before the Council as soon as we could, but we
also felt that we had to pay attention to Article
33 and we therefore entered into negotiations
with the Albanian Government to see whether
there was any possibility of an amicable settlement. The Albanian reply showed at once that
there was no hope of that at all, and we had no
alternative but to take the matter to the Council.
The other statement that the USSR representative made in his speech today was the following: "In this connexion it is necessary to point
out the important fact that the fairway in which
the British destroyers were damaged by mines
on 22 October 1946 does not coincide with the
fairway which was swept in 1944-1945 and
which is mentioned in the British note of 9 December 1946. Therefore the reference to the
sweeping of 1944-1945 contained in the above
British note is unfounded. m

The statement, that the fairway where the
destroyers were damaged does not coincide with
the swept fairway, is untrue; and this can be
proved to be so.
Further, with regard to the mine-sweeping he
declared: "The reference contained in the British note to the effect that the mine-sweeping
would be carried out in accordance with 'the
unanimous decision of the Central Mine Clearance Board' is refuted by the Board's resolution
of 14 November 1946, in which it was stated
that the mine-sweeping was carried out 'not on
the instructions of the Board and without its
sanction' )).1

sentant de l'URSS, nous ayons agi sans tenir
compte de l'Article 33 de la Charte. Le representant de l'Union sovietique est mal venu a
porter pareille accusation. Nous desirions, en
fait, saisir le Conseil de l'affaire des que possible
mais nous savions qu'il fallait tenir compte d~
cet Article 33 et nous avons donc entame des
negociations avec le Gouvernement albanais
pour rechercher s'il y avait une possibilite de
reglement amiable. La reponse de l'Albanie a
montre immediatement qu'il ne fallait pas y
compter, et il ne nous restait donc plus qu'a
soumettre la question au Conseil.
J e voudrais relever un second point dans la
declaration prononcee aujourd'hui par le representant de I'URSS. Ce representant s'est exprime en ces termes: "A cet egard, il est necessaire de faire ressortir le fait important que le
chenal dans lequel les contre-torpilleurs britanniques ont ete endommages par des mines, le
22 octobre 1946, n'est pas le meme que celui
qui a ete drague dans la periode 1944-1945 et
dont il est question dans la note britannique du
9 decembre 1946. En consequence, la reference
au dragage de 1944-1945, contenue dans la
not britannique, ne se justifie pas!'''
Il est inexact que le chenal ou les contretorpilleurs ont ete endommages ne soit pas le
meme que le chenal drague, et nous pourrions
le prouver.
Parlant ensuite du dragage des mines, il declare: "L'assertion contenue dans la note ·britannique, selon laquelle le dragage des mines
serait entrepris conformement a la decision unanime du Bureau central de deminage, est refutee par la resolution adoptee par le Bureau le
14 novembre 1946, qui precisait que le dragage
des mines a ete entrepris /sans instructions du
Bureau et sans son approbation1 ."

I think both the Polish and the Albanian
representative have also repeated that charge,
that the mine-sweeping was carried out without
any unanimous decision of the Board. I am
afraid this is a rather complicated story, and it
will take me a few minutes to explain it. Perhaps
I had better read-I hope I am not being indiscreet for I do not know if it has ever been
published-the actual text of the decision of
the Central Board, of 1 November. Paragraph 1:
"The Board considers that the North Corfu
Channel should be re-swept at a favourable opportunity." Paragraph 2: "The Board is unable
to express any further opinion in this matter,
which is an issue outside the scope of this Board."
That was the unanimous decision 'taken on 1
November. So far as I can understand it, the
records are not extremely clear. Some reference
to the decision of 1 November appeared in an
organ of, I think, the British press, and attention
was drawn to this fact at a meeting of the Central Board on 14 November. I think it was

Je crois que le representant de la Pologne et
le representant de l'Albanie ont tous deux repete
cette accusation, a savoir que le dragage des
mines aete entrepris sans decision unanime du
Conseil. Je crois qu'il s'agit la d'une histoire
assez compliquee et il me faudra quelques
minutes pour l'expliquer. Il vaudrait peut-etre
mieux que je donne lecture-j'espere ne pas
commettre d'indiscretions, car je ne sais pas si
elle a ete rendue publique-du texte meme de
la decision du Bureau central en date du 1er novembre. Le paragraphe premier est le suivant:
"Le Bureau estime que la partie nord du detroit
de Corfou devrait etre draguee a nouveau a la
premiere occasion favorable". Paragraphe 2:
"Le Bureau n'est pas en mesure de formuler
d'autre opinion sur cette question qui ne releve
pas de sa competence". Telle est la decision qui
a ete prise a l'unanimite le 1er novembre. A
ma connaissance, les proces-verbaux ne sont pas
extremement clairs. Il est question de cette decision du 1er novembre dans un organe de la
presse britannique, je crois, et on a attire l'atten-

The U~ited Kingdom representative was quoting the
at the time of the USSR representatIve's speec~ the wording of which differs slightly
from the nfficml translation which appears in this record.

1 Le representant du Royaume-Uni cite I'interpretation
faite lors du discours du representant de l'URSS, et
dont le textc est legerement different de la traduction
officieIIe figurant dans ce proces-verbal.

•

I

mt~rpretatlOn made

386
raised by the USSR representative, but I am not
quite sure. A considerable discussion ensued.

tion sur ce fait a une seance du Bureau central
tenu~ le 14 novembre. J e crois que le question
a ete soulevee par le representant de l'URSS.
Je n'en suis pas tout a fait ce~tain. 11 en est
resulte une grande discussion.

An agreement was reached at that meeting, to
issue a press statement to the effect that the
sweeping of Albanian territorial waters had not
been carried out under the direction or auspices
of the Central Board. That agreement, while
representing the views of the members of the
Board during the meeting, was suspended within
an hour of the termination of the meeting by an
objection raised by the United States member
of the Board, and all members of the Board were
immediately informed. A meeting to reconsider
the decision of 14 November was summoned for
the next day. At the request of the USSR representative, this meeting was not held actually
for five days, and took place on 19 November.
In so far as there was agreement on 14 November-that is, agreement to issue a press statement-it was to deny the emphatic words regarding the direction and auspices of the Central
Board which were reported to have been used
by the British press. It was definitely not a reversal of the decision of 1 November, that the
channel should be swept. It had nothing to that
effect at all, and the reversal decided upon on
19 November was justified by the fact that the
proposed press statement would have given the
imptession of being a repudiation of the decision
of 1 November. The only operative decision was
that of 1 November, which was communicated
textually to the Allied Naval Commander-inChief, and that has never been reversed. It is
therefore incorrect to say that there was no decision in favour of sweeping the channel because
there was.

Un accord est intervenu a cette seance pour
publier un communique de presse precisant que
le dragage des eaux territoriales albanaises
n'avait pas ete entrepris sous la direction ou sous
les auspices du Bureau central. Bien que cet
accord representfi.t les vues des membres du
Bureau presents a cette seance, son application
fut suspendue une heure apres la cl6ture de la
seance, en raison d'une objection soulevee par
le representant des Etats-Unis au Conseil, et
tous les membres du Conseil en ant ete immediatement informes. Vne reunion fut convoquee
le lendemain pour remettre en question la decision du 14 novembre. Cette reunion n'a eu lieu,
en fait, que cinq jours plus tard, le 19 novembre,
a la demande du representant de l'URSS. On
etait tombe d'accord, le 14 novembre, pour
publier un communique de presse, dans le but
de dementir les termes trop categoriques employes par la presse britannique en ce qui
concerne les instructions et l'approbation du
Bureau central. L'accord du 14 novembre
n'avait nullement pour but de revenir sur la
decision du ler novembre, qui prevoyait le dragage du chenal. Rien n'a ete fait en ce sens et
le revirement decide le 19 novembre etait justifie par le fait que le communique de presse que
l'on se proposait de publier aurait donne l'impression qu'on revenait sur la decision du 1er novembre. La seule decision pratique a ete ceIle
du ler novembre qui a ete communiquee, textuellement au commandement en chef des forces
navales alliees et n'a jamais ete infirmee. 11 est
done inexact de dire que le dragage du chenal
n' a jamais ete decide, car il l' a ete.

Now the Polish representative made one or
two other statements. He said in the' first place
that there was only one fact which existed beyond doubt, and that was the loss which the
British Navy had suffered. I maintain that there
are certain other facts. He said that, for instance,
with respect to aeroplane flights over Albania,
there were simple denials on one side or the
other, but no evidence. But there was evidence.
The Albanians said flights had been made by
British three-engined aircraft marked PK 4. I
can prove-I can call witnesses, if necessarythat we have no three-engine aircraft there, and
no aeroplanes marked PK 4. It seems to have
been an invention of the Albanians.

Le representant de la Pologne a egalemem
fait une ou deux declarations. 11 a dit en premier lieu qu'un seul fait a ete pfouve, a savoir
que des contre-torpilleurs britanniques ont ete
coules. Je soutiens qu'il ya certains autres faits.
Il a dit, par exemple, qu'il n'y a, de part et
d'autre, en ce qui concerne les survols du territoire albanais, que de simples affirmationssans
preuves. 11 y a des preuves. Les Albanais ont
dit que des survols ont ete effectues par des
appareils britanniques trimoteurs, portant la
marque PK4. Je peux prouver-avec temoins
a l'appui, s'il le faut-que nous n'avons pas
d'appareils trimoteurs dans cette region, et que
nous n'avons pas d'avions portant la marque
PK4. C'est la, semble-toil, une pure invention
des Albanais.

The Polish representative-and, I think, the
Albanian representative-referred to an announcement by General Hodgson, and made
great play with that. He said that General
Hodgson had issued a warning that this Channel
could not be guaranteed free of mines. Well, a
warning of that kind after a sweep is normal
and technical. You can sweep mines, but you
cannot sweep up mines that may be on the sea

Le representant de la Pologne-et, sauf
erreur, aussi le representant de l'Albanie-a fait
etat d'une declaration du general Hodgson dont
il tire un grand parti. 11 a declare que le general
Hodgson avait publie un avis d'apres lequel on'
ne pouvait garantir que le detroit etait entierement demine. Techniquement parlant, it est
normal de publier un avis de ce genre apres un
dragage. On peut draguer des mines mais on

387
ne peut ramener en surface les mines reposant
sur le fond et il est tout a fait normal de prevenir les navires de ce danger. 11 se trouve toutefois que cet avertissement date de deux ans. On
ne peut en faire etat. Je parle, en ce 'moment,
de mines posees recemment, il y a six mois au
plus. Je sais que le representant de la Pologne
a prefere dedaigner les temoignages que j'ai soumis, qui etaient appuyes par des photographies
montrant l'etat dans lequel les mines ont ete
trouvees; i1 a decIaI'e que ceIa ne signifiait rien
et que l'etat des mines ne prouvait rien. Si mon
ami polonais eta it armateur, je crois qu'il saurait
tres bien qu'il faut faire periodiquement de gros
frais pour nettoyer la carene d'un navire. Or,
.les corps etrangers s'attachent aux mines tout
comrne aux navires.
Telles sont les observations que je voulais preThose are an the remarks I have to make, and
I apologize for taking up the time of the Council. senter. Je m'excuse d'avoir retenu aussi longtemps l'attention du Conseil.

bed, and it is quite normal to warn shipping of
th.at danger. But, as a matter of fact, that warning was issued two years ago. It is irrelevant.
What I am talking about now is mines laid
recently, at the mqst six months ago. I know
that the Polish representative chose to brush aside
the evidence I have submitted, supported by
photographs, of the state of the mines which were
found, saying there was nothing in it, and that
their state proved nothing. If my Polish friend
were a ship-owner, I think he would know well
enough that one has to make a very large outlay
at intervals to scrape a ship's bottom, and a mine
will collect as much as a ship will.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
If the representatives of China and the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, who have asked to
speak, do not insist on speaking today, we shall
hear them at our next meeting dealing with this
matter.
The meeting rose at 7 p.m.

Le PRESIDENT: Si les representants de la
Chine et de rUnion des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, qui ont demande la parole, n'insistent pas pour parler aujourd'hui, nous les entendrons lors de la prochaine seance que nous
consacrerons a cette question.
La seance est levee

a1g, heures.
