UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

st

MEETING:

30 MARCH

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

,, ... .. . .. .. .... . ,.. ... ... .,. .. I.. .. .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . . , , , . . , . , . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . m

1

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/14913) . . I , . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2341)

SlPV.2341

I

:

i

*a

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. , .) are normally published in
quarterly Sr~pplernents of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisians qf the SecLlrily Cormcil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2341st MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 30 March 1982, at 4.30 p.m.
Mrs. Jeane J. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America).

Pwsidvnt:

P/*l~,scnt: The representatives of the following States:
China. France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/23411

I.

Adoption of the agenda

2.

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Nicaragua to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General

2. The PRESIDENT:
1 should like to inform mcmbers of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of El Salvador, the German Democratic Republic,
Madagascar.
Sri Lanka and the
United Republic of Tanzania in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter nnd
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

(S/14913)

3.
Adoption of the agenda

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/14913)
I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at the previous meetings on this item [2335rh,
2-U7th tr/?d 233YfA mrtin,~s
1, I invite the representative of Nicaragua to take a place at the Council
table. I invite the representatives of Angola, Argentina, Cuba, Grenada, Honduras. India, Iran, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Mexico, Mozambique.
Nigeria,
Seychelles,
Viet Nam and Yugoslavia to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Mr.

de PINIGS
(Spain) fintr,.pretcrtion
,fbrm
Madam President, since my country is
speaking for the first time in public during your presidency, we should like to reiterate here what we have
already stated during our private meetings: that is. that
in the discharge of your responsibilities
you may rely
on the support of the Spanish delegation. It is rare that
we have the opportunity to have a distinguished lady
such as you presiding over our meetings. We should
like to wish you every success and, of course. the
courtesy due you and your rank as a Minister of the
Government of the United States and as a Permanent
Representative
of the Council and President of this
important body.
Sptrnish):

4. I should also like to express thanks for the skill
demonstrated
by the representative
of the United
Kingdom, my friend Sir Anthony Parsons, and for his
work in the Council. We are very sort-y that he will
soon be leaving us. His country is a rich one. whereas
my own is not so rich. It may be that the United Kingdom can afford the luxury of allowing a person of Sil
Anthony’s capability. ability and skill to retire. My
hope is that we shall soon see him at some other post
and entrusted with other political tasks, and that hc
will not be allowed to languish in tranquillity
and inactivity, but will rather be kept in the heart of the battle
--“at the cannon’s foot”. as we say in Castilianwhere his ability and skill merit his presence.
-5 * 1 should also like to reiterate my gratitude to the
Soviet Union for having presided over the Council

during the month preceding the United Kingdom’s
service. The truth is that the Security Council has not
been inactive, but, quite to the contrary,
has been
extremely busy. Nevertheless.
one of the most important characteristics
of the Council is that work silently
accomplished
in private meetings is often more effective than that done in public meetings. In any situation, however,
it is always necessary to air the problems that afflict the world, and that is why we are
meeting on this occasion.

nnd of those that in one way or another can lend theit
support, to resolve that situation of tension by peaceful means. Nothing should deter LIS. and we must base
ourselves
on the premise that through negotikltions
understanding
is always possible. We must reject solutions of force that, as history has demonstrated.
contain the seeds of their own failure. In a word. it is
through constant and patient dialogue that we c;~n
hope to achieve a formula for a solution acceptable to
all the parties concerned.

6. Upon the request of the Government
of Nicaragua, the Council is studying the situation affecting
that country and, in a broader context, the entire Central American region. In recent days, we have heard
the statement by the Co-ordinator
of the Governing
Junta of National
Reconstruction
of Nicaragua,
Mr. Ortega [2.?35th mc~i17g],
and the statement made
by the Council’s
President as the representative
of the
United States [ibid. 1, as well as those made by representatives
of other Governments,
all rightly concerned at the recent changes in the specific situations
of the countries of that region.

I I. In this connection-and
this is the third point
I should like to bring out-we
are aware of the efforts
of some Governments,
and especially that of Mexico,
to find formulas that may make it possible to reconcik
the various points of view in this dispute. In the present debate we have also had the opportunity to heal
the constructive
ideas of the Governments
of Ho&
duras [233&h meeting] and Panama [2_I.?&h /~icc~in~],
and particularly
the latter’s positive contributions
tcl
the search for a solution, which should be studied with
the greatest attention. Although, owing to the very
nature of the negotiations under way, our knowledge
of these formulas is necessarily
fragmentary,
what
we do know of them enables us to hope that it may
be possible to reach a common ground for a negotiated
solution that would eliminate the basic causes ofdestubilization,
which are none other than social imbnlantes, injustice and repression,
and to arrive at elements for an urgent solution, such as mutual guarantees
of non-aggression and the exclusion of the use or the
threat of use of force between neighbours.

7. The Government
of Spain has on previous occasions expressed its concern. which it shares with other
Governments.
at the deterioration
of the situation in
u part of the world with which it feels so closely united
by bonds of history, culture and shared aspirations,
My Government
regrets
that the development
of
events has pitted against each other or could lead to
confrontation
among countries to which we are linked
by what we hope will be ever-growing
co-operation
and friendship.

12. The Spanish Government wishes once again to
express its faith in the virtues of pluralistic democracy.
The stability of Central America turns upon the same
point as that of any other region in the world: on the
necessary base of popular support, without which it is
impossible to ensure social peace and respect fol
human rights.

8. On behalf of my Government,
I wish to state
clearly at this time the basic lines of OLII‘ stand with
regard to the problem now
being considered
by the
Council.
9. First. the Government
of Spain deems unacceptable any type of intervention
or interference
in the
internal affairs of States in violation of the sovereign
will of peoples. This is a basic principle of Spain’s
foreign policy, and one that we regard as a universally applicable norm. There can be no exceptions
to this principle,
for that would be tantamount
to
opening the way to a disintegration
of the vel-y foundwtions of international
order, The Government
of Spain,
therefore,
stands ready to condemn any attempt at
interference
in matters that are essentially
within the
domestic jurisdiction
of States. in accordance
with
Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter of the United
Nations.

13. We hope that the discussion of this item in the
Council may contribute to clarifying the complexity
of the situations we are considering, and that it maYi
with the extension of the principle of democratic
government, the sense of freedom and the respect for
legitimate interests, as well as with the exclusion of
violence and interference, help to bring about an understanding that will dispel any shadow of threat to international peace and security.
14. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom):
First. Madam President, I should like to offer you my
most heartfelt congratulations on two counts. First,
1 congratulate you on your extremely skilful. elegant
and altogether human conduct of the presidency during
this rather difficult month. The way in which you
have done it has, I think, been a lesson to US ml’e
orthodox bureaucrats. Secondly, I congratulate YOUon
the fact that today is 30 March and only anothel
36 hours remain for you to be in this very difficult
position. It is, of course, an enormous pleasure to us

IO. Secondly, the Government
of Spain is prepared
to support and to do all in its power to achieve steps
towards peaceful solutions to this or uny other dispute.
It cannot be denied that II situation of tension exists
in the Central American region. But recognition of this
should leud immediately
to an unequivocal
determination, on the part both of the countries
concerned
2

to have in the Chair the representative of the United
States, a country with which our relationship goes
b&--l
think it is exactly 370 years now, and to which
we are linked by such close and eluborate ties, that
ilre both indefinable in words and inextricable in
pn1ctice.

Ortega Saavedra. His letter of 18 March to the Secretary-General
[S/149/31 stated that an invasion of
Nicaragua by the United States was imminent.
On
25 March (2.VSrlr nlc~t~tin,:~1, he claimed before the
Council that the United States was preparing in a
number of ways to intervene in the internal affairs of
Nicaragua. But the United States Government has declared quite categorically, before the Council and elsewhere, that it has no intention of invading Nicaragua.
The United States has responded favourably to suggestions that there should be direct talks with the Nicaraguans, and I am sure that it is only in such direct
t;llks that the necessary atmosphere of trust can be
created for the two countries to I-c-establish a relntionship based on friendship and co-operation.

IS, I should like also to express my very warm thanks
to all those members of the Council and non-Council
members who have been so kind as to say nice things
about my presidency last month. Having been absent
from New York, I read those tributes with great gratification.
16. I was particularly touched by the tribute just paid
to me by my old friend Jaime de PiniCs. If he is right
that my retirement is going to be postponed and that
I shall have another diplomatic
post to fill, I think
that the excitement and interest involved in that will
actually outweigh my longing for the more vegetative
life of retirement, which I have desired now for ovet
40 years.

21. My delegation believes that all of the countries
in the region must abide by the principle of non-interference. We are concerned by reports that some of
them may be supporting violence and subversion in
the territory of their neighbours. Any such activities
must be halted if peace is to be established. We are
also concerned at the military build-up in some parts
of the region, where resources are so sorely needed
for development programmes. The increases currently
planned for the Nicaraguan armed forces, for example,
seem to go well beyond any defence needs that country might have. We call on all the peoples of the region
to reject violence as the means of achieving theil
social and political objectives. The death toll from the
past four years in Central America has reached horrific
levels. This week’s issue of the magazine T/7() Eu~nmoist
reports that since 1978 a total of 90,000 people
have died in Nicaragua. El Salvador and Guatemala.
three countries with a combined population of 1.5million. That is nearly one person in every 150. losses
comparable to those sustained by my own country in
the whole of the Second World War.

17. My delegation has listened to the succession of
speakers in this debate with great interest. Despite
appearances to the contrary, there is common ground
amongst them, particularly amongst those most closely
involved in the problems of the Central American
region, There seems to be a clear wish for peaceful
solutions. There appears to be a common desire for,
to quote a number of speakers, negotiation and COoperation rather than confrontation.
IS. However, I have to admit that my delegation
does not view the arrival of this issue in the Council
with enthusiasm. This is not because problems in the
region do not exist: they clearly do. This is not becaL!se we are not concerned about these problems:
though geographically distant from Central America,
we are concerned about problems that afflict States in
the region, with which we have a long history of friendship and co-operation, More important, we are concerned as a responsible member of the international
community.
and as a member of this council, about
tension, instability or conflict, wherever these occur.

22, There is a crying need for vision and statesmanship in the region; there is a need for restraint: there is
21 need for the protagonists to understand better the
legitimate and genuine concerns of their adversaries
and to break out of the circle of charge and countercharge. We appeal to all of them to look beyond the
conflicts of their recent history, to leave behind the
misery nnd trauma of the past few years. and to work
together in exploiting the resources of the region fol
the benefit of all their peoples.

19. What we question is whether the airing the issues
:Ire being given in the Council will help to promote
peaceful solutions. Many of the charges which have
been levelled in the Council are more extravagant
than any available evidence could conceivably SUStain. Above all, there seems to be a need not for
rhetoric in this Council but for negotiations between
the main parties concerned. We support the previous
speakers who have called on the parties to meet and
pursue their discussions wherever this is likely to be
most fruitful. This might be on a bilateral or regional
basis. or in co-operation with other States in the
region; it is not for the Council to specify which.

23. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): There is no need to
state that there is universal agreement that a tragic and
very explosive situation prevails in many parts of Central America and the Caribbean region. That consensus
of profound concern is rooted in objective as well as
by profuse bloodsubjective factors, exemplified
jetting, suffering, insecurity and deprivation over the
years ,-indeed,
over the decades. The boiling-point
bus now been reached. I do not believe that anyone
of goodwill, of whatever persuasion or ideology. can
ignore or overlook such 21bleak situntion. which can
never be resolved by anything other than peaceful and
fur-sighted means.

20. I now turn to the main allegation of the Co-ordinator of the Governing Junta of Nicaragua,, Mr. Daniel
3

24. Jordan is deeply concerned about the events in
the region for many reasons. First, as a loyal Member
of this world body, Jordan is inherently and inescapably committed
to abide by the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations,
which specifically
mandate non-interference
in the internal affairs of
sovereign, independent States either by overt or by
covert means, the settlement of disputes by peaceful
means, and respect for the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of every State.

they should be heeded, inasmuch as the States of
Central America and of the Caribbean are the nextdoor neighbours of the United States. But this is all
the more reason why a super-Power can afford to seek,
and is in a position to do all in its power to join in. a
dialogue and negotiations towards an understanding.
30. Nicaragua.
as well as the United States. has
expressed its willingness to do so. Let us all hope that
this will take place with the utmost expedition. Indeed.
it is already under way, directly and indirectly. There
can never be a military solution to what are fundamentally socio-economic issues as well as respect for
human rights and dignity, no matter from where violations may emanate,

25. No country in the world has any entitlement to
create other countries in its own image, no matter how
much more advanced it may be in consequence of historicaI evolution and development.
The peoples and
States of every region must be afforded the opportunity
to run their own affairs, learning in the process and discovering by trial and error the most appropriate system
for their own salvation. They might commit mistakes
along the way, but the world was not created in one
day. I do not know how long it took the “big bang”
to take place, but at least the world was not created
in one day.

3 I. If Israel, which is oceans away, is receiving
close to $3 billion per annum, surely a next-dool
neighbour, in the backyard of the United States, has
no less an entitlement to assistance. Other countries in
the world should also make their contribution, and
I am not excluding any region. If this had been done
courageously and on a massive scale, then we probably would not be meeting today to debate this seemingly -and
I emphasize “seemingly’‘-intractable
situation in Nicaragua and in other countries in Central America and the Caribbean. This is our hope and
our prayer.

26. Secondly, Jordan is deeply concerned over the
rapidly deteriorating situation in the region because of
its precious historical Spanish-heritage
link and the
sizable communities
from our region-indeed,
from
our country-which
have been there since the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and for whose welfare
as loyal citizens of their new countries Jordan has the
most sincere sentiments and hopes. We are proud that
their loyalty is solely to the country of their choice.

32. Let us iurn a potential nightmare, to which we
are subjected day and night in the mass media-in the
newspapers, the headlines-into
a glorious dream of
good-neighbourly
relations, prosperity and a zone of
permanent tranquillity.

27. Thirdly, Jordan, as a member of the Council,
must necessarily be deeply concerned with regional
and international
peace and security. It cannot be
simply parochial. This solemn obligation
devolves
upon Jordan as one of the members of the extensive
continent of Asia as well as a member of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries,
whose principal
objective is to lessen international
tensions wherever
and whenever they may arise and to express its views
with judicious and unprejudiced candour.

33. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative
of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
34. Mr. KOMATINA
(Yugoslavia): Madam, at the
outset I should like to congratulate you on your assumption of the high post of President of the Council
for the month of March. We are convinced that your
academic background, which gives you a broad perception of world problems, together with the experience that you have gained in your responsible function in the United Nations, will contribute to the
successful outcome of the consideration of the important problem currently on the agenda of the Council.

28. My delegation
has listened with the utmost
attention to the complaint presented to the Council by
the Co-ordinator
of the Junta Governing
Council,
Mr. Daniel Ortega Saavedra. in which he enumerated
covert acts of sabotage by mercenaries and threats
of indirect intervention.
in particular by the ousted
and discredited Somoza fiefdom rule which the world
has universally condemned because of its unbridled
and ruthless selfishness, exploitation
and oppression, Nicaragua has the right and the duty basically
to alter a previously inhuman and intolerable situation,
unhindered by fears of force or threats of force and in
a manner compatible with its own declared aspirations,
in the course of ousting a repressive rCgime.

3.5. At the same time, I should like to express WI’
to your predecessor, the President fol
appreciation
the month of February. Sir Anthony Parsons, whose
skill and experience greatly contributed to the work
of the Council.
36. The Council has met to consider the tense situation in Central America. full of different kinds of conflict stemming from the long internal and external
subjugation of the peoples of the countries in that
region. This has generated deep internal contradictions. the solution of which the people have this time
taken into their own hands.

29. Jordan has also listened to the serious misgivings
expressed by the chief of mission of the United States;
4

37. The situation prevailing in Central America and
in the Caribbean represents an anachronism in an era
when the aspiration of peoples to emancipation,
to
the right to decide freely on their destiny, has become
the predominant characteristic of contemporary development in the world. We are today witnessing eve]
stronger expressions of irrepressible strivings not only
by peoples still under colonial rule and foreign domination und occupation, but also by all other peoples
still living in the bondage of the past and of poverty.
to create ;I society that will truly respond to their needs.
Such an aspiration is evident in all parts of the world
and is the moving force of humanity’s progress.

be. any principle
in international
relations which
supersedes the right of every country to be the decisive and only arbiter of its internal system. way of life
and path of development. No reasons can be accepted
21s,justifications for the imposition of foreign will and
given models of socio-political
systems. regardless of
the strategic, political. ideological or any other kind
of cause for which they may be claimed. As long as
such a practice and such behaviour exist in international relations. there will be no lasting peace or
stability-either
in Central America or elsewhere.
42. The policy of non-alignment,
which was born in
the struggle for the affirmation
of such principles.
stands for the elimination
of such behaviour in international
relations.
Therefore.
Yugoslavia.
which
consistently adheres to the principles of non-nlignment, cannot remain silent when the freedom and independence of any country are threatened or infringed
upon.

38. The revolutionary changes in Nicaragua are the
direct outcome of the struggle of its people to overcome the injustices of the past and to create a society
in which all strata of the population will live in freedom
and in creative effort towards the establishment of
equitable relations.
39. The present division of the world into blocs leads
to continuous rivalry under various pretexts and
causes increased tension, first of all in the regions of
direct bloc confrontations,
often distorting the char-’
acter of the problems whose origins are embedded in
the authentic aspiration of peoples to change the conditions of their lives. Such a bipolar concept of the
world is frequently the starting-point for claims to the
right to intervene, whereby the global rivalry of bloc
interests prevails over the inalienable right of peoples
of various regions to self-determination,
independence
and equitable participation in international
relations.
This often leads to the suppression of indigenous and
authentic social processes in various parts of the
world. Sovereign rights of countries and peoples are
violated, their freedom and territorial integrity are
threatened and new hotbeds of crisis are created,
jeopardizing peace and security in the world.

43. We consider the request of Nicaragua for the
convening of a meeting of the Council to be in w~01x1ante with the Charter of the United Nations and the
need for the United Nations to deal with such problems. Therefore Nicaragua. like any other country,
has the right to turn to the organ which under the
Charter has the primary responsibility
for the muintenance of peace and security. The objective of the
Organization
must be the alleviation of the situation
through a search for a peaceful solution of the current
problems in Central America.
44. The first and indispensable step in that direction
is, we firmly believe, recognition of the necessity of
avoiding ;L further deterioration
and of assuring that
all directly concerned factors-above
all those that
could possibly contribute to the solution of the situntion in the region-demonstrate
a full sense of responsibility, utmost restraint and realism in their behaviour.

40. The situation in Central America as well as in the
Caribbean region has become ever more exacerbated.
We cannot but be concerned at the intensified violence, a whole series of conflicts, L’OLI~Sd’ktrrt, interference in internal affairs. the use of mercenaries,
threats of military intervention and enormous IOSS of
human life and material damage. There is no doubt
that the consequences of such developments could
bring about ;L wider conflict which would jeopardize
the sovereignty and freedom of the countries of that
region, with broader implications for the international
situation as a whole.

45. It is obvious that the only possible way to find
lasting and comprehensive
solutions in the interest
of both the countries of the region and wider stabilizution is through negotiations.
political dialogue and
the settlement of all problems and conflicts by instruments of peace, in order to establish conditions under
which every country and every people can freely
develop their social and national being.
46. In that context. we consider that the positive
programme
presented by the President of Mexico,
Mr. Lcjpez Portillo,
undoubtedly
constitutes ;I very
constructive contribution to the efforts to find a peaceful settlement, His proposals are based on perception
of the red causes of the crisis and on the search fol
realistic ways of solving it with full recognition of
every authentic interest.

41. Proceeding from the well-known principles and
Policy of Yugoslavia. we have always stressed the need
for strict adherence to the principles of non-interference in the intcrnul nffairs of States, respect for the
independence,
sovereignty and territorial
integrity
of alI countries. and the inadmissibility
of all forms of
Pressure, threats or use of force against sovereign
countries. irrespective of their proponents and under
whatever pretexts. For us there is not, nor can there

47. It is important that the proposals of the President of Mexico huve received broad international
support both in the region and outside it. It is also of
5

great significance thut they come from a country of
the region whose commitment
to peace and friendly
relations with all countries has been widely recognized. It is particuktrly
encouraging
that these proposals have been supported by the countries of the
region thut are most directly involved, particularly
Nicaragua itself,

They have been embodied in the very first two AI.titles of the Charter of the United Nations and elahorated in subsequent documents of the Organization.
in the charters of regional organizntions and in the
declarations of the non-aligned. The absence of a rccitation of those principles does not mean in dimunition
of our adherence to them. We thought it preferable to
focus attention on the question that has brought this
Council into session.

48. The reulitics of the region are both simple and
complex. They are simple since countries and peoples
have the right to free themselves from underdevelopment and social inequality:
they are complex beGILIW
of the involvement
of factors whose negative
impact can be overcome only through genuinely nonaligned action in defence of the right of every country. regardless of its geographical
position, to free
development.
Here as anywhere else, consistent
adherence to the principles and objectives of nonalignment offers the only lasting solution to the crisis.

55. At the very outset may I say that the representations that are now before the Council, irrespective
of their source, are matters which the Council does
halve the jurisdiction to entertain, examine and pronounce upon. My delegation can see no doubt OI
ambiguity
in this regard, because whatever other
arrangements there might be, bilateral or regional, fot
the peaceful settlement of disputes, no Member State
of the United Nations can be expected to forgo its
right to have recourse to the Charter and to this Council, which is its executive and enforcing authority.

49. We expect the Council to act in accordance
with its responsibilities
and to respond to the gravity
of the situation by adopting a decision which will
generate conditions for ;I peaceful solution of all the
problems.

56. The promptness with which you, Madam President, convened the Council over representations involving your own country and the hearing which is
being given them are both a recognition of this right
of Member States and a tribute to the great tradition
of democracy for which the United States is known,

50, The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Sri Lankn. 1 invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make a statement.

57. Nicaragua’s contention before this Council has
been that there is an imminent threat to its territorial
integrity from the United States. As evidence of that.
Nicaragua has cited a number of actions that have
taken place or have been initiated in its neighborhood
which, while being publicized in the media, have gone
uncontradicted. However, we have heard you, Madam
President, in your capacity as the representative of
the United States assure this Council that there is no
basis for this charge and that the United States Government has repeatedly stated that it has no intention
of invading Nicaragua and has indicated its willingness
to negotiate with Nicaragua.

s1. Mr. FONSEKA
(Sri Lanka): Madam President,
may I extend to you my congratulations
and good
wishes on your assumption of the presidency for the
month of March. We are confident that under YOUI
able guidance the Council will bring to a satisfactory
conclusion the matter that is the subject of its present
deliberations.
52. May I also express my delegation’s
appreciation to the representative of the United Kingdom, Sir
Anthony Parsons, for the valuable services he gave
during his presidency of the Council in February. I am
certain that all his colleagues on the Council share the
sentiment I should like to express: delight at knowing
that the vegclative life for which he has been yearning
must for the present continue to remain an aspiration.

58. At the same time, the Head of the Nicaraguiln
Government
spoke of what we have also iearned
from the media: that there has been a series of meetings
between the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico
and his counterpart, the United States Secretary of
State, at which proposals made by both sides have
received their active consideration.
The Head of
the Government
of Nicaragua
has acknowledged
these proposals as an encouraging element. These
exchanges have been confirmed to the Council by the
representative
of Mexico who spoke last Friday,
26 March [237t/1 ~~?ccdtingl. Since then. what awaits
some finality is a date for the commencement of those
negotiations.

53. The Council is engaged in considering the representations made by the Head of the Nicaraguan Government. Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra. about
a serious situation confronting his country. The Council has heard you, Madam President, in your capacity
as the representative of the United States, responding
to those representations.
The Council has also heard
the views of other representatives,
both from the
region and beyond. There has scarcely been any
dispute thut the issue before the Council constitutes
;I threat to stability in Central America which, if escalated. would have implications
for international
peace and security.

59. For our part, we shall support any initiative that
defuses the situation and expedites negotiations,
Such negotiations
will, we believe, reassure both
Nicaragua and the United States, as well as the other
countries in the Central American region, that there

54. There has hardly been ;I debate in this Council
at which speaker after speaker has not recalled the
principles which should govern inter-State relations.
6

has done: the reason is that he already knows my
delegation’s attitude towards him. However. I urn confidcnt that the reprt‘scnt:ltive
of the United Kingdom
will convey my delegation’s sentiments to him.

will be ;I mutual and reciprocal

ciples embodied
where.

application of the prinin the Charter and elaborated else-

60. Pending the commencement
of these negotiations. we would urge that all the States involved respond to the repeatedly expressed hopes of the international community
that both in their words and
actions they will exercise the greatest degree of restraint. We believe that, having come this far, OUI
common objectives would be better served by avoidance of mutual recrimination
which detracts from.
rather than contributes to, understanding. It is in this
same spirit that we ask that we avoid any attempt
to pass judgement on the charges and counter-charges
that have been heard.

66. The Council continues to meet today in rcsponsr
to the request made by the Government of Nicar:\gua.
which has drawn the Council’s attention to the worsening security situation in Nicaraguu and in the Central American region as ;I whole. It is clear from the
statements which have been made so far and also from
the documents that have been made avuilnble to us
since the debate started last Thursday that there is
tension in the Central American region and that that
tension is likely to escalate if the present trend is not
arrested soon.
67. Two years ago, the new realism had won out in
Nicaragua and Zimbabwe. It is true that neither society is a paradise: but equally true is the fact that
neither society represents :1 threat to any other State
or a triumph for any other State. Socialism anywhere
in the world, including Central America. especially
if it comes about by a popular movement or by democratic elections, is not a threat to anybody.

61.

In conclusion, may I say that in speaking at
these proceedings in the Council we have no wish to
condemn or revile any of the States involved in this
matter: nor are we motivated by a desire to internationalize what some see as being exclusively a regional
question. It has been brought before the Council because there has been no solution forthcoming from
bilateral or regional forums, which in turn has led to
11 renewal of tensions. If the Council’s attention L’esuits in a reduction of those tensions and apprehensions and ensures the commencement of negotiations.
the time and effort it has expended will be worth
while.

68. The Government and people of Nicurnguu would
like to devote all their energies to the reconstruction
of their country. because they inherited enormous
economic problems after the downfall of the Somoza
like
rigime. In any case, why should a Government
the present one in Nicaragua which sets as its priorities health cart. literacy, land reform and equality of
opportunity
be an automatic
“enemy”,
and why
should a dictatorship of the right that exercises powel
be
on behalf of a few land-owners and industrialists
an automatic “friend”‘? Th e people of Nicaragua want
to see their political revolution matched by economic
development of their country.

62. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Benin and Zambia in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.

69. It is thus not surprising thnt the Government
and the people of Nicaragua view with great concern
any measure of insecurity affecting their country, from
nny quarter. That was made clear before this Council
;lt its meeting on 25 March [23.Vth nl~~cJti/zg). when
the Co-ordinator
of the Governing Junta of National
Reconstruction
of Nicaragua,
Commander
Daniel
Qrtegu, expressed his Government’s
fervent clcsire
for peace in order to reconstruct the country. The
Government and the people of Znmbia shiue the concern and desire of Nicaragua.

63. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the r-epresentative of Zambia. I invite him to take a place ut
the Council table and to make his statement.
64. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): On behalf of my delegation I wish to congratulate you, Madam, on you1
assumption of the office of President for the month
of March. I am confident that you will preside over
the Council’s deliberations with success.

70, We share their concern because WC know that
in any tense situation there cannot he normal WOnomic ilctivity. The basic social. economic and othcl
needs of the people cannot be adequately met because
the resources are expended on meeting security
requirements.
We have experienced. and WC arc still
in the southern
experiencing,
a similar situation
African region. where the ~/prrrthc,id rCgime of South
Afric;\ causes insecurity und is constantly violating
the sovereignty and independence
of independent
African States in the urea.

65. I should like also to express my delegation’s
appreciation to Sir Anthony Parsons of the United
Kingdom for the successful manner in which he discharged his responsibilities as President of the Council last month, Of course Sir Anthony is aware that
I shall not eulogize him iis the representative of Spain
7

We share Nicaragua’s
desire for peace because
71.
Zambia believes that the Government
and the people
of Nic:mlgurt
have an important
contribution
to make
towards
the development
of the Central
American
region. They can effectively
do so only if they feel
secure within
their
borders.
Nicaragua’s
contribution would be good not only for its people and for
those in the Central
American
region
but also fat
us all.

Council.
which bears the main responsibility
for the
weighty
task of maintaining
international
peace and
security.
will see. in the calm. thoughtful
and respunsible statement
made by Mr. Daniel Ortega the moving
appeal of the people of Nicaragua
which. in the fi\ce
of tile sinister
designs of internntionul
imperialism.
are crying out to the world their desire to live in peace
and their will to remain sole masters of their destiny.
77. This appeal. this cry. is voiced not only by the
people
of Nicaragua
01’ the peoples
of El Sulvudor,
Gulltemul;\.
Grenada or Cuba: it is the appeal and the
cry also of the peoples of Latin America,
Africn, Asi:
and the Middle
East which,
because they have re.
solved to construct
in full liberty a dignified
and prosperous
society
where the odious policy of exploitation of man by man will be outlawed
and where the
rank weeds bequeathed
by centuries
of colonial
and
neocolonial
exploitation.
racism and c/pc/rr/lrid
will be
uprooted,
are experiencing
daily threats to their sovereignty
and independence.

72.
Furthermore.
it is my delegation’s
strong view
that nations of the world should try as much BS passible to separate
global
military
confrontation
from
internal
political
struggles
in the third world,
since
these struggles do not pose threats to anyone,
whatever the outcome.
The inevitability
of radical change
in desperate countries
on the brink of starvation
or in
the grip of murderous
Governments
ought to be obvious. but it by no means follows
that revolutionary
Governments
are either
anti-this-State
or pro-thatState.
73.
It is gratifying
to note that the people
of Nicaragua rind their Government
do not desire confrontation: mther. they desire peace and tranquillity
in the
area. Their I-equest for the Council
to discuss
the
matter must be seen in this light. There is need, therefore. for nil those concerned
to seize this opportunity
und sit down to serious negotiations
so that a solution
can be found to the dangerous
situation
that has developed in Central
America.
All peace efforts need the
support
and the encouragement
of the Council
and,
indeed, of the entire international
community.

78. These are the cries of the peoples of Viet Nam,
Laos. and People’s
Kampuchea:
the cries of the peoples of Angola.
Mozambique,
Zambia,
Zimbabwe,
Botswhma.
Seychelles,
Guinea
and Sao Tome
and
Principe,
which are living under the constant
threat
of aggression.
It is also the cry of my people, the hardworking
and militant
people of my country.
the People’s Republic
of Benin, against which.
it should be
recalled,
international
imperialism,
bent
on vengeance.
on Sunday,
I6 January
1977, perpetrated
TV
vile and craven
act of aggression
for colonial
reconquest.

74. The Council,
in the discharge
of its primary
responsibility
for the maintenance
of international
peace and security.
as provided
for under the Chartel
of the United Nations.
should ensure that the Chartel
principles
are upheld
by all Member
States of the
United Nations.
My Government
believes
that strict
adherence
by Member
St:ltes to Charter
principles
of
non-intervention
in the internal
affairs of States, the
non-use
of force in the settlement
of disputes
and
respect for the sovereignty
and territorial
integrity
of
Sliltes would greatly
contribute
towards
the estnblishment
and strengthening
of friendly
relations
between St:ltes. It is incumbent
upon all of us as Member States of the United
Nations
to honour
the principles of the Charter.
and I hope that the Council
will
reaffirm that position
at the conclusion
of this debate
on Niculagua.

79.
In other words. the delegation
of Benin. perhaps
better than anyone else, understands
and shares the
grave concern
of all peace-loving
peoples
over the
threat and the hostile acts which
have been visited
upon the people and the Government
of Nicnrngua.
80.
And I should like here, on behalf of the Benin
People’s
Revolutionary
Party and its National
Executive Council,
to convey to Comrade
Daniel Ortega and,
through
him, to the Junta of the Government
of National Reconstruction
and the people of Nicaragua.
the
fraterniil
and militant
greetings
of the revolution~~ry
people of Benin. They are waging the same liberation
struggle
against the retrograde
forces of reaction
and
international
imperialism.
81, The frequency
of all these counterrevolutionXY
assaults which they have unjustly
fallen victim to and
the increasingly
savage escalation
which characterizes
the criminal
acts of aggression
of international
imperialism
and its lackeys and local agents are living
proof of the fierce determination
of the anti-popukll
forces to put down at all costs the noble and heroic
national
liberation
struggle
embarked
upon by I)LII
peoples
in ~1 world where there is growing
evidence of
the unshakable
determination
of peoples:
to fight to
the last ditch
against
colonialism,
neocolonialism,
racism and rrpc/rt/l(id
in order to be freed completely

7s. The PRESIDENT:
resentative
the Council

The next speaker
is the repof Benin.
I invite him to take a place at
table and to make his statement.

76. Mr.
SOGLO
(Benin)
fi/ztrlprcJttrtio/I
,fhu77
F~rrr~c*/?J: Madam
President.
since you have allowed
me to speak-for
the first time-before
the representiltives
of the States of this Council.
over which
you
are presiding
with such skill.
I should
like to
express my gn\titude
and the great honour
it does me.
I should ulso like to express
my hope-indeed.
my
conviction-that
under
your
skilful
guidance
the

8
I

and once and for all from the yoke of foreign domination; to eliminate foreign capitalist monopolies in
order fully to control their national resources; to overthrow minority reactionary rigimes in the pay of
international imperialism so as to set up progressively
and in full sovereignty people’s democratic rkgimes
that will yield more prosperity and happiness for their
peoples.

appropriate organ in this world Organization,
rather
than a regional organization which has ostracized certain States in that part of the world, to make an effective contribution,
with all the credibility and authority lent it by its universality,
to settling the existing
problems in Central America and the Caribbean by
peaceful means of negotiation, Ready for revolution;
the struggle continues!

82. Thus, by managing to throw off the chains of a
brutal and inhuman system on 19 July 1979, the Sandinist Front for the National Liberation of Nicaragua
is held to be guilty of the same crime as that committed by the people of Benin on 26 October 1972,
when they decided fully to exercise their legitimate
national and sovereign rights over their land and
national wealth.

88. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of El
Salvador has asked to speak in exercise of the right of
reply, I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
89.

(El Salvador) (intrrPresident, I should
like first of all to congratulate you on beha1.F of my
Government for the very efficient and very fair way
in which you are guiding the work of the Council.

83. Those who have built their might on genocide,
on slavery and the forced labour of black people, on
theft and pillage of the wealth of the third-world countries, find it difficult to understand-even
inconceivable-that
erstwhile oppressed peoples should
today seek to participate on an equal and sovereign
footing in the onward march of history.

ROSALES

RIVERA

90. I should like to thank the members of the Council for having granted me the honour of addressing it.
I am speaking in order to reply to two delegations that
rashly affirmed that the elections on 28 March in El
Salvador were going to be a “predictable
failure”, 01
at least expressed doubts about the way in which
those elections would be conducted.

84, The bitter lessons of the intervention in Viet Nam
or the Bay of Pigs have been too swiftly forgotten.
The universally accepted principles of the peaceful
settlement of disputes among States are made subordinate to gun-boat diplomacy. The sacrosanct principle of the political independence and sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States has been cynically flouted.
The principle of non-intervention
and non-interference in the internal affairs of other States is shamefully infringed. The inalienable right of all peoples to
choose their own political, economic and social system is blithely disregarded.

91. The answer to those ill-intentioned
words is the
eloquent way in which the Salvadoran people, without
distinction,
turned out in force throughout our national territory to deposit their votes, thus exercising
the sacred and inalienable right of all peoples to choose
their own leaders. This consultation with the people
was aimed at electing a Constituent Assembly which
will have the power not only to redraft the new political Constitution
of the Republic but also to lay new
foundations for government.
The civic holiday that
characterized the electoral event and the sacrifice
which it represented in other areas where citizens
,were threatened by armed extreme leftist elements
wishing to boycott the process before and during the
day of the elections, in spite of the fact that leaders
of the Revolutionary
Democratic Front had affirmed
that no shots would be fired against the voters, confirmed that those political leaders have no weight in
the decisions of the alliance that they have formed.
That popular demonstration
bears eloquent witness
to a resounding “No” to violence, the banner of those
who, being a minority as has been clearly demonstrated, wish to impose through the force of arms thei]
individual
will on the overwhelming
majority will of
‘the Salvadoran people.

85. These fundamental principles are none other than
those contained in the Charter of the United Nations
and in pertinent resolutions of the Organization. They
should be re&irmed
by the Council, for the benefit
of those who should be the last to play fast and loose
with them, in order to avert the dangers and perils
which threaten not only Nicaragua but all the States
of Central America and the Caribbean.
86. The desire frequently expressed by Commander
Daniel Ortega to improve relations with the United
States on the basis of mutual respect and the unconditional recognition of the right of Nicaragua to selfdetermination;
his oft-reiterated desire immediately to
undertake frank and open negotiations with the Government of the United States; the initiatives and proPOsds made by the Mexican President, Jo& L6pez
Portillo, on 21 February at Managua: all these are
measures which are likely to promote dCtente, stability and progress in Central America and the Caribbean.
87. The threat is a serious one: it endangers international peace and security, and it is up to the most
.

Mr.

prctrrtion .fi’otn Sprmish): Madam

92. The present Government offered a change in the
archaic and unjust socio-economic
system, and made
that change. This sociological process is irreversible,
but another corner-stone of democratic life in any
legitimate society is the right of social components to
decide through the voting process the future of the
country. Therefore, the people alone is the subject and
the ultimate recipient of its own destiny.
9

.

93. The commitment
undertaken to the people to
conduct an open, free and democratic electoral process in which all ideological trends could participate,
a commitment
which led to elections for that highest
representative body, the Constituent Assembly, on the
28th of this month, has been fulfilled before the eyes
of the entire world: the information media, television
networks, observers from many countries, and political personalities from all over the world have reported
on the process. We can state with pride that for the
first time in SO years there have been genuinely free
elections in El Salvador, elections in which there was
a massive turn-out of voters and the significance of
which was crucial at this historical and political moment in the country. The political aphorism that in any
democratic body power emanates from the people has
become fact in El Salvador. The idea of a republican
representative State is fully consonant with the expression of the will of the people, unassailably and unequivocally expressed at the polling booths. The people
has expressed with its verdict a clear-cut rejection of
terrorist violence and has clearly borne witness to the
fact that the democratic fibre exists at its very heart.
Respect for the will of the people means, therefore.
that there must be no endangering of the national sovereignty or the powers that stem from it. Only through
the voting process is it possible to obtain a share of
power, and it is only by means of a clean, unpressured
vote that political
groups acquire representative
strength. Joint declarations by third countries can
never substitute for what is proper and essential to
the will of a people, to what constitutes its essence,
and is at the same time the conquest or legitimate recognition of the popular will.
94. For all those who believe in the path of dcmocracy and of peace, the doors of clean and democratic
disagreement will continue to open, and conscience
will decide whether they choose the rout.e of harmony
and participation
or the tortuous path of violence.
Would that other countries of Central America that
today boast of being democratic, pluralist and revolutionary might follow the civic example provided by
the Salvadoran people on the 28th of this month, when,
in an unprecedented demonstration
of civic virtue and
even at the cost of great personal sacrifice, it expressed
its sovereign will through its vote. But El Salvador
will not attempt to impose its model on anyone.
95. Since I assume that the members of this Council
have read the letter of 25 March, distributed under the
symbol S/14927, sent by the Government
of El Salvador through me to the Security Council, 1 shall not
repeat its contents; I shall merely repeat my Government’s position by referring to that letter. None the
less, 1 do wish to add, since El Salvador has been
mentioned in discussions, the following.

in Llnited

Nations.

New

York

98. Thirdly, the Salvadoran Government maintnius
and will continue to maintain relations of co-operation
of all types, based on the norms recognized by international law, by the Charter of the United Nations, by
the Charter of the Organization
of American States
and other international instruments, with the country
or countries that find this consistent with their own
interests.
99. Fourthly, El Salvador does not constitute a threat
or source of friction at the international level for any
country, nor has it ever violated the principle of nonintervention
in the internal affairs of other States in
the Central American region, much less of States distant from that region.
100. Fifthly, on the contrary, El Salvador has been
the victim of acts of intervention which took place
against the will of the Salvadoran Government and
which constitute aggressive behaviour; but in spite
of those interventionist
and aggressive acts against
our
sovereignty, in order to maintain friendly relations
with the countries that promote or implement those
acts we have asked that they put a halt to them, but
have not presented a formal complaint before the
competent international bodies.
101. Sixthly. if those interventionist
and aggressive
acts continue, El Salvador will be compelled to use its
right to bring into operation the machinery of the interAmerican regional system that it considers appropriate
in order to preserve its sovereignty and national
dignity.
102. El Salvador and its Government
alone wil1
decide on how that inalienable right should be exercised.

103. A few brief words in conclusion. The heartfelt
civic fervour which was demonstrated by the Salvadoran people last Sunday in the most adverse circumstances is a plebiscite in favour of democracy and
against totalitarianism.
This new stage in the history of
the country opens the path for the parliamentary process and the institutionalization
of political reform.
This humble people, simple but courageous, which
expressed its unequivocal mandate for peace and its
consequent
repudiation
of violence, must not be
frustrated in its exercise of the principle of self-determination.
104. To that people, which is the essence of the homeland, we pay a tribute from this rostrum-a
tribute
expressed in the first verses of our ‘national hymn:
“We hail the homeland, proud to call ourselves its
children.”

96. First of all, the problem of El Salvador is the
exclusive purview of the Salvadoran people, which
comes under its internal jurisdiction
and therefore is
subject to the provisions of Article 2, paragraph 7, of
the Charter of the United Nations,
Litho

97. Secondly, the problems of international
relations in the i&er-American
sphere should be solved
through the organs created by the regional system.

00300

xx-hnyXY-octlher

IYXY--2.O.r~
