IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

including the suggestion to establish a working group of
the Sixth Committee after one of the existing working
groups accomplishes its mandate;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session a report containing the comments and observations received pursuant
to paragraphs 1 and 2 above with a view to taking a final
decision on the procedure to be followed:
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the ítem entitled "Consideration of the
draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses".
101st plenary meeting
19 Decemher 1983

38/128.

Progressive development of the principies
and norms of international law relating to
the new international economic order

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, the General Assembly is called upon
to initiate studies and make recommendations for the purpose of encouraging the progressivc development of international law and its codification,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-Vl) of
1 May I 97 4, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September I 975 on
development and international economic co-operation
and 35/56 of 5 December 1980. the annex to which contains the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade.
Reca/ling its resolutions 341150 of I 7 December 1979
and 35/ 166 of 15 December 1980, cntitled "Consolidation
and progressive development of thc principies and norms
of international economic law relating in particular to thc
legal aspects of the new international economic order'",
and its resolutions 36/107 of 10 December 1981 and 37/
I 03 of 16 December 1982, entitled "Progressive development of the principies and norms of international law
relating to the new international economic order",
Taking note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General, 7 particularly of the progress report prepared by the United
Nations Institute for Training and Rescarch, 8 of the analytical papers and analysis of texts of relevant instruments, 9 prepared by the consultants and the Institute in
accordance with paragraph 4 of General Asscm bly resolution 37/103, ofthe views submittcd by States in response
to resolution 37 / 103 10 and of the report of the Panel of
Experts, 11
Taking note, in particular, ofthe recommendation ofthc
Panel of Experts that the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research should complete, in 1984, the analytical study on the progressi ve development of the principies and norms of intemational law relating to the new
international economic order, 12
Recognizing the need for a systematic and progressive
development of the principies and norms of international
law relating to the new intemational economic order.
l. Requests the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research to continue preparing the third and final
7 A/38/366 and Corr. l and 2 and Add_ 1
8 A/38/366 and Corr_ 1 and 2. sen_ 11
9see UNITAR/DS/6.
10 A/38/366/ Add.1.

---- ---~------------

265

phase of the analytical study and to complete it in time for
the Secretary-Gcneral to submit it to thc General Assembly at its thirty-ninth scssion:
2. A/so requests the United Nations Institute for Training and Research to prepare a summary and an outline of
the study in order to facilitate debate on the ítem;
3. Urges Member States to submit. not later than 31
May 1984, relevant information with respect to the study,
including proposals conceming further action to be taken
on the final study to be submitted to the General Assembly
at its thirty-ninth sess1on:
4. Requests the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law. the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization. the regional commissions, the
United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations
and other relevant intergovernmental and nongovemmental organizations active in this field, as determined by the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research, to submit relevant information and to cooperate fully with the lnstitute in the implementation of
the present resolution;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session a report on
the final study prepared by the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research for its consideration, on a priority basis, under the ítem entitled "Progressive development of the principies and norms of international law
relating to the new international economic order" to be
included in the provisional agenda of that session.
lO 1st plenary meeting
19 Decemher I 983

38/129.

United Nations Programme of Assistance in
the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and
Wider Appreciation of lnternational Law

The General Assemhly,
Notmg with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation oflntemational Law 1.i and
the recommendations made to the Secretary-General by
the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of Intemational Law, which
are contained in that report,
Considering that intemational law should occupy an
appropriatc place in the teaching of legal disciplines at ali
uni versities,
Noting with appreciation the efforts made by States at
the bilateral leve! to provide assistance in the teaching and
study of international law,
Convinced, nevertheless. that States and international
organizations and institutions should be encouraged to
give further support to the Programme and to increase
their activities to promote the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of intemational law. in particular those acti vities which are of special benefit to persons
from developing countries.
Recallin1; that. in the conduct of the Programme. it is
desirable to use as far as possible the resources and facili11 A 38/366 and ( ·orr. l and 2. anncx
12 /hui.. para. 23
11 A lS1546_

266

General Assembly--Thirty-eighth Session

ties made available by Member States. intemational
organizations and others.
Noting that, following the request for voluntary contributions made to Member States by the Assembly in its resolution 36/ 108 of I O December 1981, the fund of the
Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Fellowship on the Law of
the Sea has not yet become operational and consequently
no fellowships have yet been awarded.
l. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out in
1984 and 1985 the activities specified in his report. including the provision of:
(a) A mínimum of fifteen fellowships each in 1984 and
1985, at the request of Govemments of developing countries;
(b) A mínimum of one scholarship each in 1984 and
1985 under the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Fellowship
on the Law ofthe Sea to be financed by the voluntary contributions specifically made for the Fellowship as a result
of the requests set out in paragraphs 9 and I O below;
(e) Assistance in the form of a travel grant for one participant from each developing country who will be invited
to the regional courses to be organized in 1984 and 1985;
and to finance the above activities from provisions in the
regular budget and also from voluntary financia! contributions which would be received as a result of the requests
set out in paragraphs 9 and l O below;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his constructive efforts to promote training and assistance in intemational law within the framework of the
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of Intemational Law in 1982 and 1983;
3. Expresses its appreciativn to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for its
participation in the Programme, in particular for the
efforts made to support the teaching of intemational Iaw;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research for its participation in
the Programme, particularly in the organization of
regional courses and in the conduct of the fellowship progra~me in_ intemational law sponsored jointly by the
Umted Nat10ns and the Institute:
5. Also expresses its appreciation to the States which
provided host facilities for the regional training and
refresher courses held in 1982 and 1983;
6. Further expresses its appreciation to the Hague
Academy of lntemational Law for the valuable contributions it has made to the Programme by enabling intemational law fellows under the sponsorship of the United
Nations and the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research to attend its annual intemational law courses and
by providing facilities for seminars organized by the Institute in conjunction with the Academy courses, and for its
constructive efforts in organizing the regional training and
refresher courses held at Tunis in 1982;
7. Notes with appreciation the contributions made by
the Hague Academy of lntemational Law to the teaching,
study, dissemination and wider appreciation of intemational law and calls upon Member States and interested
organizations to give favourable consideration to the
appeal of the Academy for a continuation of and, if possible, an increase in their financia! contributions in order to
enable the Academy to go on with the above-mentioned
activities;
14 At its 104th ))lenary _meeting, on 20 December 1983. the General
Assembl)'. entrusted 11s_ Pres1dent w1th the task of appointing the memhers of
the Adv1sory Comm1ttee. The membership of the Committec will br
announced as soon as the appointments have bccn rnadc.
15 Resolution 2625 (XXV). anncx.

8. Urges ali Govemments to encourage the inclusion of
courses on intemational law in the programmes of legal
studies offered at institutions of higher lcaming;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to publicize the Programme and to invite periodically Member
States, universities. philanthropic foundations and other
interested national and intemational institutions and
organizations. as well as individuals. lo make voluntary
contributions towards the financing of the Programme or
otherwise to assist in its implcmentation and possible
cxpansion;
1O. Reitera/es 11s request to Membcr Sta tes and to
interested organizations and individuals to makc voluntary contributions towards the financing ofthe Programmc
and expresses its appreciation to thosc Mcmbcr States that
have made voluntary contributions for this purpose;
11. Requests thc Secretary-Gcneral to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implemcntation of the Programme during 1984 and 1985 and. following consultations with thc Advisory Committcc on thc
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching.
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of Intcmational Law, to submit recommendations regarding the cxecution of the Programme in subsequent years;
12. Decides to appoint thirtcen Mcmbcr Statcs as
members of thc Advisory Committee on thc United
Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study.
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of Intcrnational
Law. for a period of four years beginning on I January
1984; 14
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of Intemational Law".
10/st plcnary meeting

/ () Deccmhcr J983

38/130.

Measures to prevent international terrorism
which endangers or takes innocent human
lives or jeopardizes fundamental freedoms
and study of the underlying causes of those
forms of terrorism and acts of violence
which lie in misery, frustration, grievance
and despair and which cause sorne people to
sacrifice human lives, including their own,
in an attempt to effect radical changes

The General Asscmbll'.
Recalling its resolutions 3034 (XXVII) of 18 Deccmbcr
1972, 31/102 of IS December 1976, 32/147 of 16 December 1977, 34/145 of 17 December 1979 and 36/109 of JO
December 1981,
. Recalling a/so the Declaration on Principies of Intemat1onal Law conceming Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter or
the United Nations, 15 thc Declaration on the Strcngthening of Intemational Security. 16 the Definition of Aggress1on 17 and the Protocols Additional to thc Gencva Conventions of 1949, ix
Deeply concerncd about continuing acts of intemational
terrorism which take a toll of innocent human lives,
Convinced of the importancc of intemational cooperation for dealing with acts of international tcrrorism.
ló Resolution 1734 (X XV).
1'

Resolution 3314 (X XIX). annex.

18 A/J2il44. annexes I and 11.
