S/PV.8589

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8589th meeting

Tuesday, 30 July 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Mogashoa
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-23539 (E)
*1923539*

S/PV.8589

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

the attack. She had saved her baby sister, who has now
been discharged from Dr. Abrash’s hospital.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; and Ms. Susannah Sirkin, Director
for International Policy and Partnerships, Physicians
for Human Rights.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Last Friday, 26 July, I spoke via
a video link to Dr. Mohammed Abrash, a surgeon at
Idlib Central Hospital. Trained in Aleppo, he has been
a physician for 28 years, and since 2011 he has been in
Idlib. Dr. Abrash told me he is afraid. He has a room
at the top of the building. He says the lower floors
and basement are the safest places, so that is where
the patients are. A few days before I spoke to him, a
bomb landing 50 metres away blew out all the glass and
windows of his room. A day or so before that, another
bomb had hit a gynaecological facility 200 metres
away. Dr. Abrash’s hospital is deconflicted under the
United Nations system. Everyone knows where it is.
I spoke to Dr. Abrash because two days prior, on
24 July, three young sisters were taken to his hospital
by emergency ambulance. Their house had been hit by
a bomb dropped by a war plane. Dalia, the 9-year-old,
lay on the bed behind Dr. Abrash, as we spoke while he
tended to her.
Everyone has seen the pictures of her two younger
sisters, because they were printed on the front pages of
newspapers all across the world — Rawan, a 3-year-old,
buried by rubble, covered in dust and clinging on to the
T-shirt of her baby sister, Tuka, in a desperate effort to
stop her from falling to her death off the precipice that
the bomb had made of the upper storeys of their home.
Their mother, just 25-years old, and 5-year-old sister
Reham were killed in the attack. Rawan, that brave
little three-year-old, died of her injuries the day after
2/21

30/07/2019

For more than 90 days now, bombing and shelling
by the Government of Syria, backed by the Russian
Federation, has produced carnage in the so-called
de-escalation zone of Idlib. On 26 July, the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights identified
at least 450 civilians who had been killed since late
April, including more than 100 in the past two weeks
alone. We have seen continued reports of attacks killing
civilians, including further attacks in the town of those
little girls. Many hundreds more have been injured.
More than 440,000 have been displaced. Dozens of
civilians have also been killed or injured as a result
of shelling by Security Council listed terrorist group
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and the non-State armed groups
associated with it.
My office and I have now briefed Council members
on the situation seven times since 29 April when the
current onslaught started. Members will all have seen
the statement of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights issued on 26 July. Let me quote from it.
“Despite repeated calls by the United Nations
to respect the principle of precaution and distinction
in their conduct of hostilities, this latest relentless
campaign of air strikes by the Government and
its allies has continued to hit medical facilities,
schools and other civilian infrastructure, such as
markets and bakeries. These are civilian objects,
and it seems highly unlikely, given the persistent
pattern of such attacks, that they are all being hit
by accident.”
She emphasized,
“Intentional attacks against civilians are war
crimes, and those who have ordered them or
carried them out are criminally responsible for
their actions”.
I last briefed the Council at its closed meeting
on 18 July. I said then that I would respond today to
a number of questions that Council members asked
me, first, about the information sources we use to
determine what is going on; secondly, an update on the
de-confliction system; thirdly, about the letter sent to
you, Mr. President, and the Secretary General on 16 July
by the Permanent Representative of Syria (S/2019/572)
and, fourthly, whether we would pass on to the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
19-23539

30/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8589

to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011 and the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic the information we hold about attacks
on civilians and civilian objects.

Members’ money as a basis for financing them. Some
Members hire other independent bodies to double
check that what the delivery organizations tell them is
true. Those organizations have staff totalling thousands
of people, most of them Syrians, and many of them like
Dr. Abrash. Members can talk to them, too, just as I
have done.

First, with regard to information sources, many
Council members provide us with information, which
we study carefully. Information that I provide to the
Council is information that is from direct or verified
sources, triangulated, reviewed and confirmed. Our
teams on the ground tell us what they see. Our partners,
with whom we have worked sometimes for many years
and with whom many of the countries represented
here in the Council also work, provide information.
Testimony comes from those closest to the source who
are assessed by the United Nations as credible. We use
imagery, including satellite imagery, or geotagged and
time stamped pictures of medical facilities that have
been analysed and assessed by the United Nations. We
see videos of explosions, destroyed buildings, scorched
bodies and screaming children. We triangulate all
our information.

Then, of course, there is the testimony of the people
of Idlib themselves. I spoke yesterday by video link to
two groups of displaced people in different parts of
Idlib. I asked them what was happening where they
were. They said, “We are being bombed every day by
the Russians and the regime”. I asked them what they
needed. They said, “We just want the bombing to stop”.

There are many other sources of information. Media
organizations report extensively on what is happening.
Members have all seen their reports and footage. There
is a great deal of satellite imagery illustrating the impact
of the fighting on towns and villages in southern Idlib
over the past three months. If, for example, we compare
satellite photos of Kafr Nabutha, a town in southern
Idlib, taken at the end of April and then again at the
end of June, which is what analysts at the Operational
Satellite Applications Programme of the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research — the United
Nations body with capacity in that area — have done,
what we see is a level of destruction consistent with a
bombing campaign aimed at a scorched-earth policy.
Almost every building was destroyed in a three-month
period. Such satellite imagery has shown 17 entire
villages almost completely destroyed and emptied.
Then there is information from organizations
delivering humanitarian assistance, including United
Nations agencies, such as UNICEF, the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Population Fund
and others, and the many humanitarian partners they
finance. Those organizations are all financed by the
Member States on a voluntary basis. Members require
them to provide information on how they are spending

“Do you feel safe?”
“No. We are afraid.”
“What is your hope for the future?”
“We just want to live in peace.”
We know there are people from the Security Council
listed terrorist group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham in Idlib
who make daily life there difficult for ordinary people,
but we also know that estimates suggest there are about
100 civilians for every fighter. Do the answers from
the people I spoke to yesterday sound like the words
of terrorists? I do not think so, especially because the
people to whom I spoke ranged in age from 8 years old
to 12 years old. They are children — little boys and
girls. There are a million children just like them in that
part of Syria, many forced to flee with their families
from elsewhere in the country. I asked if any of them
go to school. “No. It is not safe. They hit our schools.”
There is no shortage of information about Idlib. We
all know exactly what has been happening over the past
three months.
Secondly, I was again asked for information
on the de-confliction system. Through that system,
humanitarian agencies, mainly non-governmental
organizations provide information to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to identify static
civilian locations or humanitarian movements. The
United Nations then shares the coordinates with the
international coalition forces, the Republic of Turkey
and the Russian Federation.
When there is an incident on a de-conflicted site,
we notify the parties and request that an investigation be
undertaken. As I said to the Council last week, whether

19-235393/21

S/PV.8589

The situation in the Middle East

30/07/2019

the information provided through the de-confliction
system is being used by the parties to protect civilian
facilities from attack or to target them for attack is an
extremely important question. As members know, I
have asked the Russian Federation for clarification of
what it does with the information we give it. I continue
to hope to receive further clarification.

and Dalia, to be treated by Dr. Abrash. The United
Nations continues to support organizations operating
ambulance systems in Idlib. As members are aware,
medical facilities and transports are entitled to special
protection under international humanitarian law,
requiring steps to spare them even if they are being
used for military purposes.

We have also sent notes verbales to parties to the
conflict in respect of six different attacks in north-west
Syria in 2019 in relation to de-conflicted locations or
movements. While we have received a formal response
from Turkey, we have not received one from the
Russian Federation.

Fourthly, on the question of whether we will pass on
relevant information that we hold to the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 and the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, in order to
support investigations into the potential violations we
are seeing, the answer is yes, we will do that, subject
only to the proviso that those giving us sensitive
information consent to it being shared.

In spite of our efforts to work with parties to the
conflict to prevent attacks on civilian objects and
humanitarian workers, I have come to the conclusion
that, in the current environment, de-confliction is not
proving to be effective in helping to protect those who
utilize the system. I have asked my team to meet again
with the humanitarian organizations that would like
their activities to be de-conflicted to update them on
the current situation and again determine whether or
not we should continue to provide information to the
parties on new sites or humanitarian movements.
Thirdly, I have now seen the letter of 16 July
from the Syrian authorities (see S/2019/572), which I
was asked about when I last briefed the Council (see
S/PV.8561). As members know, the letter says that 119
hospitals in Idlib governorate have been taken over by
terrorist groups, no longer serve their original purpose
and cannot be considered hospitals, health-care centres
or even civilian objects.
Few of the facilities referred to in the letter are
named, but Maarat Al-Numan Hospital is among those
that are. According to the United Nations-led health
cluster, it has been functioning as a hospital since
December 2014. The current operating partner, helped
by the United Nations, has been supporting the hospital
since April 2015, and it is still supporting it today.
Another facility that is named is Ibn Sina Hospital,
where the basement floors were rehabilitated with
funds from the United Nations and other donors and
which has been in operation since April.
The letter also says that there is no ambulance
network left in existence in Idlib. Members of the
Council have all in recent days seen footage and photos
of ambulances in Idlib, including one used to take those
three little girls I talked about earlier, Rawan, Tuka
4/21

Between January and May this year, more
than 6 million people in Syria were provided with
humanitarian assistance with financing provided by
donors to allow us to implement the United Nations
humanitarian response plan. An average of 2.9 million
people were given some form of help every month. The
humanitarian response plan is needs-based. Eightyfive per cent of all assistance provided reached areas
of high-severity need — areas where multiple, urgent
needs have converged and require a systematic and
sustained response. There is also a response in areas of
lower severity, including for life-saving activities, such
as vaccination campaigns and nutrition screening.
Some recent reports have claimed that United
Nations humanitarian assistance reaches only those in
areas not controlled by the Government. That is untrue.
In fact, most of those reached with United Nations
assistance are in areas controlled by the Government of
Syria. Access to the estimated 1.1 million people in need
living in areas that changed control in 2018 continues to
improve. In southern Syria, for example, half a million
people in need have been reached at least once with
some form of humanitarian assistance over the past five
months, despite increased insecurity in recent months.
Significant gaps in access still remain across many
of those areas. Eastern Ghouta, for example, remains
heavily dependent upon water trucking more than a
year after changes in control. I also remain concerned
for those 24,000 people remaining in Rukban, and I call
again for access to reach them.
19-23539

30/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

In the north-east, 734,000 people also receive
assistance on a monthly basis, including 70,000 civilians
currently in Al-Hol camp. Humanitarian agencies have
significantly scaled up their response to meet needs
in Al-Hol, opening three field hospitals in the past
month. I nevertheless remain extremely concerned
about people there. I call again on all Member States
to repatriate their civilians and take all the necessary
steps to avoid statelessness. I also call on all Member
States to de-escalate growing tensions along the borders
in the north-east and avoid any actions that might cause
further displacement, casualties and suffering.
In addition, humanitarian agencies have
significantly scaled up cross-border operations
authorized under resolution 2165 (2014), particularly
for those who have fled to the northern part of Idlib
during the current fighting. This month, cross-border
aid aims to reach some 1.2 million people with food
assistance. In the current circumstances, there is no
other way to provide adequate support to the 3 million
civilians who are in the area.
I am not sure that I have told the Council anything
today that is different from what all those present
already know. Many people have told the Council what
is happening in Idlib for many months now. I asked Dr.
Abrash and the children that I spoke to yesterday if they
had a message for the Council. They do, and it is “[w]e
are afraid. Please help us. Make it stop.”
The Security Council has ignored all the previous
pleas it has heard. The Council knows what is
happening, and it has done nothing for 90 days, as the
carnage continues in front of its eyes. Are members of
the Council again going to shrug their shoulders, as
Michelle Bachelet said? Or are they going to listen to
the children of Idlib, and do something about it?
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I now give the floor Ms. Sirkin.
Ms. Sirkin: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to address the Security Council regarding
attacks on health facilities and personnel and their
impact on civilians in Syria. Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock just provided insight into the horrific
humanitarian crisis taking place in north-west Syria as
we speak here today.
My name is Susannah Sirkin, and I am the Director
of Policy at Physicians for Human Rights, which is

S/PV. 8589

an international non-governmental organization that
brings the expertise of science and medicine to the
defence of human rights. Our researchers at Physicians
for Human Rights have been rigorously corroborating,
documenting and reporting on violations in the Syrian
conflict for the past eight years.
Since the beginning of the conflict in Syria, the
ongoing assault on health-care facilities and personnel
has been a defining factor and a deliberate, inhumane
and illegal strategy of war. When hospitals are
destroyed, the loss is far greater than the buildings.
When medical workers are killed, the human toll is
not just their lives but also the exponential number of
people who suffer and die without medical treatment.
Our years of meticulously gathered documentation
lay bare the blatant disregard for civilian life in the
Syria conflict, as revealed by the Syrian Government’s
repeated attacks since 2011 on health facilities and
personnel. The numbers I am about to share with the
Council are an undercounting, because we apply a
conservative methodology.
From March 2011 through July 2019, Physicians for
Human Rights corroborated 578 attacks on at least 350
separate facilities, and we documented the killing of
890 medical personnel. Five hundred and twenty one of
those attacks — 91 per cent — were perpetrated by the
Syrian Government and allied forces — 297 by Syrian
Government forces and 224 by either Russian or Syrian
Government forces.
Each of the attacks on a functioning health
facility is a war crime. Taken together, those assaults
constitute crimes against humanity. The widespread
and systematic destruction of health facilities and the
killing of hundreds of doctors, nurses, pharmacists
and paramedics by Syria and its Russian allies has the
apparent aim to break people’s spirits, as one Syrian
doctor put it in the powerful new documentary For
Sama, which I hope all members of the Council will
have the chance to see, if they have not already.
That repeated tactic of terror turns places of safety
and life into danger zones and death traps. For years,
the Secretary-General has routinely shared those data
with the Security Council. They have been publicized
to the world again and again. Yet, appallingly, those
crimes continue to be committed with utter impunity.
In Aleppo, Physicians for Human Rights has
documented 161 attacks on health-care facilities, with
54 in 2016 alone. Hospitals attacked then by Syria with

19-235395/21

S/PV.8589

The situation in the Middle East

its Russian allies forced tens of thousands of civilians
into flight and literally killed patients who were
stripped of life-saving care. And now, three years later,
the world is watching — silently — the same escalation
of brutality in Idlib and north-western Syria, which
could result in the worst humanitarian crisis of the
twenty-first Century.
On 29 April, as we just heard, the Syrian
Government and its Russian ally started their military
escalation targeting Idlib and northern Hamah. Since
then, Physicians for Human Rights has received reports
of 46 attacks on health-care facilities, and so far, using
its rigorous methodology, we have confirmed 16 of
them and are still counting.
From May to 15 July, the number of newly
internally displaced persons who are trapped in this socalled demilitarized area has reached close to 500,000,
bringing the total there to at least 1.3 million. There are
very likely more of them. Many of the families now in
Idlib have already been displaced — four, five or more
times — throughout the relentless waves of violence in
the Syrian conflict. People in Idlib today, as we speak,
have nowhere else to go.
Many of the health-care facilities in that area have
been forced out of service, but — shockingly — we
see that agreements coordinated by the United Nations
to notify all parties as to the locations of health-care
facilities, which are intended as a strategy to protect
them — as we just heard from Under-Secretary General
Lowcock — have been violated again and again. The
Syrian and Russian Governments know the exact
location of most health-care facilities, and yet they
continue targeting them.
The courageous remaining medical workers are
providing life-saving care while being bombed, and
doctors tell us that hospitals, which should be the
safest places in Idlib, are the exact opposite. They are
targets. At least 14 facilities have been hit, according
to the Syrian American Medical Society, despite
sharing their coordinates with belligerents through the
so-called deconfliction mechanism of Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), which,
we just heard, is failing.
Physicians for Human Rights has documented
attacks, for example, those of 10 July on the Saraqeb
Primay health-care centre and the Maarat Al-Numan
central hospital — which, as we just heard, has been
supported by the United Nations and continues to
6/21

30/07/2019

function as a hospital despite attacks. Both facilities
had shared their coordinates. Three surgical units were
attacked on the same day in early May. And the list
goes on.
In 2016 when the Council adopted resolution 2286
(2016), on protecting health care in conflict, thenSecretary-General Ban Ki-moon stated:
“[w]hen so-called surgical strikes end up hitting
surgical wards, something is deeply wrong;
“[e]ven wars have rules;
“[t]he Council and Member States must do more
than condemn such attacks. They must use every
ounce of influence to press parties to respect their
obligations” (S/PV.7685, p. 3).
The Council’s current collective inaction is a clear
derogation of its responsibility to protect. Governments
failed to heed the warnings of this criminal strategy of
war that has devastated all manner of infrastructure,
community and culture. Civilians in Syria have been
let down by the Security Council’s failure to act, by
individual Governments that were in positions to stop
the carnage, as well as — sadly — by United Nations
agencies hamstrung by rules that have enabled the
perpetrators to flout the most basic humanitarian
agreements with zero consequence.
We are calling on Syria and Russia to immediately
stop attacks on hospitals and other vital civilian
infrastructure. We are adding to the call of those
children. And we are calling on all parties to the
conflict to cease violence against civilians. We are
urging the Secretary-General to launch an immediate
investigation into attacks on health-care facilities
and personnel in Idlib, northern Hamah and western
Aleppo, and investigate the failure of the deconfliction
mechanism. All parties must cooperate fully and ensure
unimpeded access to investigators.
We call on all Governments, everyone in this
Chamber and people of conscience everywhere to do
everything in their power to end the slaughter and
protect the civilians cornered in Syria. The continued
failure of the Security Council to end impunity for
those crimes is a blight on the credibility of this organ
to carry out its core mandate. Continued inaction sends
a message of abandonment and erosion of humanitarian
law, not only to those in Syria but to all people subjected
to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
19-23539

30/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8589

I thank Council members for the opportunity
to address them today. I would like to add that we at
Physicians for Human Rights pay special tribute to
health professionals, to those still alive and providing
care under fire, to those who were forced to flee and to
all those who gave up their lives, for their bravery and
commitment to save lives.

directly targeted in the recent attacks, in accordance
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We also call on
the parties to the conflict to respect Security Council
resolutions pertaining to civilian infrastructure, in
particular resolutions 2286 (2016) and 2427 (2018), on
the protection of hospitals and schools, respectively.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Sirkin for her briefing.

We remind all parties that counter-terrorism
efforts cannot absolve them of their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including the
protection of civilians and the principles of distinction,
precaution and proportionality. We reiterate our call
for the sustained implementation of the ceasefire
arrangements of the Russia-Turkey memorandum of
understanding of September 2018. We also reiterate
our call for a nationwide cessation of hostilities, in
accordance with resolution 2401 (2018). Once again, we
reaffirm that there is no military solution to the conflict
in Syria.

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I deliver this statement on
behalf of the three co-penholders, namely, Belgium,
Germany and Kuwait.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock and Ms. Susannah Sirkin for their
briefings, as well as to express our gratitude, deep
respect and appreciation to all humanitarian and
medical workers throughout Syria, especially those in
the very challenging and dangerous environment of
north-western Syria.
We heard once again today from the United Nations
about the horrors that civilians are facing in northwestern Syria — an area that has faced an ongoing
military campaign for the past three months. According
to the United Nations, hundreds of people have been
killed as a result of the latest air strikes. Other reports
also state that more children have been killed in the
past four weeks in Idlib than in all of 2018.

We, the penholders, believe that the Council has a
responsibility towards the people of Syria, particularly
those living in and around Idlib. We call for the
protection of the 3 million civilians living in that area,
1 million of whom are children. That is why, time and
time again over the past three months, we have called
for meeting after meeting on the situation in northwestern Syria, and initiated several draft statements on
this military escalation and its humanitarian impact.
Unfortunately, the Council has not been able to unite
around such initiatives. Nevertheless, we will not tire.

The recent attacks on health-care facilities and
markets in Maarat Al-Numan resulting in the death
of many civilians are alarming. As co-penholders,
we strongly condemn those air strikes deliberately
targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure and
consequently severely impacting civilians’ lives and
the humanitarian response in north-western Syria.

We recall that the number of displaced persons in
north-western Syria has almost tripled since we, the
penholders, first called for a meeting in early May on
the impact of this military escalation. The number of
people displaced has risen from 176,000 people at that
time to 440,000 today. One cannot help but ponder
whether the inaction of the Council is partly to blame
for the dramatic increase in the number of displaced and
what, if anything, we could have done differently. That
is also why we will continue to draw attention to the
events unfolding in north-western Syria. The Council
cannot continue to stand by and watch Idlib turn into
the worst humanitarian catastrophe of the twenty-first
century, as Mr. Lowcock has warned us several times.
It is time we heard his call and acted upon it.

We reaffirm that all parties must take all necessary
measures to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure,
as well as humanitarian workers, who were also

The situation in the Rukban camp is desperate. The
United Nations and its partners must be able to provide
assistance to those remaining in the camp. Inhabitants

Hospitals, schools and markets have been
deliberately targeted and destroyed by air strikes. Much
of that civilian infrastructure was deconflicted, which
means that their coordinates were known to the parties.
They knew, and they know, what they are doing. Such
attacks on deconflicted civilian infrastructure are
simply unacceptable and have to stop immediately.

19-235397/21

S/PV.8589

The situation in the Middle East

should be able to make an informed choice on whether or
not to leave the camp in a voluntary, safe and dignified
manner. For those who are willing to leave the camp,
key protection standards must be in place. In the Al-Hol
camp, the situation remains deeply concerning for the
70,000 people there, 90 per cent of whom are women
and children facing protection concerns. Improved
humanitarian access is needed for the population of
the camp.
Syria and its people have witnessed some of the
most serious crimes defined under international law.
We echo the Secretary-General’s call in his statement
of 11 July that the perpetrators of serious violations
of international humanitarian law must be held
accountable. There can be no lasting peace in Syria
without justice and accountability. We stand firm in
our commitment to fighting impunity. In this context,
we renew our support for the work of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011.
With regard to the return of refugees, our position
remains unchanged. All returns must be safe, voluntary
and dignified.
Tens of thousands of Syrians remain detained,
missing or unaccounted for. Last month, the Council
adopted resolution 2474 (2019), the first resolution
of the Council on missing persons in armed conflict.
This resolution is particularly relevant to the situation
in Syria today. The families of those The situation in
the Middle East detained or missing deserve to know
the fate of their loved ones, and we call for tangible
progress on this issue.
As for humanitarian access, we would like to
emphasize that it must be provided in an unconditional,
safe, timely, unhindered and sustained manner. We
remind all parties to the conflict of resolution 2449
(2018), on humanitarian access and cross-border
assistance, which calls upon all parties to ensure
principled, sustained and improved humanitarian
assistance to Syria in 2019. It is high time for all parties
to the conflict to live up to this obligation and to do
more to ensure sustained quality access to all in need
throughout Syria.
Finally, we reiterate our full support for Special
Envoy Pedersen in his efforts to reach an inclusive
8/21

30/07/2019

and credible political solution in Syria on the basis
of resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). It will also be
conducive to a sustainable, long-term improvement of
the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States): The United
States condemns in the strongest possible terms the
escalation of the Al-Assad regime and the Russian
Federation’s military operations in north-west Syria,
which have had a devastating impact on Syrian
civilians, medical workers, humanitarians and civilian
infrastructure, with an increasingly deadly air and
ground assault.
There is no denying that the humanitarian situation
in Syria is growing more dangerous by the day. The
number of civilians killed and injured is rising, and
water facilities, schools and hospitals are targeted
by regime and Russian forces. Despite the fact that
the coordinates of these locations are shared with
the Russian Federation through the United Nations
deconfliction mechanism, specifically to prevent
them from being hit, we have just heard devastating
statistics from Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and
Ms. Serkin, reminding us all of the grim facts on the
ground that should compel us all to put an immediate
end to this violence.
Over 440,000 people have already been internally
displaced since the start of the offensive in April, and
the grim reality is that there is simply nowhere else for
the more than 3.5 million people in Idlib province to
run in order to escape the next airstrike. That fact is
well known to the Al-Assad regime and the Russian
air force.
For the past three months, the United States has
called on the Al-Assad regime and the Russian Federation
to immediately stop their military campaign and their
attacks on civilians and to cease military operations
in Idlib, consistent with the Sochi agreement signed
by Turkey and the Russian Federation in 2018. Similar
calls from other Council partners and dire warnings
from the Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and other
senior United Nations officials that an offensive in Idlib
would unleash the worst humanitarian crisis in Syria to
date have all gone unheeded and ignored by Damascus
and Moscow. On 22 July, it was with utter revulsion that
the United States heard reports of yet more air strikes
by the Al-Assad regime and the Russian air force on a
19-23539

30/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

market in the city of Maarat Al-Numan, in Idlib, which
killed at least 35 people and left little but rubble behind.
It is important that we be clear about the facts about
the violence in Idlib and northern Hama. Russia and the
Al-Assad regime are devastating civilian infrastructure
and hitting medical facilities. As the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights said in a statement on
26 July, these are civilian objects and it seems highly
unlikely, given the persistent pattern of such attacks,
that they are all being hit by accident. Indeed, when the
Al-Assad regime and Russia repeatedly attack hospitals
and other civilian objects — many of which, as the
parties have been informed in advance, are sheltering
vulnerable civilians — it is difficult to deny that the
sustained pattern of strikes on markets, hospitals and
bakeries is anything but a deliberate act.
The United States also condemns the killing and
maiming of humanitarian actors, such as ambulance
drivers, health workers and White Helmet volunteers
by the Al-Assad regime and its allies’ campaign. The
United States will not waver in our support for the
courageous work that White Helmets and all medical
workers and humanitarians do in Syria every day.
Doctors, nurses ambulance drivers and White Helmets
are not terrorists and deserve our protection. The
United States offers its condolences to the families,
friends and colleagues of the three ambulance workers
killed over the weekend and the four White Helmet
volunteers — Amir Al-Bunni, Anas al-Dyab, Mahmoud
Al-Ali and Zuhair Al-Rajou — recently killed as they
attempted to save victims of the air strikes. The United
States forcefully condemns those devastating impacts
on civilians in the strongest possible terms and calls for
an immediate end to ongoing hostilities. We urge the
Al-Assad regime and its allies to immediately return
to a ceasefire in the area and allow for unhindered
access to address the humanitarian disaster created by
the air strikes as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015) and
numerous other Security Council resolutions.
We have said it before and must say it again:
there is no military solution to this conflict. The
latest offensive on Idlib has gained the regime and its
allies nothing and serves only to further escalate and
destabilize the region. We appreciate the participation
of Susannah Sirkin from Physicians for Human Rights
in today’s briefing.
Accountability cannot be optional for the
perpetrators of violence in Syria, in particular the

S/PV. 8589

regime’s latest attacks, which have hit known health
facilities. The United States fully supports a full and
independent investigation into attacks that have hit
health facilities in north-west Syria and also continues
to encourage United Nations humanitarian agencies
to provide any data and information they have on
reported attacks on health facilities to the International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic as
well as to the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution
of Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, for further action and to
ensure that those actions are appropriately documented.
The United States is also deeply concerned by United
Nations reports that the military operations in northwest Syria are impeding the delivery of humanitarian
aid to 3 million civilians in Idlib governorate. Those
communities are deeply dependent upon United
Nations cross-border aid. The United States calls on all
Security Council members and our regional partners to
ensure that the United Nations has the ability to freely
implement cross-border aid deliveries throughout all
agreed border crossings, in accordance with resolution
2449 (2018). There is no substitute for the United Nations
cross-border operations, set forth in resolution 2449
(2018), through all four authorized border crossings,
and it is particularly important now, given that we are
witnessing a deteriorating humanitarian situation in
southern Syria.
The United States also remains gravely concerned
about the fate of the thousands of civilians in Rukban.
Although as many as 17,000 people have voluntarily
left the camp, according to United Nations estimates,
as many as 24,000 people remain there and have
systematically been denied aid because of bureaucratic
delays by the regime and the Russian Federation since
the last United Nations convoy reached the camp in
February. The United States also strongly urges the
Russian Federation to expedite and secure, on behalf
of the Al-Assad regime, all the necessary regime
approvals for a new United Nations assessment team
and aid convoy to Rukban immediately.
The United States affirms the right of the internally
displaced persons in Rukban to make their decisions to
leave the camp voluntarily. However, it is important to
recall that many who remain in Rukban are choosing
to stay in the most difficult of humanitarian conditions
because either they cannot afford to pay for their

19-235399/21

S/PV.8589

The situation in the Middle East

own transportation out of the camp or, as was noted
in the United Nations assessment in February, they
do not wish to return to areas under the control of the
Al-Assad regime out of fear of reprisal attacks, forced
conscriptions, despite Russian-brokered deals to the
contrary, and arbitrary detentions.
The plight of Syrian civilians arbitrarily detained
by the Al-Assad regime is one humanitarian issue that
is often overshadowed by the barbarity of the regime’s
military campaign in broad daylight, the continued
forced-starvation siege of Rukban and the ongoing
restrictions on United Nations access. There is both a
humanitarian and a political imperative for advancing
progress on improving transparency and access to
regime prisons and securing the release of those
Syrians arbitrarily detained by the regime, especially
women, children and the elderly. Progress on detainee
issues, as Special Envoy Geir Pedersen has said,
could be a confidence-building measure to generate
trust among the Syrian people, the Syrian-opposition
representatives and the Al-Assad regime that will
help create momentum towards a political solution.
Accordingly, in the coming weeks, the United States
intends to call for a Security Council briefing on the
topic of detainees and missing persons in Syria in order
to mobilize urgently needed action on this issue.
Finally, the reinvigoration of the political process
in line with the resolution 2254 (2015) must start
with a verifiable ceasefire across all of Syria, and in
particular in Idlib and northern Hama. Until then, the
United States will continue to apply pressure through
all available means in order to isolate the regime and
its allies.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank our two
briefers today, Mark Lowcock and Susannah Sirkin.
I think we all feel that it is deeply frustrating that
we come here month after month, but it is better that we
come than we do not come. However harrowing it is, it
is better that we hear what is happening in Idlib, than
we do not hear what is happening there, and however
difficult it is, it is better that than we let denial take
hold. Indeed, we would like to act, but the responsibility
for the fact that we do not act lies with just three States
Members of the United Nations, one of them a member
of the permanent five of the Security Council. What
is happening in Idlib makes a mockery of permanentfive responsibilities.
10/21

30/07/2019

Ahead of Astana, on 1 to 2 August, and with
last week’s political session cancelled, there is an
opportunity today to get at the facts and ensure that
crimes do not go unrecorded. We have heard from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and from Physicians for Human Rights
about carnage on the ground, communities turned to
rubble, children saving children and then dying in the
attempt — all breaches of international humanitarian
law — and High Commissioner for Human Rights
Bachelet has made clear that those criminally
responsible will be held accountable.
The Syrian and Russian units bombing Idlib ought
to pause at that prospect. It might not come today, but
justice will come. If I may borrow a very famous phrase
and use it in a different context, the arc of the moral
universe may be long, but it bends towards justice. The
units taking part in military action against hospitals
and medical facilities and personnel need to heed
that warning.
I have the number of questions today. I am used
to the questions not being answered, but I am going
to keep on asking them, because I think they go to the
heart of what is happening. I would like to know what
is being done by the protagonists, Syria and Russia,
to protect civilians on the ground, notably, children. I
would like to know how they know or claim to know
where the terrorists are, given that we heard from
OCHA that there are 100 civilians for every terrorist
fighter. And I would like to know how their forces go
about distinguishing between terrorists and civilians,
given the overwhelming number of civilians.
I would also like to know what part of international
humanitarian law they believe allows terrorists to
be attacked with no regard to those civilians. I have
read all the Geneva Conventions at the weekend and
I cannot find a single line in the Conventions or the
Protocol Additional thereto — by the way, Syria has
not ratified the Additional Protocol — that justifies
attacking civilians on the scale we are seeing in
Idlib to get at terrorists. I would like to know in
particular — you know, Mr. President, we had a
briefing from a Russian military general at the other
day (see S/PV.8561) — what the Russian and Syrian
military doctrines and rules of engagement have to say
about international humanitarian law and the principles
of proportionality, distinction and neutrality in respect
of Idlib. I would simply like to know what the Russian
and Syrian rules of engagement are. I would very happy
19-23539

30/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

to have the Russian general back if he can answer
those questions.
I would also like to know what is Russia’s and Syria’s
explanation as to why the deconfliction mechanism is
not working and why hospitals and facilities that have
given their coordinates are being hit. And I would
like to know how the Syrian authorities can claim that
these hospitals and facilities do not exist or have been
decommissioned when the United Nations, Physicians
for Human Rights and others have seen them and are
in touch with their doctors. One has to ask, who is
more likely to be believed, the United Nations or the
protagonists on the ground? I hope that we can actually
get some concrete answers today.
For the rest, I wanted to join those who so far
have called for an investigation into United Nations
de-conflicted sites. It is the utmost importance to
establish clearly the circumstances of the attacks
through a transparent and credible investigation. I
welcome what the Under-Secretary-General said about
the United Nations being able to give its information
to the two United Nations mechanisms already in
existence. I think that is very important.
I should also like to touch on the letter from
the Syrian Permanent Representative dated 16 July
(S/2019/572). Under international humanitarian law, just
because a hospital or clinic has been “decommissioned”
or “ransacked” does not mean it can be attacked with
impunity. I have said before that if, and it is a big if,
a hospital is being used as a military target, then the
Geneva Conventions, the ones that the Syrians have
ratified, require that warnings be given. No warnings
are being given. The Syrian Permanent Representative’s
letter admits to attacks on hospitals. It is hard to deny
that that is a war crime and deserves the utmost deep
investigation, so that those units responsible, those
military commanders responsible and the politicians
who give them their instructions can be brought
to justice.
A couple more words if I may. I agree with those
speakers who are concerned about Rukban. We appeal
to the authorities to let the convoys in. We also share
those sentiments about the political process. There
needs to be a credible and sustainable political process.
The constitutional committee is but one step; many
more steps need to be taken, and reconstruction
assistance from ourselves and our partners will not be
available in the absence of a credible political process.

S/PV. 8589

And in the absence of reconstruction, Syria cannot be
rehabilitated into the international community; I think
that is an important point.
Lastly, if I may, the Charter requires us to act to
save future generations from the scourge of war. What
part of that is not understood by Syria and Russia in
respect of Idlib today?
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his
briefing and also listened closely to the statement made
by Director Sirkin. China has been closely watching
the humanitarian developments in Syria and supports
the United Nations and all relevant parties in their
unremitting efforts to improve the situation in Syria.
The Syrian people yearn to see an end to the conflict
as soon as possible so that they can return to a country
of regained peace and order so as to rebuild their homes.
China would like to make the following observations.
First, there is a need to work together to seek
comprehensive and lasting solutions to the counterterrorism and humanitarian issues in north-western
Syria. Given the complex situation on the ground in
Idlib, the parties should engage in dialogue to reach
consensus. China supports Russia and Turkey in their
continued implementation of the memorandum of
understanding to realize de-confliction in Idlib. As
Idlib is experiencing rampant terrorist activity, the
international community should, in accordance with
the relevant Council resolutions and international law,
adopt a common standard in resolutely combating
terrorist groups. China supports the United Nations
and all relevant parties in continuing to scale up
humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in north-western Syria.
Secondly, we must tackle in an adequate manner
the humanitarian issues confronting all parts of Syria,
especially IDP camps. Al-Hol and Rukban camps are
facing humanitarian challenges owing to complex
causes. The military hostilities in north-eastern Syria
have led to the displacement of civilians, especially
women and children, and made Al-Hol what it is
today. Given the complex composition of the camp’s
population, it is important to devise a responsible,
tailored solution for the settlement of its inhabitants.
The vast majority of those living in Rukban camp
want to go home. The international community should
therefore, through coordinated actions, help them end
their displacement.

19-2353911/21

S/PV.8589

The situation in the Middle East

Thirdly, there is a need to support the Syrian
Government’s social and economic reconstruction
efforts in parts of the country where the security
situation is relatively stable. The Syrian Government
has been actively clearing explosive remnants of war,
rebuilding infrastructure, restoring public services,
promoting development and improving lives. These
efforts deserve recognition. Economic sanctions
have dealt a heavy blow to the Syrian people and do
not help to improve the humanitarian situation across
Syria. Enabling more and more Syrians to emerge
from the shadow of war and lead peaceful, stable and
orderly lives should be the common objective of the
international community.
Humanitarian relief operations in Syria should
fully respect the country’s sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity and should be carried
out in strict accordance with Council resolutions, the
United Nations Guiding Principles on the Right to
Humanitarian Assistance and the relevant provisions
of international law. In this process, communication
and coordination with the Syrian Government should
be strengthened. Committing to a political settlement
is a fundamental and realistic pathway to easing
humanitarian situation in Syria.
China supports the role of the United Nations as
the primary mediator in pushing the Syrian parties to
abide by the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned principle and
Council resolution 2254 (2015) and to seek a solution
that accommodates the concerns of all sides. China
takes note of the positive developments relating to
consultations among the parties concerned on the setup
of the constitutional committee. We look forward to the
briefing to be delivered by Special Envoy Pedersen to
Council members next month.
At the same time, we wish the next round of Astana
talks every success.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank Mark and
Ms. Sirkin for their briefings.
We reiterate the recognition of the Dominican
Republic for humanitarian workers in Syria for the
work they are doing for the people affected, at the risk
of their own lives. We are concerned about access to
humanitarian aid for more than 11 million people, half
of whom are children, owing to the security situation.
12/21

30/07/2019

Since the end of April, at least 400 people have
died in Idlib, Hama and Aleppo governorates. In the
last month alone, 33 children have lost their lives.
Death caught all of them unawares in their homes, in
schools, in hospitals, in camps for displaced persons or
in the marketplace. There are now more than 400,000
displaced persons whose humanitarian needs are ever
increasing. Forty attacks on health facilities have been
recorded over the past three months. That is one attack
every two and a half days.
All of this is cause for alarm and requires immediate
action by the Council. We must not be silent witnesses to
what some might call just another chapter in the history
of Syria. No, the Council must mobilize to bring about
the immediate cessation of attacks against civilians in
Idlib and the rest of Syria.
We reiterate our conviction that there is no military
solution to the conflict in Syria. The immediate priority
must be to protect the population and ensure their
access to humanitarian assistance. We must replace
fear, frustration and a lack of faith with the building of
a common vision and a new future of sustainable peace.
That begins with an inclusive, credible and sustainable
political process for and by Syrians, facilitated by the
United Nations and based on resolution 2254 (2015),
whereby the Council is guarantor. All attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure must be investigated
and its authors held accountable. In addition, we wish
to see progress in the process of freeing those detained
or kidnapped, as well as in finding missing persons.
(spoke in English)
The Dominican Republic might have little influence
on the parties involved in this conflict. However, it is
because of Syria’s suffering population that I say this
to the Council, on their behalf. I call upon everyone to
exercise restraint. I call upon everyone to give peace a
chance. I call upon everyone to alleviate the suffering,
not to add even more. And I call upon everyone to
protect civilians. Hostilities must stop, and they must
stop now.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mark Lowcock and commend
the outstanding work of his teams in responding
to the humanitarian emergency in Syria. I would
also like to thank the Policy Director of Physicians
for Human Rights for her briefing and for the
commitment of humanitarian and medical staff on the
ground. The assessment made by our two briefers is
19-23539

30/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

irrefutable — there is a humanitarian disaster taking
place in north-west Syria. The lives of more than
3 million civilians, including 1 million children, are at
stake. Beyond the emergency response, we must focus
more than ever on three priorities.
The first is the restoration of the ceasefire in Idlib,
which is an absolute imperative. France condemns
in the strongest terms the strikes that continue
to indiscriminately target civilians and civilian
and humanitarian infrastructure. We call on the
signatories to the ceasefire agreement — Turkey and
Russia — to honour their commitments and ensure
its effective implementation in north-west Syria with
a view to establishing a nationwide ceasefire, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). Russia must
apply the necessary pressure on the regime to avoid
further violence, the primary victims of which are
civilians. Fighting the terrorist groups listed by the
United Nations is necessary, but that must never be
used as an excuse for indiscriminate bombing, which
only increases the risk of terrorism and, in particular,
the risk of the scattering of jihadists. Moreover, I
reiterate that France will be extremely firm and stands
ready to react in the event of a new, confirmed use of
chemical weapons.
Respect for international humanitarian law is
binding on all and is not negotiable. That is the second
priority. The parties to the conflict must assume
their responsibilities to protect civilians, particularly
the most vulnerable and humanitarian and medical
personnel. The targeting of civilian and humanitarian
infrastructure, such as hospitals and schools, including
those that have been deconflicted, is an unacceptable
violation of international humanitarian law. We call
on the United Nations to investigate such incidents.
The deliberate targeting of civilian infrastructure
constitutes a war crime and will not go unpunished.
Immediate,
safe,
secure,
comprehensive,
sustainable and unhindered humanitarian access to
the entire Syrian territory must be guaranteed. That
is the regime’s primary responsibility. Humanitarian
aid must be able to reach, as a matter of priority, those
most in need — women, children, displaced persons
and refugees. There is an urgent need for a new aid
convoy to be immediately deployed to Rukban camp.
We call upon those who have the means to do so to
exert the necessary pressure on the regime to ensure
such access in all areas under its control, in particular
in the territories it reclaimed in 2018, in the south-west

S/PV. 8589

and in eastern Ghouta. The findings of the Human
Rights Watch report that documents the regime’s
obstruction and predatory humanitarian aid practices
warrant a response. It is essential that the delivery
of humanitarian aid not be arbitrarily impeded when
supplied in accordance with the principles of neutrality,
independence, humanity and impartiality. Here, too,
the regime’s supporters have a particular responsibility.
The third priority is the launching of a sustainable
political process under the auspices of the United
Nations, on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) in its
entirety. The Council must be united in that objective. We
fully support the Special Envoy’s efforts in that regard.
We welcome his ongoing efforts and reiterate our call
for rapid progress on the political process. We call for
a credible and balanced constitutional package, both in
the composition of the committee and in its procedural
rules. It is the sole responsibility of the Special Envoy
to announce the formation of the committee and to
convene it in Geneva. If the regime continues to impede
it, it will be up to the Special Envoy to tell us when he
considers that he has exhausted all possible avenues to
reach agreement on the committee. It will then be the
responsibility of the Council to decide how to proceed.
In parallel, we must now start preparing for the
holding of free and transparent elections, under the
supervision of the United Nations, and in which
all Syrians, including refugees, will participate, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). To emerge
from the Syrian tragedy, it is essential to give Syrians
an opportunity to express themselves freely about the
future of their country. That work must go hand in hand
with the pursuit of confidence-building measures that
can contribute to the establishment of a neutral and
secure environment.
Without progress on those essential points, there is
no reason for France and its partners to change their
positions on reconstruction, the lifting of sanctions
and normalization. The regime and its supporters
are continuing to destroy infrastructure, particularly
medical and educational facilities. They have already
asked the international community to finance what they
are currently destroying. That is out of the question.
There can be no military solution to the Syrian crisis.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Mr. Mark Lowcock, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his comprehensive

19-2353913/21

S/PV.8589

The situation in the Middle East

briefing on the latest developments in the humanitarian
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. We also thank
Ms. Susannah Sirkin for her informative briefing.
Côte d’Ivoire once again welcomes the agreement
establishing a demilitarized zone in Idlib, signed on
17 September 2018, between Russia and Turkey, which
has made it possible to avoid the large-scale offensive so
dreaded by the international community. Unfortunately,
the agreement has only been partially respected, in
some measure because of the refusal of armed groups
to withdraw from the demilitarized zone. In addition,
my country regrets that, since 29 April, there has been a
resumption of fighting in Idlib governorate, which has
further exacerbated the already precarious conditions
of approximately 3 million people.
According to estimates from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the new
outbreak of violence has claimed many lives and led to
the displacement of more than 400,000 people, while
approximately 11.7 million displaced persons will need
urgent assistance, including 5 million who face extreme
hardship. The humanitarian situation has become
increasingly worrisome, given the recurring attacks
over the past few months on vital civilian infrastructure
in north-western Syria, in particular health facilities
and schools, as well as water treatment plants. In that
regard, Côte d’Ivoire again calls on the parties to the
conflict to put an immediate end to hostilities and to
strictly respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law. We encourage them in particular
to take all measures necessary to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
With regard to the serious plight of refugees and
internally displaced persons, my country urgently
appeals to the international partners to honour the
funding pledges they made at the third Brussels
Conference on Supporting the future of Syria and
the region, held from 12 to 14 March. According to
Ms. Najat Rochdi, Senior Humanitarian Adviser to the
Special Envoy to Syria, of approximately $3.3 billion
needed to provide assistance for more than 11 million
Syrians, only 23 per cent has been raised thus far
this year.
The serious humanitarian crisis faced by Syria
has been inextricably linked for many years to the
conflict in the country. The responds to the needs of
people facing extreme hardship must therefore be
accompanied by greater efforts aimed at achieving
14/21

30/07/2019

an immediate ceasefire, which is essential to the safe
delivery of humanitarian aid and the resumption of
political dialogue, which is the sole prerequisite for a
peaceful and lasting solution to the crisis in Syria.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its support
for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and
encourages him to pursue his mediation efforts with a
view to relaunching the political process, in line with
the relevant provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, let me
extend our sincere thanks to both Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock and Ms. Susannah Sirkin for
their very clear and comprehensive briefings.
In the north-west of Syria, as Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock has reported, the escalation is
ongoing. And sadly, more lives have been lost, more
people have been injured and there is a bigger wave of
displacement — not to mention the extensive damage
done to civilian infrastructure. As a result of hostilities
in the area since late April, more than 450 people
have been killed. That is indeed horrifying and must
stop immediately. We have said that time and again.
All parties need to seriously and strongly respect
international humanitarian law and prioritize the safety
and security of civilians. My delegation wishes to
highlight three pertinent points.
First, the suffering of people in north-western Syria
must end. Indonesia once again appeals to all parties to
refrain from conducting provocative actions and, most
importantly, to cease the ongoing violence. Words in
the Chamber are not sufficient to describe the severity
of the impact of hostilities on civilians, in particular
women and children, who make up 76 per cent of the
total population of north-western Syria. Data from Save
the Children show that more children in the north-west
were killed in the past two weeks alone than in all of
2018. My delegation therefore reiterates its call on all
parties to stop all attacks and violence against civilians
and ensure that access to emergency humanitarian
assistance is fully granted.
Secondly, it is beyond frustrating, if not
unacceptable, to learn that although a hospital’s
coordinates had been shared through the de-confliction
mechanism, it was still targeted. What should we do
when medical facilities are not even safe for people
on the ground? What should we do next? Medical
infrastructure must not be subjected to direct attacks
for military purposes. The destruction of civilian
19-23539

30/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

infrastructure that is key to the survival of the people
adds to the suffering of already traumatized men,
women and children. While we consider that the existing
de-confliction has already been established with good
intentions, we see the merit in exploring the possibility
of improving the effectiveness of the mechanism.
Thirdly, my delegation also wishes to highlight the
humanitarian situation in the Al-Hol and Rukban camps
as priorities for the delivery of critical humanitarian
responses. Tension remains high in Al-Hol due to
uncertainty about the future of more than 70,000
people in the camp. Meanwhile in Rukban, access for
the delivery of humanitarian aid is still needed. While
approximately 17,000 people have left Rukban, the
situation remains dire for more than 24,000 people in
the camp.
At this crucial time, particularly within the context
of the ongoing escalation in north-western Syria,
Indonesia believes that unity in the Council is needed
now more than ever. We may have different views
on some issues. However, it is vital to be united in
protecting people’s lives. At the same time, it is also
important not to politicize the issue and to genuinely
uphold dialogue and coordination among Council
members and relevant parties.
Let me end my remarks by paying tribute to all
humanitarian workers on the ground who courageously
risk their own lives to save others.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Do you know what just came to mind,
Mr. President? I recall that when I have heard briefings
delivered by Mr. Mark Lowcock on the situation
in Yemen or in Libya, the tone and submission of
information on those issues was very different from
what we hear when Mr. Lowcock delivers briefings on
Syria. Do members not think so? I think so, and not for
the first time.
As usual, today we heard another series of
invectives against Syria and the Russian Federation.
Colleagues spouted statistics, quotes and emotional
testimony. Incidentally, we are well aware of the value
of such emotionally charged testimony. We remember
when leading Western media outlets, including the New
York Times, inflated the tragedy of Omran Daqneesh, a
Syrian boy from Aleppo. However, after the liberation
of eastern Aleppo, it turned out that the images were
staged — a fact that was subsequently confirmed by
Omran’s parents.

S/PV. 8589

Today, my British colleague accused the Russian
Federation of making a mockery of the Security
Council. I do not wish to turn today’s meeting into a
competition. I do not know where she sees the mockery,
but let us recall the mockery of the Security Council by
countries that have become accustomed to blaming the
Russian Federation for everything.
The goal of all those calls “to immediately stop”
and invectives is absolutely clear to us — it is to sustain
a terrorist presence in Idlib for the future purpose of
combating the legitimate Syrian authorities. That has
happened each time another terrorist enclave in Syria
has almost been shut down. It happened in eastern
Aleppo and eastern Ghouta, and now the propaganda
machine is firing its full arsenal at the situation in
Idlib. What is happening is fully clear to us. And those
who yield to that provocation should not be so naive as
not to understand the reality behind the appeals we hear
today. The main goal is to sustain a terrorist enclave
in Idlib. That is the main goal being pursued by our
Western colleagues. Today’s meeting is being held at a
complicated time and affords us another opportunity to
shed light on the real humanitarian situation in Syria.
The real humanitarian situation in Syria was the
subject of a briefing delivered by the Russian Ministry
of Defence yesterday, 29 July. In a spirit of openness,
our Defence Ministry always invites accredited foreign
colleagues to Moscow to attend such briefings. But
since again there was no show of interest in learning the
truth and members did not attend, today we will give
the Council a brief overview of the content it covered.
I believe that part of what has been set out in
this briefing is a response to the questions raised by
my British colleague, who enjoys asking questions
in this Chamber and frequently takes the tone of a
prosecutor. As previous speakers said, the situation in
and around Idlib is cause for real concern, although
not in the context presented in fake reports, but rather
because of the scaled-up attacks by the Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham terrorists, who attack civilians and use
them as victims of their criminal provocations. At the
same time, we note that jihadists are stepping up their
military capacity by increasing the number of foreignmade weapons, including aircraft and multiple rocket
launchers. Mr. Lowcock modestly failed to mention
how many civilians have died in the attacks perpetrated
by terrorists.

19-2353915/21

S/PV.8589

The situation in the Middle East

30/07/2019

The humanitarian situation in Syria remains a
subject of speculation. One of the most egregious
examples is the latest information about the alleged
attacks by the Russian Aerospace Forces on the market
and adjacent areas of the city of Maarat Al-Numan, in
Idlib province, on 22 July. Allow me to share some of
the Defence Ministry briefing.

Murak. Fortunately, that duplicitous attempt was foiled
after the information was published. In that regard, we
once again call on the Secretariat and the specialized
agencies of the Organization to be less hasty in
publishing unverified information and to accept data
from only reliable and apolitical sources, which must
also be cross-checked.

“On 22 July, the British-based Syrian
Observatory for Human Rights, citing the so-called
White Helmets, reported attacks by the Russian
Federation’s Aerospace Forces attacks on the Al-Hol
market and adjacent residential areas of the city of
Maarat Al-Numan in Idlib province, resulting in the
death of dozens of civilians. The accusations were
cited by some European media outlets and even
the leadership of Western countries and certain
international organizations. The market in question
can easily be located on the Maarat Al-Numan city
map, and it is also been indicated on the geographic
maps of the corresponding Internet services.

Today, it was said that Russia deliberately bombed
hospitals and schools. That is a lie. I repeat that once
again. In Syria, the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation
of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic is open
24/7. We have repeatedly proposed that Mark Lowcock
should liaise with it in order to verify information about
the facilities that have been deconflicted and that we
have allegedly attacked. Such attacks are also a lie.
That step must be taken, rather than spouting so-called
facts here in the Council that are based on dubious and
unverified sources, not the so-called directly verified
sources that are being cited.

“Russian air assets were not used or flying
over that area on 22 July. To verify reports on the
destruction of the market in Maarat Al-Numan,
Russian unmanned aerial vehicles photographed the
site of the area and its adjacent territory twice, on
24 and 26 July, that is, after the alleged air strikes.
The briefer invited us to look at the monitor. As
we can see, the imagery obtained by the objective
monitoring shows no signs of destruction, which
would have been inevitable if the area had actually
been subjected to an air strike using six bombs.
“That was further confirmed by the images
taken by a Russian spacecraft on 25 July, as well
as by video footage taken directly at the Al-Hol
market in Maarat Al-Numan, which we received the
day before yesterday. As we can see, the allegedly
destroyed market remains operational. We regret
the fact that representatives of eminent international
bodies and organizations are once again falling
victim to easily verifiable deception disseminated
by terrorists, propagating fake news and unverified
reports to corroborate unverified accusations.”
That lie, however, is becoming the leitmotif of our
meeting today. Our colleagues also had the opportunity
to read the information circulated by the Government
of Syria about a video recording obtained from one of
the eliminated terrorist, which shows White Helmets
practicing a staged chemical attack on the town of
16/21

Moreover, as we have often repeated, I cannot
recall the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights or the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs making a statement on the
principles of precaution and distinction when the
coalition razed the cities of Raqqa, Hajin or Mosul to
the ground. Why is it that no one said anything about
that at that time? I raise that question all the time, but I
have still not received an answer. We have long talked
of the need to stop the use of double standards regarding
developments in Syria. Attempts to shield terrorists in
Idlib, whether for a hidden agenda or engagement in a
political process as a local authority, no longer stand up
to scrutiny.
In case anyone has forgotten, I will recall that
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham is the terrorist organization
Jabhat Al-Nusra under a different name. Its so-called
good fighters, whom Mark Lowcock referred to when
quoting Idlib residents, are intimidating local civilians
and using civilian and medical infrastructure for
military purposes. They are using civilians as human
shields. At the same time, the need to combat terrorism
is justified by the continued illegal military presence
beyond the Euphrates. That directly contravenes the
proclaimed respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria and again constitutes a flagrant
example of double standards.
A great deal has been said today about hospitals
and figures have been invoked. For example, Ms. Sirkin
19-23539

30/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

said that out of 46 attacks on medical facilities, only
15 could be confirmed. How the Organization is
able to confirm attacks without being on the ground
is a separate issue. It turns out that two-thirds of the
reports that the Council received have been fake. We
are very troubled by the fact that a United Nations
mechanism should be involved in the circulation of
such fake information.
Prior to military operations in Syria, there were
only 12 hospitals in Idlib. Where did the statistics on
the number of allegedly destroyed hospitals come from
that United Nations representatives, Member States
and representatives of non-governmental organizations
have cited earlier and today? I have said this before and
repeat it now. There were not as many hospitals in all
of pre-conflict Syria as are now being claimed to have
been destroyed. Is any tent where wounded fighters are
treated considered to be a hospital?
We believe it vital not to remain silent about the
situation in the territories not under Government control.
Such areas are blank spots on the maps of humanitarian
organizations. That is not because everything is fine
there. On the contrary, the area beyond the Euphrates
lies in ruins, without electricity or access to water or
medical care for residents. According to our military
figures, there were over 300 terrorist attacks in June
and July.
The situation remains difficult in the Rukban
internally displaced persons camp. However, thanks to
the efforts of the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation
of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic, more
than 17,000 people have been relocated from Rukban.
We intend to continue to work with the United Nations
and the International Committee of the Red Cross to
ensure the return of refugees and provide them with
everything that they need.

S/PV. 8589

the Geneva Conventions. However, for some reason, the
United States is in no hurry to prove the Rukban camp
with what it needs. We are also deeply concerned over
information about major armed units being prepared
and deployed to Al-Suwayda, Palmyra and Abu Kamal.
In conclusion, I stress that the position of the
Russian Federation remains unchanged. We will
continue to spare no effort to restore peace in Syria both
in our national capacity and as a permanent member
of the Security Council and participant in the Astana
troika, through which — I recall once again — more
was accomplished than in any other format in terms of
de-escalation, the elimination of the terrorist threat,
broadening the humanitarian response and moving
forward the political process. We will continue to
work together with Turkey in accordance with the
17 September 2018 memorandum on the stabilization
of the situation in the Idlib de-escalation area (see
S/2018/852).
We make the appeal that our efforts not be obstructed
by the provision of political cover to terrorists or by
provocative actions.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General
Mark
Lowcock
and
Director Susannah Sirkin for their briefings, which,
unfortunately, are extremely alarming.
We usually use expressions such as “greatly
concerned” with regard to the current situation in Syria,
but the situation is far from being usual. As we speak,
we are witnessing a deadly escalation of the conflict
in north-west Syria. As we speak, military strikes
are destroying the safest spaces, including camps for
internally displaced persons and markets.

Turning to the Al-Hol camp, the situation there
is truly catastrophic due to the limited access of
humanitarian agencies and funding. Half of the camp’s
inhabitants are women and children. That is what people
should be truly worried about when we talk about the
humanitarian situation in Syria.

Any military operation should be fully in line with
international humanitarian law and human rights law to
prevent harm from coming to the thousands of civilians
trapped in the middle of the fighting. The protection
of civilians and unhindered access to humanitarian
assistance are not a choice but the legal obligation of all
sides to the conflict. Those who do not comply should
be held accountable.

We remain troubled by the situation on the eastern
bank of the Euphrates, where the Al-Tanf area is illegally
occupied by the United States. Since the Geneva
Conventions have been mentioned today, I recall once
again that the occupying Power is responsible for the
population in the occupied territory in accordance with

Hundreds of civilians have lost their lives and
more than 440,000 have been newly displaced. The
continued presence and activities of United Nationslisted terrorist groups in the area contributes to the
suffering of civilians, but combating terrorist groups
cannot justify violations of international humanitarian

19-2353917/21

S/PV.8589

The situation in the Middle East

30/07/2019

law, and attacks on medical facilities constitute a
serious violation. Such actions have to stop, especially
given the fact that the majority of strikes occurred under
the de-confliction mechanism. Attacks on densely
populated areas resulting in hundreds of dead civilians
are unacceptable and must stop as well.

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Equatorial Guinea is grateful for the
convening of this meeting and for the useful briefings
by Mr. Mark Lowcock and Ms. Susannah Sirkin, which
illustrate the current alarming and tragic situation
throughout Syria.

We just heard from Ms. Susannah Sirkin
that non-governmental organizations have been
documenting attacks on health-care facilities and the
deaths of medical personnel since the start of the conflict.
Every day we learn about the destruction of civilian
infrastructure in Idlib. Sadly, we have to underline that
that is a scenario that has already occurred in Syria,
Aleppo and eastern Ghouta. Civilians from those areas
were evacuated mainly to Idlib. They expected at least
a minimum level of protection. Unfortunately, there
is none.

The conflict in Syria continues to present us
with alarming statistics. The Idlib region has without
any doubt become one of the northern governorates
hardest hit by the war, as Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Sirkin
just described. We are facing a true nightmare, the
horror of which is only increasing, as are the current
humanitarian challenges. The increase in violence that
we have observed in recent weeks in various parts of
Syria, especially in the de-escalation zones agreed by
the Astana guarantors, reflects the negative trend in
Syria and concretely illustrates the extreme volatility
of the situation in the country.

I once again underline the importance of ensuring
that the de-escalation zone in Idlib established at the
initiative of Russia and Turkey is fully respected. It is
absolutely crucial to prevent a full-scale humanitarian
catastrophe. All parties to the conflict should spare
no effort to ensure the full implementation of that
agreement on the ground.
Finally, I want to stress our concern about the tragic
state of health-care facilities in Syria. Most of them are
not functional, and those still operating are too poorly
equipped to provide care to patients with injuries and
further support to persons with disabilities. In our
opinion, the international community, especially the
Security Council, should vigorously advocate health
care for and the protection of civilians, especially
women, children and persons with disabilities.
The situation is extremely worrisome in the northeastern and north-western parts of Syria, given only the
examples of Al-Hol and Rukban camps, where people
are still waiting for the third humanitarian convoy,
and Raqqa, where it is practically impossible to lead a
normal life.
Let me conclude by underlining that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. Therefore,
I would also like to stress the importance of reaching a
political agreement in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). A
political settlement is urgently needed, as it remains
the only way to achieve sustainable peace under such
extremely dire circumstances.
18/21

We are witnessing some of the deadliest attacks
in civilian areas since the beginning of the military
escalation almost three months ago. Rockets are now
raining down on Idlib, which, as was underlined, have
killed more than 450 people, including children, and
more than 500,000 people have had to leave their
homes owing to the intensification of air strikes. For
those who are familiar with the Italian city of Venice,
that would be the equivalent of emptying that city of its
population twice over.
We are seeing the situation taking on worrisome
proportions, and an increasing number of voices have
begun in no uncertain terms to point to the failure
of international diplomacy and the world’s most
powerful nations. That belief, shared by many of the
world’s citizens, calls into question the noble work and
the very purpose of international organizations and
decision-making bodies such as the Security Council.
It is not surprising that a few days ago, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Michelle Bachelet emphasized in a statement the
“collective shrug” as a response to the great number
of civilian casualties, while stressing at the same time
the persistent failure of the permanent members of
the Security Council to agree to use their power and
influence to stop the fighting and killing once and for
all. That has always been the position of the Government
of Equatorial Guinea, and we hope that this umpteenth
call to action and for ending international indifference
might achieve the outcome we so long for while halting
19-23539

30/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the current military campaign and bringing the parties
to the political negotiating table.
In such an environment of persistent insecurity,
we once again call on the warring parties to safeguard
civilian lives and basic infrastructure facilities such as
schools and hospitals. Moreover, health-care facilities
are becoming all the more crucial as military offensives
are causing increasing numbers of deaths and injuries.
In the south of Idlib and throughout the region,
as has been stressed, the main operational hospital is
Maarat Al-Numan. It is unacceptable that it continues
to be subject to regular attacks by any of the parties.
There are many humanitarian organizations that spare
no effort to support the operation of vital health services,
so we cannot allow all international humanitarian
action deployed in this area to collapse.
Our position is that respect for medical facilities
and their personnel and equipment is essential. We once
again echo the call of the Secretary-General in strongly
condemning the ongoing air strikes on and shelling of
health facilities and medical personnel, despite the fact
that we are still struggling to find the words to use to
condemn the violence against the civilian population
and the use of those civilians as pawns in the fighting
between the various groups involved in the conflict.
We believe that even in the fight against terrorism,
respect for international humanitarian law must always
be guaranteed. In relation to the protection of health
facilities and their staff in Idlib, we stress that the
parties’ allies must step up their involvement to prevent
the situation from boiling over, and urge them to do so.
I wish to conclude my statement by expressing the
hope that the upcoming meetings on 1 and 2 August
in Nursultan between the guarantors of the Astana
process will contribute to reducing the escalation and
swiftly reactivating the ceasefire that was agreed upon
in September 2018.
Ms. Mogashoa (South Africa): Let me begin
by thanking you, Mr. President, for the outstanding
manner in which you have guided the work of the
Council during your presidency this month. We thank
you for your conduct in this regard.
I also wish to thank Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Sirkin
for their briefings to the Council this morning.
South Africa remains deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Since the beginning

S/PV. 8589

of the escalation of hostilities in late April, hundreds
of civilians — many of whom are women and
children — have lost their lives and countless others
have suffered severe injuries that are, in many cases,
life-altering, leaving them permanently disabled. My
delegation is particularly concerned about the attacks
in north-west Syria in which civilians, particularly
women and children, were killed as a result of air
strikes on marketplaces and residential areas in several
towns. Those actions have had a particularly severe
impact on women and children, who make up 76 per
cent of the population.
South Africa is also concerned about the
widespread destruction of civilian infrastructure.
Since late April, at least 37 incidents involving health
facilities or personnel have been reported, killing and
injuring civilians and damaging or destroying vital
health facilities that are essential for the survival and
well-being of the people. It has been reported that
during the same period, 47 schools and several water
stations were damaged or destroyed by air strikes or
shelling, disrupting access to clean water and education
for hundreds of thousands of people. This is not to
mention the mental scars that children will carry with
them for decades as a result of the traumas they have
experienced. The continued displacement of a large
proportion of the population has also led to a number of
challenges, including the disruption or, indeed, absence
of education at all levels for hundreds of thousands of
children and limited access to health care and other
basic social services.
South Africa condemns the continued attacks on
humanitarian workers, who have put their lives at risk
to support and assist those who are in critical need of
basic services but are not spared from the continued
violence. South Africa urges all parties to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law for the protection of
civilians and civilian infrastructure. It is also important
that the signatories to the September 2018 ceasefire
memorandum adhere to its provisions.
South Africa reiterates that while we acknowledge
the threat of and violence committed by terrorist
groups, it is also necessary that no action taken to
counter terrorist activities be undertaken at the expense
of innocent civilian lives. Any such action should be
taken only within the parameters of international law.

19-2353919/21

S/PV.8589

The situation in the Middle East

Let me turn now to the situations in the Rukban and
Al-Hol camps. I would like to reiterate South Africa’s
position that while we welcome reports that more than
17,000 people have left Rukban, there are those who do
not have the resources to leave. It is essential that those
who remain in Rukban be provided with the assistance
they require, and we call on the relevant parties to grant
the required approvals for the delivery of additional
aid to the camp. The situation in Al-Hol remains of
concern, especially as the rising temperatures in the
region create additional challenges. We welcome the
work of the numerous humanitarian agencies that
provide food, water, sanitation and hygiene services, as
well as education and health services, to the camp.
In conclusion, South Africa believes that the only
sustainable solution to the Syrian question remains the
achievement of a political solution through an inclusive
Syrian-led dialogue. We support the efforts of the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy, Mr. Geir Pedersen,
to facilitate these inclusive negotiations. In this regard,
we look forward to Mr. Pedersen’s upcoming report on
his recent engagements.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.
We thank Ms. Susannah Sirkin and Mr. Mark
Lowcock for their important briefings. We would also
like to express our appreciation for the efforts they are
leading in order to alleviate the suffering in Syria.
Peru is deeply concerned by the intensification
of violence on Syrian territory as well as the serious
deterioration of the humanitarian situation that this
entails. The north-west of the country remains the
current focus of our attention due to its population
density, high volatility and increased risks as a result
of terrorist groups’ extensive control of the area. We
are alarmed to note that the most basic principles of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
continue to be ignored in this area, such as the due
proportionality of military responses and precautions
with regard to their effects.
Peru joins the expressions of deep regret for the
deaths of children, which have increased this year
as a result of air strikes that do not discriminate
between civilians and combatants. We also deplore
the destruction of civil infrastructure, including
schools, medical centres and drinking-water-supply
facilities, aggravated by the fact that the geographical
20/21

30/07/2019

coordinates of several of those centres had been shared
with the Syrian authorities. Such barbaric acts must
cease immediately.
We must underline that these acts represent
flagrant violations of international law and, due to
their deliberate nature and the impact they have on
the civilian population, can and should be declared
war crimes. We hope that these reprehensible acts will
be subject to exhaustive investigations that properly
identify their perpetrators and bring them to justice.
We wish to highlight the particular responsibility
borne by those countries with the capacity to influence
the situation, which can and must do more so that the
parties abandon all attempts to find a military solution.
Preserving the agreement reached by Turkey and Russia
in September 2018 is of fundamental importance in
these delicate circumstances.
The general focus on the events developing in
north-western Syria must in no way detract from
the urgency of addressing the humanitarian crises
looming over other areas of the Syrian territory. We
consider it imperative to direct greater efforts towards
meeting the basic needs of the tens of thousands of
internally displaced persons who remain in the Al-Hol
camp, as well as to promote comprehensive solutions
that will allow them to return home safely and in a
dignified manner. Accordingly, we encourage the Iraqi
Government to finalize the repatriation plan for their
over 30,000 citizens, with the assistance of the United
Nations. These efforts should also be extended to Raqqa
and other urban centres in Deir-ez-Zor, since the return
of Iraqi nationals is a tangible fact that requires great
mobilization by the international community so as to
provide them with a minimum of security and proper
living conditions. We also urge the Syrian authorities
to issue the appropriate authorizations to the United
Nations so that it can carry out exhaustive assessments
of the living conditions in Rukban camp and provide
sustained assistance.
I conclude by reaffirming that only a political
solution on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) will allow us
to overcome the humanitarian disaster still affecting
Syria, with full respect for its sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
19-23539

30/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

I give the floor to Ms. Sirkin to make a
further statement.
Ms. Sirkin: I just wanted to correct a misquotation
I heard earlier from the representative of the Russian
Federation, who stated that two thirds of the reported
attacks that we cited from the last month have turned
out to be fake. That is absolutely not what I said, and,
in fact, we have so far confirmed 16 such attacks, and
we are still counting, which is due to the rigour of our
process and the fact that indeed we are not naive and
do not just take every report and print it out. We have
a very serious methodology, and there is absolutely no
way that we have cited fake reports. I just wanted to
correct that misquotation of my statement.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning today’s meeting, which is the
last scheduled meeting in the Chamber for the month of
July, I would like to express, on behalf of the Peruvian
delegation, our sincere thanks to all the members of the
Council for their continued support, cooperation and
counsel during a very busy month. We may not always
have agreed, but there was no need for any procedural
votes, and we unanimously adopted three resolutions,
which shows the success of our efforts to maintain
Council unity, which is a crucial value and one that we
hope will extend to other items on the agenda.

S/PV. 8589

We would like to thank all members of the
delegations to the Council, including the Permanent
Representatives, as well as the experts on the various
issues we have discussed, for their hard work and
dedication. We thank Hasmik Egian and James
Sutterlin and the efficient Security Council Affairs
Division team for their assistance here and during the
trip to Colombia, the conference officers, interpreters,
verbatim reporters, security staff, press officers and
journalists, and the kind members of the Security
Council Secretariat Branch. I also thank the members
of my team for their work, organization and dedication
during our month in the presidency. I am grateful for
their unflagging efforts to fulfil — in the most efficient
way possible — the delicate task that has been entrusted
us for these two years.
I am pleased to turn over the gavel to the Mission
of Poland, our friends and neighbours for these two
years, and to wish them great success, which I am sure
they will achieve under the leadership of Ambassador
Wronecka and her efficient team. We offer them our
full cooperation in the month to come.
Once again, we wish to express our gratitude and to
reiterate distinguished Peruvian diplomat Javier Pérez
de Cuéllar’s undying commitment to peace: it is not
just a simple dream but the most deeply held treasure
of humankind.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

19-2353921/21
