UNITED NATIONS

FORTIETH

YEAR

6
NEW

th
MEETING

12 JUNE

1985

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2586)
of the agenda

,...

.,......*

. . . . . . . . . . *.* . . . . **...*

. . . . . ..* . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . ..*.*..........I.*.*.*.

1
1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);

(a)

(b)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17222);

(c)

Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/17242)
,.,,,,...................
..i...‘,...............

WPV.2586

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symtiol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2586th MEETING
Held

in New York on Wednesday, 12 June 1985, at 10.30 a.m.

President: Mr. Errol MAHABIR

(Trinidad and Tobago).

2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the Acting President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the other
members of the delegation to take a place at the Council
table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

Provisional
1. Adoption

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sinclair, Acting
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, and
the other members of the delegation took a place at the
Council table.

agenda (S/Agenda/2586)

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite Mr. Nujoma to take a
place at the Council table.

2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(6) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the.Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/I 7222);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (S/17242)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma took a
place at the Council table.

4. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions taken
at the previous meetings on this item [2583rd to 2585th
meetings], I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Cuba, Democratic Yemen,
Ethiopia, the German Democratic Republic, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Ghana, Guyana, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Kenya, Kuwait, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Poland, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted

The situation in Namibia:
(4 Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(4 Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17222);
(4 Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/17242)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif(Afghanistan),
Mr. Bessaieh (Algeria), Mr. Van-Dunem (Angola), Mr,
Choudhury (Bangladesh), Mr. Tshering (Bhutan), Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Maciel (Brazil), Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr Mboumoua (Cameroon), Mr. Lewis (Canada),
Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen),
Mr. Dinka (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Repub
lit), Mr. Lautenschlager (Federal Republic of Germany), Mr.
Asamoah (Ghana), Mr. Karran (Guyana), Mr. Kusumaatmadja (Indonesia), Mr Barnett (Jamaica), Mr. Kiilu (Kenya),
Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr. Vongsay (Lao People’s Demo
cratic Republic), Mr. Azzarouk (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Zain (Malaysia), Mr. MuAoz Ledo (Mexico), Mr. Nyam ,
doo (Mongolia), Mr. Alaoui (Morocco), Mr. DEscoto Brockmann (Nicaragua), Mr. Gambari (Nigeria), Mr. Shah Nawaz
(Pakistan), Mr. Kam (Panama), Mr. Nowak (Poland), Mr.
von Schirnding(South Africa), Mr. Wgewardane
(Sri Lanka),

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the representative of
Liberia to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kofa (Liberia) took
a place at the Court&l table.

1

12. Regrettably, resolution 435 (1978) has not yet been
put into effect. Action to implement it is long overdue,
and my Government can understand the embitterment of
the African States. It shares their disappointment at Namibia still not having gained independence. My Government believes that the right of the Namibian people to
self-determination and independence must be recognized
and should be implemented irrespective of any other
problem, although we appreciate that there are important
problems still unresolved.

Mr. Birido (Sudan), Mr. AI-Atassi (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Turkmen (Turkey), Mr. Otunnu (Uganda), Mr. Mkapa
(United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) and
Mr. Goma (Zambia) took the places reservedfor them at the
side of the Council chamber.

5. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Cyprus, Mozambique, Seychelles and Viet Nam in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

13. Our position on the Namibia question has at all
times been clear and unequivocal. In the recent past, my
Government has reaffirmed its unmistakable position
time and again, most recently on 28 May in Bonn, on the
occasion of the twenty-second anniversary of the founding of the Organization ‘of African Unity, when Foreign
Minister Genscher addressed that topic.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Moushoutas
(Cypnrs), Mr. Davane (Mozambique). Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles) and Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

14. We consider resolution435 (1978) to be the indispensable basis for a settlement of the Namibian question. In
our view, it is the only basis on whichNamibia can acquire
internationally recognized independence. According to
that resolution, the constitution’of an independent Namibia must be elaborated solely by a constituent assembly
convened as a result of free and fair elections under United
Nations supervision.

6. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of the Federal Republic of Germany. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
7. Mr. LAUTENSCHLAGER
(Federal Republic of
Germany): First, Sir, may I express my gratitude to you
and the members of the Council for allowing my delegation to participate in this debate. This gives me the opportunity to offer you my warm congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of June. I am
certain that the deliberations of the Council will benefit
from your vast experience and proven diplomatic skill.

15. The imminent installation of a so-called interim
government and of other institutions is an act undertaken
by South Africa unilaterally and in violation of the provisions of resolution 435 (1978). Furthermore, the South
African Government is not authorized to delegate its
responsibility for the implementation
of the United
Nations settlement plan to any political party in Namibia.

8. I wish also to express our appreciation to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and the representative of Thailand,
who during the month of May guided the work of the
Council in an exemplary manner.

16. Resolution 435 (1978) makes no provision for any
interim government to be installed by South Africa, but
rather for the holding of free and fair elections under the
supervision of the United Nations. We are faced with a
development that further delays those free elections. Resolution 435 (1978) does not envision the holding of a constituent assembly outside the scope of the settlement
envisaged by the United Nations. We would therefore
have to regard the convening of such a constituent assembly as a step designed to keep the United Nations out of
the process leading to a solution. The United Nations has
called for a democratic solution which would give all
political groups in Namibia a fair opportunity to help
shape the political structure of a future independent Namibia.

9. The situation in southern Africa gives cause for great
anxiety. My Government has observed with dismay the
escalation of violence in South Africa over the past few
weeks and notes with concern that the use of force has
generally increased, not least due to excessive police
action. It appeab to those holding responsibility in South
Africa to create without delay a political order that will
have the support of all South Africans.
10. In this context, the elimination of apartheid in South
Africa by peaceful means remains a prime objective of
our policy. The Government of the Federal Republic of
Germany regards apartheid as racial discrimination and
condemns it without qualification.

17. We share the critical view expressed by many delegations over the past few days that the measures now envisaged come very close to constituting a unilateral
declaration of independence. This would be to embark
upon a road which directly affects the role of the United
Nations in the task of resolving the Namibia problem.

11. My delegation has asked to speak in the current
debate because in 1977 and 1978 the Federal Republic of
Germany, as a member of the Security Council , contributed to the formulation of essential parts of resolution 435
(1978) and ever since has been actively engaged in seeking
its implementation as a member of the Western contact
group.

18. Hence, South Africa’s institutional plans for Namibia have no prospect of being recognized by the Federal
Republic of Germany, and are viewed with grave concern
by my Government. In view of resolution 435 (1978) and
2

25. These meetings of the Council, requested by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and by the Organization of African Unity, have been convened to confront
once again the most intractable question of decolonization ever before the international community. It is indeed
difficult to convey in words the proportions and extent of
the ordeal that the valiant people of Namibia have borne
and continue to bear after a century of colonial oppression and exploitation.

the Western settlement plan, it regards such unilateral
measures for the installation of constitutional organs and
for the delegation of governmental authority in Namibia
as null and void. This we have made immediately and
unmistakably clear, as have the other States members of
the contact group.
19. Given that the South African Government too professes to recognize resolution 435 (1978) as the one and
only international basis for a settlement of the Namibia
question, my Government appeals to the South African
Government to honour its obligations ensuing from that
resolution without delay and not to compromise the current negotiating process by unilateral action such as the
setting up of an interim government.

26. It is true that in every respect the situation in Namibia epitomizes all the odious features of the classical
colonialism which so many of us h%re in this Chamber
have ourselves experienced. However, it is true also that
certain factors contributing to and exacerbating Namibia’s present colonial bondage represent a unique challenge to our collective sense of justice and morality, for in
the case of Namibia there are the added dimensions of
institutionalized racism and racial oppression, of illegal
plunder of natural resources and of the arrogant flouting
of all accepted norms and the will of the international
community.

20. The history of the Namibia plan worked out by the
United Nations is a history of demands and appeals
addressed to the Government of South Africa. We see the
recent development as a grave attempt by South Africa to
evade those demands. It shows that in spite of all the
verbal expressions of support for resolution 435 (1978)
South Africa is not genuinely in favour of the course to be
taken to bring about a settlement. In order to come closer
to a result, we must convince South Africa that finding a
solution in co-operation with the United Nations, in keep
ing with resolution 435 (1978), will prove in the long term
to be in South Africa’s own true interest. Not least for
that reason, we believe that the work of the contact group
has not yet been completed and that the possibilities open
to it have not yet been exhausted.

27. Furthermore, the struggle of the Namibian people
for freedom and human dignity has in the course of the
four decades of United Nations involvement in the question become much more than a question of the internationally acknowledged, inalienable right of the Namibian
people themselves. Rather, the decolonization of Namibia and its accession to independent and sovereign
nationhood has for nearly 20 years been made the legal
responsibility’ of the Organization itself, an unprecedented responsibility and a sacred trust that obligates all
Member States.

21. The Government of the Federal *Republic of Germany will follow developments in Namibia with unfailing
attention. In doing so it will stay in close consultation
with the other members of the contact group. Despite all
the setbacks it will not tire in its joint efforts with them to
achieve the early implementation of resolution 435 (1978).
We are convinced that a peaceful settlement of the Namibia question will also be conducive to regional detente
and to a reduction of military presence alien to the area.

28. It has been almost two years since the Security
Council last met on the question of Namibia. In the intervening period the world has witnessed the continuing
brazen attempts of the Pretoria regime to create new
obstacles and diversions in order to block Namibian
independence. Consequently, not only does the situation
in and around Namibia remain critical, but prospects for
a peaceful solution have indeed worsened.

22. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, Mr. Mochtar Kusumaatmadja. I welcome him and invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

29. It appears quite clear to us that South Africa has no
intention whatsoever of co-operating in good faith with
the United Nations in the implementation of the letter
and spirit of the United Nations plan as endorsed in
resolution 435 (1978). Any lingering illusions in this
regard were dispelled in December 1983 when, after
determined and laudable efforts, the Secretary-General
reported to the Council that all major outstanding issues
under resolution 435 (1978) had been resolved and that
only South Africa’s intransigence stood in the way of
Namibian independence [see S/16237]. Since then not
only has implementation
of the plan been deadlocked,
but Pretoria has gone even further in its efforts to subvert
that plan, to impose an internal settlement on Namibia
and to entrench itself more firmly in the Territory.

Mr. KUSUMAATMADJA
(Indonesia): Let me
first express my sincere appreciation to you, Sir, and to
the other members of the Council for having given me the
opportunity of participating in the present deliberations
on a question of great concern to all of us. In congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency, I wish to
assure you of my high regard for your well-known diplomatic skills and experience, qualities which will certainly
prove indispensable to our effort to make concrete progress towards Namibian independence.
23.

24. I should like also to pay deserved tribute to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and to the representative of Thailand for the impeccable manner in which the Council’s
work was guided during the month of May.

30. Thus, it is not only appropriate but imperative for
the United Nations, and specifically the Council, to reassert its authority and primary responsibility over Na3

economic greed and narrowly perceived notions of strategic interest are a potent inducement for South Africa and
its friends to delay for as long as possible the inevitable
liberation of Namibia.

mibia and to take urgent measures to ensure that the
United Nations plan is immediately and effectively implemented, without any modifications, qualifications or
preconditions.

35. Pretoria’s persistent attempts to impose an internal
settlement in the Territory, in contravention of resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978), constitute yet another
factor of unacceptable delay and diversion in the process
leading towards genuine independence for Namibia.
Time and again the Security Council has been called
upon to denounce the creation of pseudo-political parties
and of puppet rgimes in Namibia. Nevertheless, just
over a month ago the racist rtgime launched a new
scheme to establish yet another interim government with
the so-called Multi-Party Conference as its main constitutent element. The Security Council, the United Nations
Council for Namibia, the Co-ordinating Bureau of NonAligned Countries and SWAP0 have all condemned this
latest ploy and declared it null and void. However, despite its rejection by the entire international community
and the total failure of similar attempts in the past, Pretoria is pressing ahead with the formal installation of its
newest contrivance in Windhoek on 17 June next,

3 1. We may perhaps ask ourselves: what is it that drives
South Africa to maintain its illegal stranglehold on Namibia? What are the factors that enable it to withstand
the pressure of world-wide censure and to defy with
impunity all Council decisions relevant to Namibia?
What can and should be done to overcome the obstacles
that have rendered the United Nations plan virtually a
dead letter?
32. Clearly, the leitmotiv for the continuing illegal occu-’
pation of Namibia is to be found in the inherent nature of
the South African regime itself. It is a renegade rtgime
which has as its core the obnoxious system of apartheid, a
system pronounced by the United Nations a crime against
the conscience and dignity of mankind, This hateful doctrine has been implanted in Namibia as well, where it
further compounds colonialism’s repulsive traits of political oppression, economic exploitation and social degradation.

36. This latest act of wilful obstruction by South Africa
not only proves its basic ma/a-fide intent but should also
be viewed against the background of South Africa’s
seeming imperviousness to international pressure. In this
context, I cannot but observe that irrespective of its purported aims the policy of so-called constructive engagement has in effect only encouraged Pretoria’s intransigence. Instead of persuading South Africa to relent, this
policy has, on the contrary, emboldened the racist rCgime
in its stubborn defiance of world censure. Equally, linking extraneous issues, such as the presence of Cuban
troops in Angola, to Namibian
independence has
resulted in a new impasse in the implementation
of the
United Nations plan. Indeed it should by now be clear to
all that the distortive recasting of what is essentially a
decolonization question into a regional conflict or an
issue of East-West contention has also played into Pretoria’s hands.

33. Pretoria’s ruthless resort to brute force is anotRsr
factor contributing to the prolonged agony of Namibia’s
colonial plight. A massive military force of more than
‘100,000 troops, deployed throughout the Territory, sustains the repressive structure of its illegal occupation. The
forced conscription of Namibians into the armed forces of
the racist rkgime and the creation of tribal armies are
continuing. Even more disturbing are reports of a largescale military offensive recently launched by South Africa
in northern Namibia and renewed aggression against
Angola. These developments show that, notwithstanding
protestations to the contrary, Pretoria remains intent on
bIudgeoning the Namibian people into submission and in
using Namibia as a military launching pad for its subversive and aggressive designs on its neighbours, the front-line
States. However, South Africa’s systematic attempts to
discredit and destroy the national liberation movement of
Namibia, the South West Africa People’s Organisation
(SWAPO), by military might and terror tactics, have failed
miserably. SWAPO, as the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people, and its military wing, the
People’s Liberation Army of Namibia, continue to provide
exemplary leadership to their countrymen, as they have
done for the past quarter-century, in their courageous
struggle towards final victory.

37. After seven long years of mounting exasperation
with the non-implementation
of the United Nations plan,
owing to the unceasing manoeuvres and fraudulent
schemes of the illegal occupation regime, the international community expects the Security Council to act
resolutely and firmly in the immediate implementation of
its own unanimously adopted decisions on Namibia. To
equivocate will inevitably entail the most dangerous consequences for peace and security in southern Africa and
beyond.

34. Apart from Namibia’s strategic significance to Pretoria’s hegemonistic designs on the region of southern
Africa, there is also the lure of Namibia’s present and
potential economic wealth. Racist South Africa, together
with foreign economic interests and transnational corporations, has over the years accrued huge profits through the
rapacious exploitation of the human and natural resources
of Namibia, in direct violation of Decree No. 1 of the
United Nations Council for Namibia’ as well as of relevant
United Nations resolutions. The existence of uranium and
other strategic resources brings an additional political
dimension to the situation. Thus there can be no doubt that

38. We therefore hope that the Council’s present deliberations and subsequent actions will not digress into a
mere repetition of perfunctory declarations and statements of principle. Indeed, out of these meetings should
emanate decisions which will, first, provide for the immediate, unconditional and undiluted implementation
of
resolution 435 (1978) as the only internationally acceptable basis for a peaceful settlement of the Namibian prob4

struggle for freedom and national independence. Despite
my extreme preoccupation back home, in the aftermath
of a catastrophic natural disaster that hit Bangladesh
recently and left behind in its trail death and destruction
of monstrous proportions, I am here today to espouse a
noble cause involving human dignity and humanity at
large.

lem; secondly, condemn and declare null and void South
Africa’s latest attempt to impose a fait accompli in Namibia through the installation of a so-called interim
government in Windhoek; thirdly, reject any linking of
Namibian independence to irrelevant and exraneous
issues; and, fourthly, ensure that Namibia accedes to
genuine independence, with its territorial integrity intact
and its economic viability unimpaired.

44. May I congratulate you, Sir, on behalf of the Bangladesh delegation, as well as on my own behalf, on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of June. We
are confident that under the able and wise guidance of
such a distinguished leader of a fellow non-aligned country, the Council’s deliberations will achieve concrete and
decisive results towards the early independence of Namibia.

39. My delegation would also see merit in mandating
the Secretary-General to pick up the threads of his earlier
efforts and to finalize whatever details are still left unresolved in the framework of implementing resolution 435
(1978). However, the conclusions reached by the
Secretary-General in his report dated 6 June [S/17242]
make it clear that there has been no change in the position
of South Africa on linking extraneous issues to Namibia’s
independence, that it has not given its response with
regard to the remaining details on the implementation of
the United Nations plan and that the prevailing difficulties have been compounded by the establishment of the
so-called interim government. Hence, it is essential that in
renewing the Secretary-General’s mandate the Security
Council should at the same time serve clear notice to
South Africa that, if it persists in its reckless obstruction
of the implementation
of the United Nations plan, the
imposition of comprehensive mandatory sanctions under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations can no
longer be postponed.

45. I should also like to record our deep appreciation to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and representative of
Thailand for the admirable manner in which they guided
the work of the Council last month.
46. The Security Council, after a period of nearly two
years, is meeting again to resume consideration of the
situation in Namibia, on the joint initiative of the
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and
of the Group of African States. The presence here today of
a large number of Foreign Ministers from Non-Aligned
Countries is a reflection of the paramount importance
that the Movement attaches to the question of Namibia. I
should like to recall here that the recently concluded
Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries comprehensively
reviewed the situation in, and relating to, Namibia, and
called upon the Council to act in a decisive manner in
fulfilment of the direct responsibility of the United
Nations with regard to Namibia and to take urgent measures to ensure that the United Nations plan for Namibia is
immediately and unconditionally implemented.

40. The international community has shown enough
patience in the face of South Africa’s arrogance and
intransigence. If flexibility and accommodation are continually met by duplicity and prevarication, it is time for
South Africa’s friends to realize that only the application
of strong and effective enforcement measures can bring
South Africa to its senses. We should like to believeindeed, we fervently hope-that the prospect of a peaceful
transition towards Namibian independence is still within
our reach. But this can be assured only if South Africa
can be compelled to abandon its present course and, for
its own sake, finally heed the expressed will of the overwhelming majority of mankind.

47. The United Nations Council for Namibia-the
legal Administering
Authority of the Territory-of
which Bangladesh is an active member, organized an
Extraordinary Plenary Meeting at Vienna from 3 to 7
June. The Declaration and Programme of Action
adopted at that meeting [see S/17262, annex] also laid
the groundwork for the successful resolution of the Namibian question. The outcome of the New Delhi and
Vienna meetings, therefore, should guide our current
deliberations.

41. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Adviser
for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh, Mr. Humayun
Rasheed Choudhury, whom I welcome. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
42. Mr. CHOUDHURY
(Bangladesh): Mr. President, it
is a privilege for me and the other members of my delegation to participate in this important debate, and I wish to
thank you and the members of the Council for giving us
this opportunity.

48. The current Council debate on Namibia is taking
place at a historic moment. The international community, in a matter of months, is to observe the fortieth
anniversary of the founding of the United Nations. This
year also marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples. The people of Namibia are also observing this year the twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding of SWAPO-their
sole authentic
representative. The contribution of the United Nations in
the field of decolonization is universally recognized and

43. I take part in this debate on the basis of the mandate
entrusted to me and to several of my colleagues by the
Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries on the question of Namibia, held at New Delhi from 19 to 21 April. I also do SO
to reiterate our firm support for, and solidarity with, the
valiant people of Namibia in their just and legitimate
5

and expressed will of the international community, the
apartheidregime has continued to frustrate implementation
of the United Nations plan for Namibia. Worse still, the
rkgime has been making repeated attempts to promote
puppet political institutions through a faCade of an
election with a view to imposing an internal settlement in
Namibia in clear violation of reso1utions 435 (1978) and
439 (1978). Bangladesh has condemned and rejected the
latest attempt by the Pretoria regime to impose a neocolonial settlement in Namibia through the so-called
Multi-Party Conference and install a puppet administration in Namibia on I7 June. It is reassuring to note that
the international community, in one voice, has rejected
this attempt and declared it illegal and null and void. The
apartheid regime has also made persistent efforts to destroy the territorial integrity of Namibia and has perpetrated a systematic fragmentation of the Territory along
ethnic and racial lines on the basis of a so-called homelands policy. We have denounced and rejected these
attempts and have repeatedly declared that Walvis Bay,
the Penguin Islands and other offshore islands are integral
parts of Namibia and that the territorial integrity of Namibia must be preserved.

is demonstrated by the threefold increase in the membership of this great world body since its inception. It is
therefore incumbent upon all of us to do everything possible to remove the last vestiges of colonialism in Namibia.
49. It is a tragedy that nearly two decades after the
termination of the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia, by the United Nations [General Assembly resolution 214.5 (XXl) of 27 October 19661, the racist Pretoria
regime continues to maintain its illegal presence in Namibia, through its abhorrent policies of repression,
racism and racial discrimination based on apartheid.
Thousands of Namibians have been murdered, tortured,
imprisoned and uprooted from their land for no other
reason than their opposition to the abominable practice
of apartheid-a system which has been repeatedly condemned by the United Nations as a crime against the
conscience and dignity of mankind. The international
community, which has the historic mandate to protect
the rights of the Namibian people, cannot remain indifferent to the ever-increasing repressive policies of the
racist Pretoria regime. In the face of adversity, the heroic
Namibian people have shown exemplary courage and
determination,
and their struggle for freedom and
national independence has earned universal respect and
support.

53. Similarly Bangladesh has denounced the continued
plundering and indiscriminate exploitation of Namibian
uranium and other resources by the racist regime in violation of the resolutions and decisions adopted by the
General Assembly and Security Council and in particular Decree No. 1, enacted by the United Nations Council
for Namibia.’ Bangladesh reiterates the call, as contained
in the Decree, to all States to take legislative action to
prevent the exploitation, processing, transport and marketing of Namibian resources.

50. It is only natural that Bangladesh, which long suffered colonial subjugation and paid such a heavy price for
its own independence, should stand firmly by the side of
the oppressed peoples throughout the world in their just
struggle against imperialism, colonialism and racism.
Consistent with its deep and abiding faith in the Charter
of the United Nations and its unswerving commitment to
the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, Bangladesh has
repeatedly affirmed the inalienable rights of all peoples to
self-determination, freedom and independence. We are
fully convinced that the triumph of such a just and legitimate struggle is inevitable.

54. With a view to maintaining its illegal stranglehold in
Namibia, the Pretoria regime has transformed the Territory into a garrison State. It has massively deployed its
armed forces to police the Territory and rule the Namibian people through intimidation, repression and terror. Countless Namibians engaged in their legitimate
struggle for self-determination have been killed or condemned as terrorists and incarcerated. The occupation
troops are not only attempting to suppress the struggle
for liberation but have also extended their acts of aggression and destabilization into the neighbouring States.
The remarks made by the representative of the racist
regime of Pretoria during the current debate are a clear
manifestation of the thoroughly obnoxious idea of Africa
being the white man’s burden. What right has that
regime to speak about the growth and developtnent of
the region, when it itself has grossly violated all civilized
norms and behaviour and vitiated the regional atmosphere, thus seriously jeopardising international peace
and security?

51. Based on this firm and principled position, Bangladesh has made every possible effort for the advancement
of the cause of Namibian independence. It is our firm
conviction that the independence of Namibia can and
must be achieved in accordance with the United Nations
plan for Namibia as endorsed in Council resolutions 385
(1976) and 435 (1978), which constitutes the only basis for
the peaceful transition of the Territory from colonial subjugation to independence. Bangladesh has consistently
asked for its immediate and unconditional implementation and has rejected the racist regime’s persistent
attempts to link the independence of Namibia with
extraneous and irrelevant issues. The independence of Namibia is a sacred international responsibility which cannot be held hostage to the resolution of issues alien to the
United Nations plan.
52. During

55. We pay tribute to the leaders of the’front-line States
who, in the face of such unprovoked aggression and continued hostilities, have displayed the utmost restraint and
statesmanship. We commend the leadership of SWAPO,
the sole authentic representative of the Namibian people,
for extending its full co-operation in the implementation
of the United Nations plan. They have shown maximum

the current debate the preceding speakers

have given a graphic account of how the Pretoria regime

continues to flout all cannons of international law and.
norms of civilized conduct in Namibia, Spurning the clear
6

flexibility and have repeatedly indicated their preparcdness to sign a cease-fire agreement and to accept a target
date for the arrival of the United Nations Transition
Assistance Group (UNTAG), which would set in motion
the electoral process under United Nations supervision.
President Sam Nujoma, even at this current debate, has
once again demonstrated readiness to co-operate with a]]
serious efforts aimed at a negotiated settlement. We congratulate him for his far-sightedness, wisdom and
statesmanship.

61. The Pretoria regime must be made to understand that
it cannot get away any longer with violations of resolutions
adopted by the United Nations. The Security Council
obviously has a special responsibility in this regard. In the
past it reviewed the situation from time to time but did not
take a firm and decisive course of action. This has only
encouraged the Pretoria regime to intensify its repression
and brutality in Namibia. The time has now come for the
Council to proceed urgently, with all the authority at its
command and all the resources at its disposal, to secure the
speedy implementation of its own resolutions and decisions. The United Nations plan for Namibia, as endorsed
in resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978,), is the only basis
for a final and lasting settlement of the Namibian question,
and we seek nothing more than its full, unconditional and
expeditious implementation.

56. Bangladesh firmly believes that the Pretoria regime
must be isolated effectively, and since our independence
we have maintained no relations whatsoever with the
racist regime in any field. We have consistently supported the call for comprehensive mandatory sanctions
against South Africa as provided for under Chapter VII
of the Charter. During its membershipin
the Council,
Bangladesh made every possible effort to ensure strict
and effective enforcement of the arms embargo against
South Africa as called for in resolution 418 (1977).

62. I should like to recall here that thesecretary-General,
in pursuance of resolution 532 (1983), adopted nearly two
years ago, undertook consultations with the parties
directly concerned and, in his earlier reports, confirmed
that all outstanding issuesrelevant to resolution 435 (1978)
had been resolved except for the choice of electoral system.
In his latest report to the Council [S/17242] the SecretaryGeneral has confirmed this position and has pointed out
again that, due to South Africa’s insistence on a totally
irrelevant and extraneous issue, it has not yet been possible
for him to launch the United Nations plan. On the question
of the electoral system, the leadership of SWAP0 has
shown flexibility and understanding, while the Pretoria
regime has not even communicated its views to the
Secretary-General. My delegation is in full agreement with
the concluding remarks of the Secretary-General, when in
paragraph 48, he urged all concerned to “make a renewed
and determined effort to expedite implementation of resolution 435 (1978) so that the people ofNamibia can exercise
their inalienable right to self-determination and independence without further delay”. Under the present circumstances, my delegation strongly feels that the Council
should reaffirm its commitment to theUnitedNations plan
and mandate the Secretary-General to undertake further
consultations with the parties directly involved, with a view
to finalizing the electoral system for holding elections in
Namibia under United Nations supervision and control, as
called for by resolution 435 (1978). The racist regime
should be told in clear and categorical terms to co-operate
fully with the Secretary-General and that any further
attempt on its part to obstruct implementation of the
United Nations plan would compel the Council to consider
imposition of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions
against it, as provided for under Chapter VII of the Charter. The Council should remain actively seized of the matter so that it can meet, at short notice, to take appropriate
steps in the event of continued obstruction by the apartheid
regime in Pretoria.

57. It is a matter of pride for Bangladesh to be able to
make a contribution to promote the cause of Namibia. We
attach particular importance to our membership in the
United Nations Council for Namibia, and we will continue
to take an active part in all its deliberations and activities,
We had the privilege of representing the Council in various
international meetings and symposia, as well as on its
missions of consultation. Within our modest means we
have contributed to the United Nations Fund for Namibia
and have offered training facilities in Bangladesh for Namibian students. Bangladesh deeply values the trust and
confidence reposed in it by the international community
for assisting and facilitating the work of the United
Nations Special Representative in the context of UNTAG.
58. May I take this opportunity to express our deep
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his untiring and
devoted efforts to achieve the early independence of Namibia. We would again assure him of our continued sup
port and whole-hearted co-operation.
59. We would also compliment the Acting President of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, the Chairman of
the Special Commitee against Apmrheid, the Chairman of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the
United Nations Commissioner for Namibia for their valuable contributions in promoting the cause of Namibian
independence, and we renew our plege to extend all
possible co-operation to them.
60. The question of Namibia is one of the most poignant
examples of the saddest chapters of modern history. The
Territory has been a unique responsibility of the United
Nations for the last two decades, and we cannot accept any
formula outside the framework of the United Nations. On
the eve of the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations, we must redou,ble our collective efforts to
free the Namibian people from the yoke of colonialism.

63. In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that human
dignity is the victim in Namibia. The abhorrent practice of
apartheid is contrary not only to the values of contemporary civilization but also to the tenets of all scriptures and
religions, Therefore, those who sustain and tolerate,
directly or indirectly, the continuance of the policy of
apartheid are casting an indelible blemish on the history of
7

their own civilization and transgressing the laws of their
own scriptures. I would urge those Governments to leap
beyond oblique intellectualizing and to understand that
what is at stake is a moral issue. In these days when
mankind
can quite justifiably
take pride in its
achievements in various fields, there is no room for such
degradation of man by man. It is our earnest hope that the
Council during its current debate will adopt without any
further delay a firm and decisive course of action to bring
about the dawn of Namibian independence. I pay tribute
to the indomitable spirit of the oppressed people of Namibia, who have been waging their liberation struggle for
100 years. We are convinced that in the not-too-distant
future this spirit will triumph.

69. The year 1985 marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding of SWAPO. We should commemorate both historical events with a serious assessment of
what has been accomplished for the Namibian people during these years, in order to give renewed relevance to the
principles of the Organization and to accelerate the process
that will lead to Namibia’s complete independence.
70. We also celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the
defeat of fascism in Europe, after a struggle intended to
benefit the entire world. Obviously, the hateful image of
fascism has not been completely erased. The disgraceful
apartheid regime in South Africa represents those very
practices of which the people of Namibia and the true
people of South Africa are victims. It is ironic that that
rCgime should receive the support of some of those who
claim the honour of having contributed to the final defeat
of fascism 40 years ago.

64. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Nicaragua, Mr. Miguel D’Escoto
Brockmann. I welcome him and invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
65., Mr. D’ESCOTO

BROCKMANN
(Nigeria) (interpreration from Spanish): Your decision, Sir, to preside person-

ally over this historic series of meetings of the Council as it
discusses once again the question of Namibia reflects the
high priority Trinidad and Tobago assigns to the delicate
and urgent matter of the total independence of Namibia.
As a Caribbean country that is part of the great Latin
American family, Trinidad and Tobago embodies the practice of non-aligned principles. If we add to that State policy
your skills and personal experience, we cannot but expect
that the work of the Council will lead to substantive
decisions that will benefit the Namibian people. The
Nicaraguan delegation is pleased to reiterate its complete
co-operation with you.

71. After almost 100 years of colonial occupation, Namibia must not remain a festering colonial wound in a
continent such as Africa, which has charted its course
towards freedom. Non-compliance with General Assembly and Security Council resolutions by a small number of
countries-South Africa and its allies-and the opportunism of some foreign investors should not make it possible
to continue to mock with impunity the Charter of the
United Nations and the principles and norms of its system
of international law.
72. On 18 April last, the racist South African rCgime
established an “interim government” in order to ensure
that Namibia would continue to be dependent on and
controlled by that rkgime. That attempt to mock the will of
the Namibian people and the support of the international
community for its struggle and that of its vanguard,
SWAPO, for the total independence of that people demonstrates once again that South Africa is not willing to end
the subjugation of Namibia. In fact what the South African
rCgime fears is that if the Namibian people were given the
opportunity freely to express themselves on their choice of
leaders they would choose SWAPO-something
that
would permanently eradicate apartheid and colonialism
from Namibia,

66. May I also greet my colleagues whose presence in this
debate demonstrates the importance that the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries attaches to this issue,
67. Nicaragua is participating in this debate for two
reasons. First of all, we are complying with agreements set
forth in the plan of action [see S/l 7284, annex] adopted at
the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries on the question of
Namibia held at New Delhi from 19 to 21 April 1985.
Secondly, our participation reflects the fact that ourpeople
and Government are completely at one with and committed to the fraternal people of Namibia and with SWAPO,
the sole and legitimate representative of that people, in
their struggle for the complete liberation of Namibia.

73. As occurs in neo-colonialist systems, the unilateral
measures promoted by South Africa in Namibia have as
their aim strengthening and institutionalizing the hateful
rtgime of apartheid. These attempts and their real objectives cannot but lead the international community to the
unavoidable conclusion that the so-called interim government and the much vaunted constructive engagement are
no more than delaying tactics to continue to deny the rights
of the Namibian people and to convert the international
community into an accomplice of the goals of the racist
rCgime of Pretoria and its allies. The Council should
emphatically, clearly and firmly condemn those hypocritical attempts by those who uphold apartheid within and
outside South Africa.

68. We understand, identify with and are in complete
support of the people of Namibia, with whose unassailable
vanguard, SWAPO, we share the experience of having
emerged from a hard and bloody national-liberation struggle carried out against the military in power imposed by a
common enemy, be it called Botha or Somoza. We share
with the people of Namibia the same ideals, the same thirst
for justice and the same yearning for peace. We look forward to that day in the near future when we shall greet the
members of SWAP0 in the seat that belongs to the completely independent State of Namibia in this great concert
of nations.
8

74. These facts and the new military offensive, which has
been described as an “iron fist” policy, embarked upon by
South Africa in northern Namibia and the massive South
African military mobilizations in southern Angola-a Territory illegally occupied by South Africa-are factors that
promote a permanently unstable situation in the region
and constitute a serious threat to international peace and
security. Those responsible for such a situation are South
Africa, its allies and the uph.olders of that rkgime, in particular the United States. They are bent on putting into practice in the region the same mechanisms for destabilization
and insecurity that imperialism uses in other regions to
keep third-world countries under its dependence and
control.

79. The members of the Council-particularly
its Western permanent members that continue to support the Pretoria rkgime-have
the grave responsibility to take
effective measures so that the plan contained in that resolution can be effectively and immediately implemented without modifications or pre-conditions. Nicaragua has always
considered that the Council should apply the measures
contained in Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, in order to ensure compliance with its mandate,
and it urges the Council members to so decide at this time.
80. The United States Government must be requested to
cease its misnamed policy of “constructive engagement”.
We must also insist-and Nicaragua with the full weight of
its moral authority so insists-that the United States stop
resorting to its veto power in the Council, since its sole
purpose-is to defend-crime and mock General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions and the decisions of the
International Court of Justice that have declared South
Africa’s occupation of Namibia illegal. Although on this
occasion I have not come here to talk about Nicaragua, it is
impossible for me not to mention how similar the imperialist behaviour against the Nicaraguan and other Central
American peoples is to the imperialist practices and policies in southern Africa. Only by rectifying these policies,
which have no support from the international community
or the people of the United States, will the United States
Government acquire the moral authority to participate in
the commemoration of the fortieth anniversary of the
Organization. Until Namibia is free, independent and nonaligned, a doubtful light will be cast on the very foundations, purposes and objectives of the Organization.

75. The similarities between the situations in southern
Africa and Central America are undeniable. In both
regions imperialism attempts to prevent self-determination
and the emergence and stability of independent nonaligned countries. For this purpose it militarizes neighbouring States whose territories are used to create, finance, arm
and lead bands of local traitors and reactionary elements
which from those sanctuaries assassinate the civilian population, destroy economic infrastructures, mine ports, promote incidents such as that in Cabinda, and carry out
terrorist actions under the pretext of creating “COI&IIS
sanitaires” to protect what the imperialists call their vital
interests, but the sole purpose of which is to topple popular
governments-even
if these have arisen out of electoral
processes of irreproachable integrity.
76. The Namibian people and those of the front-line
States know who their real enemies are and the strength of
those enemies. The establishment of so-called democratic
internationals fools no one. They are composed of the
same traitors and supported by th‘e same common enemy.
As our brother Sam Nujoma has said: “They have thus
become part of the problem which will be eliminated; it is
just a matter of time. When that comes about, these traitors
will be cast into oblivion together with their mentors”

81. Some Western United States allies, which have in the
past in one way or another practised similar policies
towards South Africa, have equal responsibility. The
intransigence, the rejection of Security Councit and General Assembly resolutions, the arrogance and the obvious
manoeuvres of the South African’ Government are the
result of the consistent and persistent criminal support the
current United States Administration extends to the abominable Pretoria rtgime.

[2583rd meeting, para. 1611.

77. In a just and appropriate response, the Coordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries recently held an extraordinary ministerial meeting at New Delhi from 19 to 21
April fo consider this situation. Nicaragua endorses each
and every one of the points contained in the Final Declaration and Programme of Action adopted at that meeting
[see S/l 7184, annex]. My presence before the Council at a
particularly difficult time for my country demonstrates the
special importance that Nicaragua attaches to these meetings, which are a fundamental part of that Programme of
Action. We hope that the Coundil will now take definitive
decisions that can deal effectively with the question of
Namibia’s total independence.

82. It should be recalled that it was the current United
States Administration which, after somelprogress had been
made in the talks on granting independence t6 Namibia,
invented for the benefit of South Africa the pretext of the
presence of Cuban troops in Angola and demanded their
withdrawal as a pre-condition for granting independence
to the Namibian nation. The international community has
rejected this link as being totally improper and false, Only
Pretoria and its allies in Washington continue to cling to
that approach.
83. That is in direct contrast with the truly constructive
and flexible policy of SWAPO, which is directed towards a
peaceful solution, and also with the political platform presented to the Secretary-General by the President of Angola.
Both have received the firm support of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and of the international community as a whole. They have also unamasked the pretexts
used by the Reagan Administration and South Africa in

78. Nicaragua has always considered that the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council, has an inescapable responsibility towards Namibia. Resolution 435
(1978), aimed at implementing the United Nations plan for
the independence of Namibia, is in Nicaragua’s view the
sole basis for a peaceful settlement of the problem.
9

f

order to continue the colonial domination of Namibia, or
to attempt to replace it with a sham independence.

89. The present international situation is marked by
numerous sources of tension throughout the world. In that
context, the situation in southern Africa-although
some
claim to detect a certain improvement-has
been deteriorating dangerously of late, not only for the South African
and Namibian peoples, but also for the peoples of other
countries which have suffered the terrible horrors and
effects of the war waged by the racist regime of South
Africa, as well as for mankind at large, for the persistence
of apartheid, with all its consequences and the actions
undertaken to strengthen it, could cause the present conflict and tension to result in unforeseeable consequences.

84. May 1 extend a warm and fraternal greeting of solidarity to comrade Sam Nujoma, President of SWAPO, the
sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people, and
its unquestionable vanguard in their struggle. After 25
years of unwavering struggle by SWAPO. for a free and
independent homeland, the people and the Revolutionary
Government of Nicaragua wish to extend to the struggling
Namibian people, to the leadership and the militants of
SWAPO, and to its People’s Liberation Army, a special
message of encouragement and hope. I ask Mr. Nujoma to
convey to the Namibian people our humble tribute to the
brothers who have fallen in the struggle; their lives were not
sacrificed in vain. Namibiashall be free one day. We extend
our hand to comrade Nujoma as a reaffirmation of our
irrevocable commitment to his cause: speeding the achievement of complete independence for Namibia.

90. Indeed, the apartheid regime, the illegal occupation of
Namibia and acts of aggression by the racist rtgime against
other States of the region are at the core of the question of
southern Africa. It is perfectly clear that the restoration of
peace to the area requires the independence of Namibia
and the elimination of the South African racist regime. In
our view, therefore, the situation in southern Africa should
be the object of the very closest attention during the current
series of meetings, so that the Council may find the most
effective means and the most just solutions for the settlement of the problems of the region, in accordance with the
numerous resolutions already adopted by the Organization, particularly Council resolution 435 (1978).

85. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Angola, Mr. Afonso Van-Dunem. I
welcome him and invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
86. Mr. VAN-DUNEM
(Angola) (interpretation from
It is a great honour and privilege for me to have
the opportunity to address the Council and to extend, on
behalf of the Government of the People’s Republic of
Angola and its President, Mr, Jos6 Eduardo dos Santos,
our cordial greetings to all those in this chamber, who have
been convened at the request of the current Chairman of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries to consider the
situation prevailing in southern Africa, where the most
heinous regime, the racist apartheid regime, is posing a
serious threat to international peace and security by keeping millions of blacks under the yoke of total humiliation
and oppression and by illegally occupying by force of arms
the international Territory of Namibia, from which it is
carrying out attacks against sovereign and independent
States of the area.
French):

91, But seven years after its adoption that resolution still
remains unimplemented, in spite of its binding nature. This
situation is a result not only of the intransigence of the
racist rigime of South Africa, but also of the collusion of
certain Western Powers which have pursued policies of
connivance and alliance with the apartheid regime. Those
policies include the linkage conceived by the United States
Administration with the sole aim of delaying or even preventing the full and effective implementation of resolution
435 (1978).
92. Resolution 435 (1978) contains the legal and political
basis for the solution of the problem of Namibian independence, and was adopted unanimously. It should be recalled
that, in conformity with Article 2, paragraph 2, of the
Charter of the United Nations, Members of the United
Nations are obliged in good faith to discharge their obligations under the Charter. That means that full implementation of the resolution in question is part of the
responsibility of all States. In that context it is unacceptable to put forward elements extraneous to that resolution
and thus categorically rejected by the entire international
community.

87. Sir, we are happy to see presiding over the Council
the representative of a country with which Angola maintains friendly relations. Your distinguished diplomatic
qualities and vast experience will, we are sure, bring to the
work of this series of meetings all the seriousness and
level-headedness called for by the situation in southern
Africa, where a drive by the criminal uparrheid regime to
destabilize and overthrow the Governments of neighbouring States has assumed alarming and sinister proportions,
in spite of the many resolutions of condemnation adopted
by the international community, including the United
Nations, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Organization of African Unity.

93. That is why, by its resolution 539 (1983), the Council
rejected all South African attempts to link the independence of Namibia with extraneous matters such as the
withdrawal from Angola of Cuban internationalist forces,
whose presence is fully in keeping with Article 51 of the
Charter and falls within the exclusive sovereign competence of Angola.

88. We wish also to convey once more to the SecretaryGeneral our warm appreciation and gratitude for his
praiseworthy and tireless efforts since his election to the
leadership of the United Nations to bring about peaceful
settlements of the international problems facing the
Organization.

94. The traditional arrogance of the racist South African
Government, which refuses to abide by United Nations
resolutions, is unquestionably being encouraged by the
policy of the United States regarding southern Africa. The
10

most recent InanifeStatiOn of that policy is the notion of
constructive engagement, aimed only at uninterrupted
exploitation of the natural resources of Namibia by foreign
economic interests, in defiance of Decree NO. 1 for the
Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia,’ and at
strengthening the aggressive military machine of the Pretoria rtgime by encouraging it to maintain its occupation of
Namibia and to continue its acts of aggression and subversion against neighbouring States.
95. Despite South Africa’s persistent and increasing use
of force and the threat of force in the undeclared war it has
been waging against Angola for more than 10 years,
Angola, loyal to its principles and scrupulously respectful
of the Charter, has given eloquent proof of its political and
diplomatic flexibility and goodwill by making a positive
contribution to the establishment of a just and lasting
peace in southern Africa.
96. Angola, in order to guarantee the speedy independence of the Namibian people, has put forward a platform
for very realistic comprehensive negotiations to break the
deadlock on the problem of Namibia. It has proposed a
programme for reducing the number of Cuban troops on
our territory, the main features of which are: first, completion of the withdrawal of South African forces from the
territory of Angola and control of its borders by the armed
forces of Angola; secondly, a solemn declaration by South
Africa commiting it to ensuring implementation of resolution 435 (I 978); thirdly, a cease-fire agreement between the
Republic of South Africa and SWAPO, the sole, legitimate
representative of the Namibian people; and fourthly, the
signing, under Council auspices, of an international agreement between the Governments of Angola, South Africa
and Cuba and a representative of SWAPO, which would
define the obligations assumed by each of the parties to
assure the independence of Namibia and the guarantees
necessary to preserve the security and territorial integrity
of Angola. Meeting those requirements would be a major
step towards the exercise by the Namibian people of its
inalienable right to independence and towards the estab
lishment of peace in the region.

Planning

Operation

Argon, aimed at destroying

the

Malollgo
oil complex in Cabinda province. They thoL1g~~t
that in that way they would force tile legitimate GoveI’llmerit of Angola to submit to their will and to the will ol’thc

Puppet gangs of UNITA (National Union for the Total
Jndependence of Angola), tQ whom the operation would be
attributed if it were successful.To carry out this machiavellian operation and experienced group of Pretoria’s special
forces was chosen, one belonging to the 40th Regiment of
the Special Forces of the SADF [South African Defcncc
Force], which has its training camp at the Bav of’Saldanh~~.
in Cape Pronvince. This group of the South African Spccinl
Forces was commanded by Captain Winan Petrus du Toit*
who was takenm prisoner by the Angolan Defence Forces.
Jt should be pointed out that Captain Winan du Toit has iI
hg record of terrorism and that he had already participated in November 1982 in the destruction of the bridge
over the Giraul River, in the province of Namibia, and iI1
1983 and 1984 in the Cahama actions and in one of' the
attacks on Maputo, the capita1 of Mozambique.
Aftter~011~’
pleting training at the Bay of Saldanha, more than 2,000
kilometres from Cabinda, the South Africa terrorist group*
consisting of nine men, embarked for Cabinda on 13 MRY
on board the ,JuinZonde, a vessel of Israeli manufacturcq
and landed on 20 May during the night. However, at 17Q”
hours on 21 May, while waiting until nightfall to carry out
their sinister plan, the South Africa terrorist gang was discovered by a patrol of the Angolan People’s Army, which
killed two of the cncmy and took the 1edcr of the gl’oLlP
prisoner.
100. Along with the abortive
recently witnessed m esdation

Argon operation,
we have
of South African aggres-

sion against Angola.
101. In March and April a South African cargo aircraft*
Hercules C-130, in another violation of the airspace of
Angola, penetrated into its territory as far as the provinces
of North Lunda and Malangc and on four occasialls
unloaded about 80 tons of military ma/&/e/for its ancillary
Ibrcc, the UNJTA puppets. The Angolan Defence Forces
have already captured about 40 tons of that ,?lrrttil*ic’
unloaded 011 19 and 27 April in Malangc Province.

97. However, despite the efforts and good will ofAngola
and other front-line States, South Africa’s attitude continues to be very hostile towards the international community. That attitude is made possible by the complicity and
support it enjoys from certain Western Powers, which
should be held directly responsible for the difficult situation in southern Africa and for the policy ofState terrorism
pursued by the racist rtgime of South Africa against neighbouring States.

102. Furthermore, after the abortive sabotage attemPt*
there has also been an increase in reconnaissance flights by
the South African Air Force, which have penetrated more
than 200 kilometres inside our territory. In that regard,
reference must be made to the flights undertaken on 31
May by eight aircraft in the Cahama, Chibemba and
Mulondo regions and on 4 June over Virei and TombWa in
the province of Namibia,

98. The lack of sincerity of the racist Rgime of Pretoria
regarding the search for a genuine solution and for peace in
the region is increasingly manifest.

103. The apartheidrdgime, which is once again testing the
patience of the international community, intends to install
on 17 June a puppet government in Namibia on the basis Of
so-called elections to be held among so-called political
parties which in fact represent no one in Namibia and are
not recognized by the United Nations or the OAU.

99. But while the Angolan Government has been showing its traditional good will, negotiating with the South
African Government on the holding of a meeting at the
ministerial level, Pretoria’s aggressive military machine
has, since January 1985, under the direction of MajorGeneral Liebenberg, Commander of Special Forces, been

104. Angola strongly condemns this attempt by South
Africa to evade the implementation of the United Nations
plan for Namibia and to impose an internal settlement
11

within the framework
Conference.

Angola is not a South African bantustan, we reserve the
right to reply in due course to the letter and the spirit ofthe
statement made by the representative of South Africa.

of the so-called Multi-Party

105. Once again the Pretoria regime has shown that it
does not have the slightest intention of abiding by the letter
or the spirit of the decisions and resolutions of the United
Nations on Namibia but, on the contrary, is seeking to
perpetuate its domination, oppression and repression of
the heroic people of Namibia.

111. The people of Angola won its independence through
a heroic struggle conducted over a period of 14 years
against the Portuguese colonial system and does not have
any lessons to learn from the criminal apartheid rigime,
which is exploiting, oppressing and repressing 25 million
blacks. We reject and condemn any attempt by South
Africa to interfere in the internal affairs of Angola.

106. That “government”, which would be nothing but a
colonial South African cabinet on Namibian territory, will
not have international recognition, and consequently its
actions will be null and void. Furthermore, it should be
recalled that any solution for the Namibian problem will be
valid only if it is adopted with the participation of
SWAPO, the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people, and if it is brought about within the framework laid down by the United Nations, since Namibia is an
international Territory under the Mandate of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, as the lawful Administering
Authority of the Territory until it achieves independence.

112. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Turkey. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
113. Mr. TURKMEN
(Turkey): Mr. President, may I
first thank you and the members of the Council for the
opportunity accorded to me to make a statement on Namibia.
114. I wish also to express to you, Sir, our warm congratulations upon the accession of Trinidad and Tobago to the
presidency. Your presence here for these meetings is particularly significant and will enable the Council to benefit
from your eminent qualities and experience during the
discussion of one of the most important issues in which the
United Nations is involved.

107. It was in that context that the Coordinating Bureau
of Non-Aligned Countries, meeting at New Delhi from 19
to 21 April 1985, considered that it would be useful for the
Council to be convened so that it could fully discharge its
responsibilities for the implementation of resolution 435
(1978).

115. I avail myself of this opportunity to pay tribute to
the representative of Thailand for the skill and tact he
displayed in presiding over the Council in May, at a time
when so many delicate issues had to be tackled.

108. These meetings of the Council present an exceptional opportunity for us to live up to our commitments to
the ideals, purposes and principles of the Charter and our
international responsibilities in this year of the fortieth
anniversary of the United Nations and the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.

116. I wish to reiterate on this occasion how much my
Government appreciates the constant efforts of the
Secretary-General to promote peaceful solutions to numerous intractable problems, and in particular to ensure the
implementation of the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia. We hope that conditions enabling
the Secretary-General to continue his endeavours will
emerge.

109. Angola hopes that this time the Council will justify
the confidence placed in it by the international community
as the organ whose primary responsibility is the maintenance of international peace and security and will demand
the immediate implementation by South Africa of the
United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia. If
South Africa persists in its attitude of arrogance, intransigence and obstructionism, the Security Council may envisage the adoption of appropriate measures in accordance
with Chapter VII of the Charter, which provides an abundance of means of isolating and eliminating the odious
system of apartheid.

117. These Council meetings are taking place at a time
when world public opinion has more than ever focused its
attention on developments in southern Africa and is
expecting firm international action which can at last persuade South Africa that it has to alter radically its policies
with regard to Namibia and apartheid. If the Council can
fulfil the expectation of world public opinion, it will not
only contribute decisively to the solution of the current
problems in southern Africa, but also provide proof that
the United Nations, as it prepares to celebrate its fortieth
anniversary, is capable of playing a fundamental role for
peace, freedom and justice in the world.

110. The statement made on 10 June by the representative of South Africa in the Council constitutes in itself an
affront to the conscience of mankind and a further act of
defiance of the authority of the United Nations, where
respect for the sovere’iinty of States and non-interference
in the interiial affairs of States are fundamental principles.
The coarse language of that statement suggests to us that
South Africa wishes to perpetuate its criminal policy of
aggression and destabilization against Angola. That is why
we have recently witnessed a recrudescence of daily violations of Angolan airspace. Within this context, and since

118. The independence of Namibia has been on the
agenda of the United Nations since its inception. It is true
that some other problems have also preoccupied the
United Nations from the very beginning and still await
solutions. But the Namibian problem has a unique characteristic, Since the General Assembly terminated South
Africa’s Mandate in 1966, Namibia has come under the
12

direct responsibility of the United Nations, The Organization therefore has a special commitment towards Namibia,
a commitment that it has been unable to fulfil for 20 years.
119. On the other hand, there is no other problem for
which the international community has unanimously
approved terms for a settlement. Resolution 435 (1978)
prepares the ground for the exercise of the right of selfdetermination by the people of Namibia through free elections under the auspices and supervision of the United
Nations. The plan evolved by the Council, which has also
been endorsed by South Africa, still continues to be the
only acceptable legal and political basis for an equitable
solution to the question of Namibia.
120. The problem that we face now is to implement the
resolution of the Council, and in this field the South African Government has succeeded so far in its dilatory tactics
and procrastination. Despite the efforts of the Council, the
OAU, the Secretary-General and the contact group and
the constructive spirit shown by SWAP0 and the front-line
States, South Africa has refused to abide by the letter and
spirit of the Council resolution, injected extraneous issues
into the negotiating process, which has to deal exclusively
with the ‘implementation
of the United Nations plan,
increased its military presence in Namibia, reinforced its
hold over the Territory and undertaken to impose an internal settlement with the aim of creating a political structure
subservient to Pretoria.
121. There is no doubt that South Africa’s objective is to
obstruct the demand for the implementation of the United
Nations plan, to prevent SWAPO, which is recognized by
the General Assembly as the sole, authentic representative
of the Namibian people, playing the role incumbent upon it
in the process of self-determination and to confront the
world with afuit accompli. To this end, the Government of
South Africa is blatantly violating the decisions of the
Council and proceeding with its decision to install a puppet
administration in Windhoek on 17 June in the form of an
interim government of the so-called Multi-Party Conference. South Africa’s latest military actions in Angola show
how much it is ready to defy the international community.
122. It was to review the situation in the light of those
developments that the United Nations Council for Namibia, of which Turkey is a member, met at Vienna in an
Extraordinary Plenary Meeting from 3 June to 7 June. My
Government subscribes to the main thrust of the Final
Document [S/17262, annex] adopted at the end of the
Meeting. If South Africa can get away with its latest tactics
and fairs accomplis, the prospects for a settlement of the
Namibian problem, in conformity with the United Nations
plan, could be jeopardized, perhaps irremediably. The
Council should, in our view, react strongly. It is only
through a judicious combination of a firm stand by the
Security Council and effective international pressure on
the Government of South Africa that resolution 435 (1978)
can be implemented, As long as South Africa is allowed to
continue its unilateral policies, southern Africa will be
deprived of a just and durable peace, and this will lead to an
exacerbation of tensions, with heavy consequences for the
peoples of the area.

123. In considering the question of Namibia, the human
dimension should not be overlooked. The Namibian
people suffer not only from large-scale human rights violations but also from the militarization of its Territory, the
squandering of its natural resources and the exploitation of
its economy, to the exclusive benefit of South Africa. The
brutal repression of the people of Namibia and South
Africa will undoubtedly reach new heights if South Africa
is not challenged in a resolute manner. The United
Nations, with its specific responsibility, cannot remain
indifferent to the plight of the people of Namibia.
124. The Council has in the past adopted sanctions
against South Africa. However, the arms embargo
initiated by the Council [resolution 418 (1977)] has been
circumvented by South Africa, which has now become a
net arms exporter. The need for stronger measures ifSouth
Africa persists in its intransigence, and for a greater political will to carry them out, is therefore obvious. It is our
earnest hope that the Security Council can this time reach a
consensus on an effective course of action, keep the developments regarding Namibia under constant review and
press unequivocally for the rapid implementation of resolution 435 (1978). This is, we believe, both a challenge and an
opportunity for the Council.
125. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is therepresentative of Brazil. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
126. Mr. MACIEL (Brazil): First let me say how grateful
I am for this opportunity to address the Council.
127. It gives me special pleasure, Sir, that you should be
presiding over this meeting on the question of Namibia.
128. Once again the Council is being convened to discuss
the situation in Namibia. Over the years, this body has
been the stage for difficult negotiations and for debates, at
times decisive, at times very frustrating, but the independence of Namibia is certainly one of those items which have
constantly defied our ability to fulfil the mandate and the
expectations of the United Nations. The legitimate aspirations of the Namibian people and its sole representative,
SWAPO, are still to be attained.
129. The tactics the Pretoria regime uses to avoid implementation of resolution 435 (1978) are well known. They
range from the alleged partiality of the United Nations in
favour of SWAP0 to the more recent notion of “linkage”,
which would connect Namibia’s independence to unrelated and extraneous issues. These tactics are employed to
protect an internal settlement in Namibia that is incompatible with the United Nations plan. Unilateral developments
sponsored by South Africa in the Territory include the
formation of the Turnhalle Alliance in.l.975, the convening
of a so-called National Assembly, followed by the ,Council
of Ministers in 1980. Lacking legitimacy, these arrangements failed, but the strengthening of a non-representative
and illegal administration in Windhoek has continued. The
fact that all these actions were declared null and void by the
United Nations brought about no change in the South
African attitude.

130. Against the background of the constant violation of
resolutions adopted by the United Nations, the international community was recently confronted by another
move by Pretoria when it announced that it would establish an “interim mechanism for the internal administration
of the Territory pending agreement on an internationally
acceptable independence for Namibia”. In making this
decision the South African Government would be taking
into account the suggestions of a multi-party conference
purportedly representing theNamibian people but in effect
acting under the general guidance of interests residing outside the Territory.

peace and defy both international law and the Charter of
the United Nations itself, Brazil also refuses to accept any
policy based on economic and strategic interests that can
only serve to postpone Namibian independence and the
elimination of racist policies in South Africa.
135. In the case of Namibia, an ever-growing consensus
is developing over the extent of the threat posed by the
South African occupation of the Territory. No one would
deny that most serious efforts have already been made by
the international community in order to pave the way for a
negotiated settlement for Namibian,independence. In spite
of this concerted action South Africa has stalled the independence process, undermining the credibility of the
United Nations. Other parties concerned, on the other
hand, have given repeated signs of flexibility. Indeed, only
a short time ago SWAP0 reaffirmed that it would be ready
to negotiate a cease-fire, as long as it would be followed by
free elections in accordance with the United Nations plan.
Angola also made its contribution when it informed the
Secretary-General of the steps taken

131. Two elements of the statement delivered by the
South African Government inspired an immediate
response. First, we were witnessing a new unilateral action
taken by the illegal occupying Power. Secondly, Pretoria
omitted reference to resolution 435 (1978), which it had
already accepted in principle as the basis for Namibian
independence. In a note issued on 3 May [S/I71511 the
President of the Council stated that the establishment of
the so-called interim government was seen by members of
the Council as a measure contrary to the expressed will of
the international community and was declared null and
void, like all other unilateral actions taken by the illegal
administration in Namibia.

“with the essential objective of guaranteeing the independence of Namibia through the full implementation
of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), of achieving
the withdrawal of South African troops from the south
of Angola, securing international guarantee for Angola’s security, independence and teftitorial integrity, and
contributing to the establishment of lasting peace in
southern Africa” [see S/16838].

132. The Brazilian Government condemns the decision
to establish such an interim government in the Territory
and adds its voice to the statement by the Council that
reaffirmed that resolution 435 (1978) remains the only
acceptable basis for a peaceful solution and an internationally recognized settlement of the Namibian question.
133. We are dismayed, however, at the reply to the Council’s statement made the next day by South Africa
[S/17152, annex]. It tried to insinuate that it would not *Lact
in a manner irreconcilable with the international settlement plan” as long as the present negotiations held “any
real prospect of bringing about the genuine withdrawal of
Cuban forces from Angola”. These references to the linkage theory further dim the prospects of effective implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and the peaceful
withdrawal of South Africa from Namibia. It seems that
violence against neighbouring States is a weapon reserved
by Pretoria to defend its presence in Namibia and its illegal
exploitation of natural resources while at thC same time it
attempts to preserve the system of apartheid. When the
Angolan Government captured a South African military
commando in its territory, that was proof that the strategy
of provoking destabilization of southern Africa is still very
much alive despite every effort and concession made by the
front-line States in 1984 to promote a climate of trust and
confidence in the region. In this connection the expansion
of the apartheid rationale calls for renewed condemnation.

136. At this crucial stage we must place qyen greater
responsibility on the shoulders of the Council, and in particular upon those members of the Council in a position to
exert a more decisive influence. Further hesitation in adopting measures to press for the independence of Namibia
could result in aggravation of the dispute and tensions in
the region. Brazil has always been an unconditional supporter of the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes, as enshrined in the Charter. The provisions of the
Charter are not only to be quoted but also to be applied. At
a juncture at which the occupation of Namibia is threatening the prospects of lasting peace in southern Africa, we
believe that the Council must take further action in support
of Namibia’s freedom and independence. Brazil reaffirms
here that resolution 435 (1978) should be promptly implemented, that it is the primary responsibility of the United
Nations to guide the independence process, and that we
consider it unacceptable to portray the Namibian question
as part of an East-West confrontation and to introduce
extraneous rivalries in this context, for this casts a shadow
over the 25 years of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the
40 years of the United Nations.
ITiiemeeting rose at 1.10p.m.

134. The Brazilian Government rejects any racial discrimination, especially the system of apartheid, as incompatible with the basic values of Brazilian society and
irreconcilable with the most elementary principles of
respect for human dignity. Military aggression by South
African forces and the establishment of the so-called interim government are actions which endanger international
Litho in United Nations, New York

NOTE

’ Decree No. I for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted by the United Nations Council for Namibia on 27
September1974 Offiieial Records of rhe GenerakAssembly,
Thi+iy#th
&winn,
Supp/enrenr
No. 24 (A/35/24). Vol. I. annex II.

-....--

00300

90-61439-July

1994-- I .325
