S/PV.7998

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7998th meeting

Tuesday, 11 July 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wu Haitao. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Fernández Revollo
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Biagini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the political agreement
of 31 December 2016 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2017/435)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2017/565)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-21001 (E)
*1721001*

S/PV.7998

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the political agreement of
31 December 2016 in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (S/2017/435)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2017/565)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/435, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
the political agreement of 31 December 2016 in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2017/565, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the situation concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. My statement will focus on
three points. First, I will address the political situation,
specifically with regard to the implementation of the
agreement of 31 December 2016, which is designed to
govern the transition under way and lay the groundwork
for elections. As indicated in the report of the Secretary2/14

11/07/2017

General dated 30 June (S/2017/565), the implementation
of that agreement by and large remains insufficient.
Secondly, I will refer to the security situation in
certain areas of the eastern and western parts of the
country, which is characterized by an increase in
clashes between armed groups and national security
forces. In part, that situation is responsible for the
disturbing increase in violations of human rights. It is
also the reason for the deterioration in the humanitarian
situation. Between May and June, the number of
people displaced in Democratic Republic of the Congo
increased by 26 per cent, totalling 1.3 million persons.
In that context — and this will be my third point — the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is
working to respond to the challenges facing the country
and continuing its adjustment efforts, as I was able to
observe during my visit to the country few weeks ago.
Six months ago, when President Kabila’s second
term was ending, the signing of the 31 December 2016
agreement by all the political stakeholders involved
helped to avert a serious crisis. The agreement marked
the culmination of many months of tension and
negotiations and outlined the transition to elections at
the end of 2017, which is currently under way. With less
than six months to go before the elections, however,
not all the transitional institutions are in place, and the
consensus that characterized the progress being made a
few months ago has gradually eroded.
The Rassemblement des forces politiques et
sociales acquises au changement, the platform uniting
various opposition parties, has dissociated itself from
recent developments. On 27 April it was not among the
signatories to the special arrangement for implementing
the agreement. On 16 May, its members were absent
when Parliament inducted the transitional Government,
and we fear that this erosion of the political consensus
has also been detrimental to the establishment of the
Conseil national de suivi de l’accord. The situation
could make it even harder to maintain the spirit of
collaboration and consensus approach that the political
landscape in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
needs. That is why Mr. Maman Sidikou, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Said
Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to the
Great Lakes Region, have been making every effort to
exercise their good offices with a view to convincing
all the relevant political actors of the importance of
implementing the agreement as fully and quickly as
17-21001

11/07/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

possible. It was with the aim of supporting their efforts
that I visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
mid-June. During my discussions I stressed the crucial
importance of implementing the commitments made
six months ago, and I had an opportunity to reiterate
my appeal to President Kabila.
I would like to note, however, that despite the sense
we have at times of an impasse, the progress being
made on voter registration in 24 of the 26 provinces of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a source of
encouragement. By 10 July, under the leadership of the
Independent National Electoral Commission and with
MONUSCO’s active support, at least 33 million voters,
of an estimated total of nearly 41 million, had been
registered. However, the security issues in the provinces
of Kasai and Kasai Central have made registration there
problematic. We should also be concerned about the
Commission’s delay in publishing the election calendar,
as well as the continuing uncertainty surrounding the
financing of the elections, despite the Government’s
efforts to disburse the agreed budget in the past few
months. Finally, the Chair of the Commission’s recent
announcement about the impossibility of holding the
elections by the end of the year is another reason for
concern. At a time when the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is midway through its transition, it is more
essential than ever to ensure that the national political
actors and international partners, including the
members of the Security Council, mobilize once again
to get the political agreement of 31 December 2016
back on track.
(spoke in English)
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report, the
security situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo continues to be a major worry. Instability persists
in a number of areas in the east and west. In the east,
a recent spate of attacks by armed groups against the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC) has added a layer of complexity to an already
volatile security landscape. In North Kivu province
in particular, Mayi-Mayi groups, among others,
recently conducted raids against FARDC positions, a
new phenomenon that МONUSCO is assessing. In the
meantime, clashes between ethnically based militias
in North Kivu have continued. In South Kivu, armed
groups have been increasingly involved in disputes
related to customary succession and in intercommunal
and transhumance-related disputes. In Ituri, the Force
de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri (FRPI) continues to

S/PV.7998

pose the single greatest threat to civilians. Conflicts
in neighbouring Burundi and South Sudan have been
spilling over into the eastern provinces of Ituri and
South Kivu in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In response, MONUSCO has continued to support
the FARDC in operations against the FRPI in Ituri and
the Lord’s Resistance Army in Haut-Uélé. The Mission
is also supporting local and community dialogue efforts
in North Kivu, South Kivu, Maniema and Tanganyika,
in an approach based on the belief that, while military
means may sometimes be necessary, only a political
solution can effectively address the root causes of the
various conflicts that threaten civilians.
The violence in the Kasai provinces, in the western
region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, has
reached disturbing levels. The Kamuina Nsapu militia
has targeted and killed dozens of civilians, customary
chiefs, public servants and security officers. It has also
attacked voter registration centres, schools and religious
institutions. For example, in a series of clashes with the
FARDC in Kazumba territory between 25 and 28 April,
41 militia members and 12 soldiers were killed. The
recent increase of inter-ethnic violence in the Kasai
region is just as worrying. In April, for example,
violence between Pende and Tshokwe communities
reportedly aligned with the Government, and Luba
and Lulua communities reportedly associated with the
Kamuina Nsapu militia, led to the deaths of 38 people
in Kamonia territory in Кasai province. МONUSCO
has also received reports of summary executions and
rapes, including of civilians by the security forces.
In response to the developments in the Kasai
provinces, MONUSCO has established a small and
mobile presence in various locations in order to help
protect civilians. It has deployed personnel in Bulungu,
Luiza and Tshimbulu, in Kasai Central province,
and reinforced its existing presence in Kananga and
Mbuji-Mayi. Through a combination of human rights
monitoring and political outreach, supported by a light
but increasing military presence, the Mission is helping
to bring back some measure of stability wherever it
can. In Tshimbulu, for example, the deployment in May
of a standing combat deployment has helped to enable
internally displaced people to return. Schools and
churches have reopened and the Mission is supporting
the local authorities in their mediation work. Despite
those efforts, there continue to be disturbing reports of
human rights violations and abuses on an almost daily
basis. Dozens of mass graves have been reported. So

17-210013/14

S/PV.7998

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

far, national investigation efforts have been slow. The
Mbuji-Mayi military court’s recent conviction of seven
FARDC officers involved in the killing of civilians
in Mwanza Lomba is a small but encouraging step
in the right direction. I welcome the Human Rights
Council’s recent resolution requesting that international
investigators be appointed to assist the authorities in
that regard.
Throughout my recent visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I stressed the importance of
prioritizing political means in addressing the situation
in the Kasai provinces and emphasized the urgency
of ensuring accountability for the crimes committed,
including crimes by members of the security forces.
I also underscored the determination of the United
Nations to ensure that those responsible for the killing
of our colleagues Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán
are brought to justice. I was encouraged by the
assurances that President Kabila gave me regarding
his determination to ensure that the crimes committed
in the Kasais do not go unpunished. Such statements
of intention must, however, be followed by concrete
action. The level of cooperation and support that the
Government provides to the team of international
investigators appointed by the Human Rights Council
will be a test of its commitment to accountability.
MONUSCO continues to adjust its posture in
response to a rapidly changing environment and
to focus on supporting the implementation of the
31 December agreement in order to pave the way for
holding elections and to protect civilians. I count on
the Council’s continued support to our ongoing efforts
to transform the Mission into a more agile, flexible
and responsive tool. I am committed to ensuring that
MONUSCO delivers on its core mandated objectives
as efficiently and effectively as possible and that it
continues to evolve in response to the changing situation
on the ground. In the current financial context, it will
be critical to ensure that the Mission makes the best
possible use of the resources at its disposal by focusing
on a limited set of key priorities. The strategic review of
the Mission is under way and, as requested, we will be
presenting the Council with options by 30 September.
The current political impasse, the rising insecurity,
and the worsening human rights and humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
require a concerted response from regional and
international partners. That response must aim to help
to create the conditions for a successful transition and
4/14

11/07/2017

the holding of free, fair and inclusive elections, in
accordance with the Constitution. The Secretariat and
MONUSCO are determined to work with the Congolese
Government and people to achieve that goal. Together,
we must preserve the hard-won gains of the past 17
years and pave the way for the Mission’s exit.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for
his very enlightening briefing and for the tireless
commitment of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) to the Congolese people.
This meeting is being held at a critical moment,
six months after the signing of the political agreement
of 31 December 2016 and three months after the
adoption of an innovative mandate for MONUSCO. It
allows us to review developments in the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to reaffirm
our shared priorities. I should like to lay out France’s
assessment of three aspects: the growing political
backlog; the worrisome deterioration of the security
situation and human rights, in particular in the Kasais;
and the welcome responsiveness of MONUSCO in
implementing the mandate set forth in resolution 2348
(2017).
First, as to the growing delays in the implementation
of the 31 December agreement is of concern to France
as the deadline for holding elections approaches.
The agreement is the only credible road map for the
end of the crisis. That is why the lack of consensus
and the systematic blockages in its implementation
are very worrying. Elections must take place in less
than six months, time is running out. It is therefore
urgent that the Government take the steps necessary to
reaffirm its commitment to respecting the provisions
of the agreement. The organization of elections, the
effective establishment of the National Council for
Oversight of the Agreement and the implementation of
confidence-building measures are priorities.
We welcome the progress made on voter registration.
That is a positive step forward and a dynamic that needs
to be pursued. We regret, however, the delays in the
17-21001

11/07/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

registration process, in particular in the three provinces
of Kasai and Kinshasa. We call on the authorities to
take the measures necessary to finalize the registration
and the voter register. I wish to stress that compliance
with the deadlines set out in the agreement is essential.
France calls on the Congolese authorities to take all the
measures necessary to organize the elections as soon as
possible and recalls the need for an urgent publication of
an electoral timetable in accordance with the provisions
of the 31 December agreement. These advances are all
the more urgent as the current impass is already leading
to an increase in areas of instability in the country.
Secondly, the unprecedented intensification of
violence in the west is particularly alarming and requires
our full attention. Violence in the Kasais has reached
an unsustainable level. The clashes between the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo and
Kamwina Nsapu militia are taking a heavy toll on the
populations, as evidenced by the continued increase in
the number of displaced persons and refugees.
We are also very concerned about the rapid
spread of insecurity to Tanganyika and the increasing
intercommunity conflicts in these regions. In that
regard, I join the Secretary-General in condemning the
attacks in the strongest possible terms and in calling on
the belligerents to lay down their arms in order to put
an end to this climate of insecurity and its disastrous
humanitarian consequences. The escape of detainees,
which is increasing in unusual proportions, also adds
to growing insecurity.
A key aspect of the resolution of this crisis will be
the response of the Congolese authorities to the fight
against impunity. We call on the Congolese authorities
to deploy the means necessary to investigate these
violations thoroughly, identify those responsible and
take appropriate measures to ensure that they are
held accountable, irrespective of their affiliation. We
welcome the adoption by the Human Rights Council on
23 June — by consensus and with the agreement of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — of ​​the resolution
authorizing the dispatch of a mission of international
experts, in cooperation with the Congolese authorities.
We call on the Congolese authorities to cooperate fully
with that team of international experts.
Thirdly, we commend the significant efforts made
by MONUSCO to adapt to the mandate provided for in
resolution 2348 (2017). MONUSCO responded quickly
to the adjustments provided for in that resolution. It must

S/PV.7998

focus on its two priorities: the protection of civilians
and support for the implementation of the 31 December
agreement. We welcome the rapid translation of this
reconfiguration of the Mission on the ground, and
encourage it to pursue its efforts in that direction.
In conclusion, France reiterates once again the
importance of the consensual implementation of all
the provisions of the 31 December agreement, which
is the framework agreed by all the Congolese parties
for the transition towards the holding of elections.
Failure to comply with one or more of its provisions
would entail significant risks for the stability of the
entire region, including a deterioration of security,
outbreaks of violence, political destabilization and
repercussions for the human rights situation and
humanitarian and socioeconomic conditions. This
scenario is, unfortunately, unfolding before our eyes
now, as evidenced by the upsurge of violence in the
Kasais, in Tanganyika and in the east of the country.
France therefore solemnly calls on all political actors
to redouble their efforts to meet the commitments made
last December and to organize the elections. There is an
urgent need to do so.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would not
normally take of the floor ahead of consultations,
but as both Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
the Ambassador of France have expressed so clearly,
these simply are not normal times for the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Indeed, for
many people in the Kasai region, these are the darkest
moments of their lives. The reports emanating from
that region should send a shiver down each and every
spine in the Chamber. They are reports that bear all
the hallmarks of the very worst of humankind: mass
killings, beheadings, mass graves, millions displaced.
Sadly, as highlighted by the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide,
the Government’s own security forces are responsible
for much of this death and destruction in certain areas
of the Kasai provinces. Nearly 100 children have
been maimed and killed by their own Government’s
forces, and children have been sexually abused by
Government forces. This represents a wider, worrying
trend. The Secretary-General reports that 60 per cent
of 1,444 human rights violations and abuses recorded
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo over the past
three months have been committed by the forces of the
Government — the same Government that bears the
primary responsibility to protect its citizens. When

17-210015/14

S/PV.7998

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

faced with hell, people should be able to look to their
Government in hope. For the people of the Kasai, they
do so only in fear.
This does not mean that the militia operating in
these areas are innocent — not by any stretch of the
imagination. As we heard from Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix, they too are responsible for rape,
killing and high levels of child recruitment.
It is clear that the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo compels us all to take a stand.
That is why we welcome the international investigation
mandated by the Human Rights Council last month.
It must act as soon as possible and be conducted
to international standards of independence and
transparency. We urge the Government to cooperate
fully with the investigation. Those responsible for these
horrific crimes must be held to account.
Sadly, the situation in the Kasai is by no means
an isolated example in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. There is also renewed violence in the
east of the country, much of which has a worrying
ethnic dimension. Such violence in different areas of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo only further
reinforces our belief that political uncertainty and
instability in Kinshasa are fuelling violent uncertainty
and violent instability across the country, and this is
now presenting a serious threat to regional stability.
We all know what needs to happen, and the
Ambassador of France set that out very clearly. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
knows what it needs to do — stop the violence, ensure
accountability for the violations and abuses and
implement the 31 December agreement in full. As set
out in the agreement, elections should be held in six
months. We simply must see progress that gives the
Congolese people and the world the confidence that this
will be realized. That is the issue that is fundamentally
increasing frustration and tensions in the country.
To deliver on this, the Independent National
Electoral Commission must release an electoral
timetable setting a date for elections, in line with the
31 December agreement, and agree a budget so that
vital international funds can be released. Let me take
this opportunity to welcome the progress in electoral
registration and the positive role played by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in support of that.
6/14

11/07/2017

But this progress must continue; insecurity cannot be
used as an excuse for further delay.
In truth, none of this new. We have known what needs
to happen for some time. It is clear that our message is
simply not getting through to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The killings have
continued; the horror has continued. What has failed to
continue is genuine implementation of the 31 December
agreement, which laid the path towards elections. It is
therefore incumbent upon all of us in the Council to do
more. With the eyes of the world looking on us today in
an open meeting, I ask all Council members to support
a clear, unequivocal message: stop the violence, hold
those responsible for violations and abuses to account
and implement the 31 December agreement in full and
without delay.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): You
will no doubt notice, Mr. President, that I am very
pleased today to not be speaking alone in an open
meeting of the Security Council, as is usually the case.
As a result, as I said, we are quite pleased to be in such
good company this morning vis-à-vis our membership.
I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for presenting the Secretary-General’s reports
(S/2017/435 and S/2017/565). I would also like to
reiterate our gratitude to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Maman Sidikou, and to the
entire team and staff of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) for the work they have been
carrying out in more than complex conditions. We
reiterate once again Uruguay’s commitment to stability
and peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
not only in our capacity as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council but also as a country that has
contributed troops in Congo over the past 16 years
without interruption.
We are at a critical point for the future of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As already
mentioned, six months ago the comprehensive and
inclusive political agreement was signed thanks to the
significant mediation efforts by the National Episcopal
Conference of the Congo, which generated expectations
for a peaceful solution to the crisis. In six months, and
before the end of the year and in accordance with the
agreement, elections are supposed to be held, leading
to a peaceful transfer of power. At this point, halfway
17-21001

11/07/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

through the year, there is serious concern about the
slow and limited progress in the implementation of the
political agreement, as well as about the deepening of
certain adverse trends in the situation of the country.
Uruguay reiterates its support for the political
agreement, which we believe is the only viable solution
to the crisis, and urges all the political actors to fully
implement the agreement. It is crucial for the parties
to step up their efforts in implementing the transition
arrangements, in setting up the national council to
follow up the implementation of the agreement and in
instituting confidence-building measures. All of these
elements are provided for in the agreement.
The report of the Secretary-General contained in
document S/2017/565 and Mr Lacroix’s briefing give an
account of an ongoing worsening of several negative
trends with respect to the situation of the country,
mainly in the areas of security and human rights. We are
concerned about the spread of insecurity in the western
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. There has
been an increase in violence among ethnic communities,
particularly in the Kasai region. Instability persists in
many sectors in the eastern part of the country, due in
large part to the activities of armed groups and militias.
The risk of violence in the main urban areas has grown
in the light of the looming electoral context. This new
outlook poses serious threats to a growing number of
civilians, many of whom have been forced to relocate
within the country or in neighbouring countries.
Uruguay expresses its deep concern over the
continuing deterioration of the human rights situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are struck
by the significant increase in the number of violations
that have been documented by MONUSCO month after
month, affecting above all vulnerable populations, such
as children and women. But we are even more struck by
the fact that State actors have been responsible for more
than half of documented human rights violations.
We are also concerned by the trend towards
maintaining restrictions on the democratic space, with
an increase in violations of civil and political rights, in
particular the freedoms of peaceful assembly, opinion,
expression and thought. Uruguay reiterates that it is
the responsibility of the Government to respect and
protect human rights and fundamental freedoms. We
urge the national authorities to act swiftly to commence
investigations and prosecutions in order to bring to

S/PV.7998

justice those responsible for violations of human rights
as well as to fight impunity.
In
conclusion,
Uruguay
acknowledges
MONUSCO’s efforts to readjust its priorities and
its mandate with a view to transforming the force to
increase its efficiency and effectiveness. However, I
would reiterate on this occasion what we said during
the mandate-renewal debate last March with respect to
reducing the number of MONUSCO troops. At a time
when there is a obvious increase in violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we are even more
concerned about comments on possible new reductions
in the coming months. As for the strategic review of
MONUSCO that the Secretariat will carry out in the
next few weeks in order to adapt the Mission’s mandate
to the new requirements, we fully confirm that the
recommendations arising therefrom will be based on a
frank assessment of the current situation on the ground,
which, in our opinion, is not at all encouraging.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Let me thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix for the presentation of a
very insightful report of the Secretary-General on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2017/565).
Since our previous meeting in March (see
S/PV.7903), the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has remained fragile and dangerous.
The political agreement of 31 December 2016 has
yet to be implemented. It is a matter of concern that
the new Government, which was sworn in before the
National Assembly on 16 May, was not recognized by
the Rassemblement des forces politiques et sociales
de la République démocratique du Congo acquises au
changement. We reiterate our call to all stakeholders in
the country to implement the 31 December agreement
through peaceful dialogue.
The implementation of the agreement must be
supported and reinforced by regional States and
organizations through the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region. Under these circumstances,
the swift organization of the presidential elections
by the end of 2017 is critically important in order to
avoid turning the intensified political tensions into a
full-fledged conflict. We welcome the efforts of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with the assistance of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic

17-210017/14

S/PV.7998

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of the Congo (MONUSCO), in completing the voter
registration process in the near future.
Kazakhstan
commends
the
activities
of
MONUSCO to support the implementation of the
31 December agreement and the electoral process. We
strongly condemn the activities of all armed groups
operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
their violations, especially those involving attacks on
the civilian population, United Nations personnel and
humanitarian actors; summary executions; sexual and
gender-based violence; and large-scale recruitment and
the use of children against international law. All armed
groups must drop their weapons and cease immediately
all forms of violence. The Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should maintain a
high level of cooperation with MONUSCO and conduct
joint operations to neutralize those armed groups.
This is also important in order to register all voters
and prepare for the elections of the troubled Kasai and
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo regions.
As we heard from Ms. Gamba de Potgieter last
Thursday, the scale of human rights violations against
children in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
especially in the Kasai region, has been the greatest it
has ever been for the past few years. Therefore, I would
like to reiterate that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo bears a primary responsibility
for the protection of the entire civilian population, first
and foremost women and children. With regard to the
killing of two United Nations experts, Kazakhstan
believes that comprehensive, credible and transparent
criminal investigations by the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must continue in
order to bring all perpetrators to justice.
The humanitarian situation in the country,
exacerbated by the ongoing violence in the Kasai
region and the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, has continued to deteriorate since the beginning
of 2017. The downward macroeconomic trend and
poor socioeconomic situation are aggravating the
humanitarian situation as well. The United Nations
system, international financial institutions and the
African Development Bank must strengthen the
peace-development nexus to support the humanitarian
and political process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
8/14

11/07/2017

Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Under SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for his briefing. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/565).
Like others, we are deeply concerned about the scale
of violence, violations of international humanitarian law
and the grave human rights violations and abuses taking
place with widespread impunity in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo right now. The situation in
the Kasai, as well as the negative development in the
eastern part of the country, are particularly worrying.
Children are disproportionally affected, as we have
heard. We must act with determination to ensure that
these violations come to an end and prevent further
conflicts from erupting or spreading. Political means
must be given priority.
The implementation of the 31 December agreement,
paving the way for free, peaceful and credible elections,
is key in that regard. We again call upon all signatories
to fully implement the agreement, which, together with
a sustainable settlement of outstanding issues in the
political process, provides the only viable way out of
the current humanitarian, economic and security crisis.
We again welcome the important work conducted
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mamam Sidikou in his good offices function, and we
support his call on the Independent National Electoral
Commission to publish without delay an official and
consensual calendar for the organization of the elections.
A peaceful and stable Democratic Republic of
the Congo is critical for stability in the subregion and
the region as a whole. We encourage constructive,
concerted and continuous engagement by regional
actors. In that context, we welcome the joint delegation
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the Southern Africa Development Community,
the African Union and the United Nations in Kinshasa
in May and hope for a speedy follow-up.
The mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which we adopted this spring, with its focus on
support for the political process, compels the United
Nations to act strategically and efficiently. We stand
ready for continuous and close consultations with the
Secretariat to ensure the Mission’s ability to fulfil the
mandated tasks, not least related to the protection of
civilians. The strategic review will provide important
input to such discussions.
17-21001

11/07/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We welcome and fully support the Human Rights
Council resolution co-sponsored by us requesting the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to dispatch a team of international experts, including
from the region, to investigate allegations of gross
violations and abuses in the Kasai region. We urge the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to cooperate fully with the investigation team and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
this regard.
Lastly, no stone should be left unturned in our
efforts to deliver justice for those who lost their lives
in the service of the United Nations, including the two
United Nations experts — Zaida Catalán and Michael
Sharp. Sweden, in cooperation with the SecretaryGeneral and partners concerned, will continue to look
into concrete proposals on how the United Nations
system, including the Council, can further support the
ongoing national investigations in order to establish the
truth and bring the perpetrators to justice. One such
option would be an additional investigative mechanism.
Mr. Fernández Revollo (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing. The information he provided is very useful in
order to understand the importance of the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Bolivia expresses its concern about the grave
violence spread by armed groups, which affects
civilians, increases the number of internally displaced
persons, incites intercommunal clashes and increases
insecurity, all of which the Congolese people are
victims of, in particular the most vulnerable — women
and children.
Similarly, we are concerned about the worsening
of the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/565) points out that 1,444 human rights
violations were committed between March and May.
According to data by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, in the Kasai region, one of
the regions most affected by violence, more than 500
boys and girls were recruited by armed groups. There
have been 600 cases of sexual violence reported since
August 2016, and there have been many cases of human
trafficking, summary executions and arbitrary arrests.
Bolivia condemns any act of sexual exploitation and
abuse, which must be duly investigated and brought

S/PV.7998

to justice in the competent Courts so that this type of
violence does not go unpunished.
There are now 1.4 million internally displaced
persons in the Kasai region, and a total of 3.8 million
internally displaced persons throughout the entire
country. Moreover, more than 400,000 children under
the age of five suffer from chronic malnutrition in Ituri
province, and it is estimated that 3.5 million children
are affected throughout the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In half of the 26 provinces that
are affected by armed violence, civilians have suffered
not only the loss of lives, but they also lack access
to health and other service, as hospitals and medical
centres have been targets of attacks by armed groups,
which has led to a serious humanitarian crisis.
We call for the stepping up the efforts of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and its staff in order to bring security to civilians
and to neutralize the armed groups in the country,
including increasing the community alert networks
and improvements in early warning mechanisms.
MONUSCO is called upon to play a more active role in
that respect.
Concerning the political agreement signed on
31 December 2016 in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo between the Government and the opposition,
Bolivia believes that it is a solid basis that establishes
a road map for organizing the presidential elections,
in accordance with the Congolese Constitution and
resolution 2277 (2016).
With regard to the December 2016 agreement, we
are concerned that the monitoring mechanism has not
yet been set up and regret the lack of progress in the
implementation of the agreed confidence-building
measures. We call on all parties to step up those
endeavours. We highlight the efforts towards updating
the voter registry in 13 provinces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and we encourage authorities
to continue that process in the Kasai and Kasai
Central provinces with a view to implementing the
31 December 2016 agreement. We also stress the
need for an inclusive dialogue on compliance with the
Congolese Constitution that considers the viewpoints
of all parties, including the Rassemblement des forces
politiques et sociales de la République démocratique du
Congo acquises au changement and the ruling majority.

17-210019/14

S/PV.7998

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We commend the active support of regional
organizations, the participation of the African Union,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and each of the guarantors of the peace
process which enhance their efforts through political
appeasement and cooperation initiatives for sustainable
reconciliation. We take note of the diplomatic efforts
of the Government that seek to broaden other regional
countries’ support for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and for the implementation of the December
2016 agreement — including bilateral presidential
level meetings.
We call on all armed groups to lay down their arms
and on all parties to the conflict to set aside any interests
that might block fruitful dialogue that would enable the
consolidation of agreements that would bring stability
to the country. We encourage the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo and MONUSCO to
coordinate their efforts.
Finally, we are convinced that the people and the
institutions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
must be the ones that make decisions regarding the
future of their country. We believe that principle to be
a decisive factor in the promotion of peace, stability
and development that fully respects the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): When we
consider the history of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we far too often have witnessed scenes of
unspeakable violence and human cruelty. The United
Nations and the wider international community have
worked tirelessly for years to help bring peace to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We commend
the efforts of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) to protect civilians and
support implementation of the 31 December agreement.
The MONUSCO peacekeeping mission has the very
challenging task of helping keep people safe, and
we remain committed to ensuring that it is able to
effectively fulfil its mandate.
But an essential step to ensuring that history
does not once again repeat itself in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is to help the Congolese people
complete a transition of power and make their voices
heard through a credible, peaceful and inclusive
presidential election this year. Election delays cannot
10/14

11/07/2017

continue. The international community must step up
and apply more pressure, not only on President Kabila
and his Government but also on the Independent
National Electoral Commission. The Commission
must immediately publish an electoral calendar, and
specifically the date for the presidential election.
The United States has already demonstrated that it
will take action against those who delay and obstruct
the implementation of the 31 December agreement
and preparations for credible, peaceful and inclusive
presidential elections. We are ready to take additional
action to sanction those who stand in the way of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s first democratic
transition of power. The Security Council should also
consider targeted sanctions to reduce the violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and help pressure
all stakeholders to play a more constructive role in
moving the country forward. Those responsible for
undermining the peace and security of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and democratic institutions must
be held accountable. Thus far, stakeholders have felt
few consequences for perpetuating instability.
The alternative to supporting a democratic
transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
return to violence, which is what we are seeing today in
the Kasai regions. This return to horrific violence is an
outcome that no one on the Council should want to see,
but in the past few months approximately 1.3 million
Congolese have been displaced, having fled violence
in the Kasais, including nearly 30,000 who are now
refugees in neighbouring Angola.
Just five days ago, the Council heard the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Virginia Gamba, relay the sickening reports
coming out of the Kasai regions. We were told that
the conflict is “spreading and intensifying”, and that
hundreds, if not thousands, of children had been
forcibly recruited to join the ranks of militant groups.
We have seen videos of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo military summarily executing civilians,
many of whom are children. We have heard reports of
Government personnel executing children as young as
five years-old, as well as reports of widespread sexual
violence committed by the forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. There is no doubt about who
is perpetrating violence in the Kasai regions and what
their motives are.
17-21001

11/07/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

At the same time, in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo there have been violent clashes,
and around the country we have seen a surge in prison
breaks. Those events, while not necessarily linked,
reflect a lack of State authority or, as some have
suggested, more deliberate efforts on the part of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to advance the strategy of chaos.
There is no time to delay. We urge the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure the
rapid start and completion of voter registration in the
Kasais. We also welcome the efforts of MONUSCO to
help support voter registration in the Kasais, in line
with its mandate.
For the United States, our bottom line is clear.
The United States supports holding elections on time,
per the terms of the 31 December agreement of 2016.
There is a narrow window of opportunity for all of us
to press the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to stay true to its commitments. All of us
need to seize this chance now. We already know what
mass violence and horror look like in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We cannot let history repeat
itself.
Mr. Biagini (Italy): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing.
Italy is deeply worried by the worsening of the
security and humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular in the Kasai
provinces. The spillover effect of the situation on the
stability of the region should also not be underestimated.
We are equally concerned by the shrinking of the
democratic space in the country and human rights
violations. The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has the primary responsibility to
respect and protect the rights of all of its citizens. We
encourage it to fulfil its obligations, including those to
hold accountable the perpetrators of violence.
At the political level, Italy remains convinced that
the full implementation of the 31 December agreement
continues to be the only viable and agreed political road
map, and is therefore key to sustaining the legitimacy
of transitional institutions. That transition must lead the
country towards democratic and transparent elections,
to be help as soon as possible and in compliance with
the constitution and the 31 December agreement. In
that connection, the Independent National Electoral
Commission’s declarations today are not encouraging.

S/PV.7998

We call on the Government and Congolese political
forces to speed up the preparation of credible, peaceful
and inclusive elections conducive to a democratic
transfer of power.
In conclusion, let me renew Italy’s full support for
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Both
play a vital role in the country.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I wish to thank Mr. Lacroix
for his briefing. I welcome his visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo last month to urge key players
to fulfil their commitment to the December agreement,
especially his engagement with President Kabila. I
thought that was very important.
Having heard his briefing, we remain deeply
concerned about the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is regrettable that there has
been little progress in the political process, including
on the implementation of the December agreement.
This has been the case since the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) mandate renewal
and troop reduction in March. Security in the country
has declined, and the situation is especially dire in
Kasai. We support MONUSCO’s efforts to adapt to the
situation and its trying to be as flexible and agile as
possible within its mandate, as Mr. Lacroix explained
to us today.
Since the consultations we held three months
ago, the situation of declining security is spreading,
as evidenced by the serious violence in Kasai. The
implementation of the political agreement has been
slow at best, and the prospect of timely elections
remains uncertain. In this regard, we are concerned
by the announcement by the Independent National
Electoral Commission that it will be unable to conduct
the elections by the end of the year. The international
community, including the Council, must remain united
and committed in sending a clear message to the parties
in the Congo, especially the Government, on the need to
swiftly implement the agreement, including the holding
of elections.
Supporting the political and electoral process is now
one of MONUSCO’s core mandates. Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix has explained to us the main challenges
that MONUSCO is currently facing, including the
extreme difficulty of voter registration in Kasai given

17-2100111/14

S/PV.7998

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the situation and the lack of resources in general. He
gave us some idea of what else MONUSCO can and must
do in supporting the Congolese authorities and these
processes, including in particular the early holding of
elections. We support the work of MONUSCO.
Regarding another priority task of MONUSCO,
that is, the protection of civilians, the Mission has been
adjusted to relocate a substantive number of personnel
and resources to the western and southern areas so as to
better respond to this challenge. The situation in Kasai
is dire, with more than 3,300 killings reported by the
Catholic church since last October. Civilians continue
to be attacked by armed elements in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Does this
mean that the reinforcement of up to several hundred
personnel in Kasai that is envisioned is not sufficient to
achieve results on the ground?
The Council should continue to monitor whether,
in the light of the current security situation across the
country, the current posture of the Mission is sufficient
to ensure the effective and dynamic protection
of civilians.
While the overall strategic review is under way,
we support MONUSCO’s efforts in acting actively
and flexibly, adapting to the situation under such
difficult circumstances.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): It is an honour for
me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July and to thank you for the opportunity afforded
me to address the Council at this meeting, which is
devoted to the situation concerning my country, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would like also to
extend the gratitude of the Congolese Government and
the Congolese people to all members of the Security
Council for their commitment to my country’s cause
and their ongoing concern as they seek to ensure that
peace and stability are fully restored throughout all of
its territory.
My delegation took note of the content of the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)(S/2017/435). I
12/14

11/07/2017

thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, who has just briefed the Council thereon.
We have a few observations to make regarding the
analysis of a number of issues addressed in the report,
with a view to deepening the Council’s understanding.
In that regard, I would particularly focus on issues
pertaining to the political situation, the security situation
and human rights violations in the Kasai region. I will
also briefly touch upon the Force transformation and
the strategic dialogue.
As regards the political situation, and as noted in
the report in paragraph 3, following a lack of flexibility
and of concessions on the part of the Rassemblement
des forces politiques et sociales de la République
démocratique du Congo acquises au changement,
the appointment of the members of the Government
has been delayed. This same attitude also prevailed
during the signing of the specific arrangements on the
implementation of the agreement and led to a delay in
the establishment of the National Council for Oversight
of the Agreement and the Electoral Process.
As regards the latter issue, it is important to stress
that, as part of the forthcoming establishment of said
council, a preparatory meeting was held on Monday,
3 July, that brought together the members of the council,
including representatives of the Majorité présidentielle,
the opposition groups that signed the agreement of
18 October, part of the Rassemblement — those affiliated
with Félix Tshisekedi and their allies having refused
to participate — and representatives of civil society.
Another meeting involving those same individuals will
be held shortly and will focus on the appointment by
consensus of the chair of said body, the validation of
members’ mandates and their entry into office, and the
drawing up of internal rules of procedure.
As regards the elections, as noted in the report, the
process of updating the voter register appears to be well
under way. Thirteen of the country’s 26 provinces have
been fully covered by the process. Efforts are ongoing in
11 others but have not yet begun in the provinces of Kasai
and Kasai Central because of the insecurity prevailing
there as a result of the activities of the Kamwina Nsapu
militia. Indeed, in those provinces certain officers of
the Independent National Electoral Commission were
singled out; a number of offices were set ablaze and
equipment was destroyed. Today a certain degree of
calm has returned, and the Commission has committed
to once again deploying equipment. According to
17-21001

11/07/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the schedule that it has established, operations could
commence in both provinces as early as 20 July.
Hence it is critical that displaced persons who
fled abroad and to other parts of the country owing to
insecurity return to their homes to participate in the
process. To that end, the Government invites the peoples
of the two provinces to demonstrate greater civicmindedness so as to enable the process to take place
smoothly. It also calls upon political stakeholders of all
stripes, civil society and members of the international
community to avoid the use of any rhetoric likely to
rekindle tensions so as to create an environment
conducive to restoring calm and tranquillity, all of
which are vital to the holding of elections.
To date, the Independent National Electoral
Commission has already registered nearly 33 million of
the 45 million expected voters throughout the country.
Going back to the concern that certain Council
members expressed about the organization of elections,
the Council will agree that we need all of the country’s
provinces to participate. The fact is that we cannot
contemplate organizing a ballot as important as the
presidential election without including Kasai and Kasai
Central provinces, which represent more than 10 per
cent of our entire voting population. It goes without
saying that if an election were held without them it
could undermine the credibility of the result, which in
turn could lead to disorder and trouble.
On the security front, the Government is aware of
the worrying situation in the eastern part of the country
and in both Kasais. That is why it remains mobilized
and focused on acting, with the army’s help, to restore
order, peace and security and to continue to work to
eradicate national and foreign armed groups. In the
case of the Kasai provinces generally, as the report
acknowledges, our army is working to restore order and
curb insecurity there. In that regard, I should mention
that a large number — almost 1,700 — of militiamen
have surrendered, with their weapons, and have
received reintegration kits from the Government, while
138 children from their ranks have been handed over to
UNICEF and MONUSCO for social integration.
In connection with the human rights violations
reported in those provinces, the President of the
Republic had already instructed the Minister of Justice
to take the necessary steps to expedite investigations so
that all the victims who have experienced atrocities in
these regions can see justice done. In that context, the

S/PV.7998

behaviour of the marginal elements of the army who
have committed atrocities against civilians in Mwanza
Lomba has been condemned by a military court, and it
is therefore not true to say, as some Council members
have done, that their violations have gone unpunished.
The military court is continuing its investigations in
order to punish all the guilty parties.
Similarly, we are proceeding with action on
the murder of the two United Nations experts. The
Government, which has been cooperating on the
matter with MONUSCO and the United Nations Joint
Human Rights Office, is determined to conduct the
case transparently and to punish the perpetrators of
the crime. In that spirit, we welcomed the request of
the United States Government, which is participating
in the investigations through the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. As I have told the Council previously, my
Government is also ready and open to working with the
Swedish Government if it would like us to. The ongoing
investigations have enabled us to arrest 11 more
suspects, of whom eight have been identified as having
played a direct role in the killing of the experts.
With regard to some Council members’ statements,
my delegation was surprised by the virulent reactions to
our forces of law and order. It is a fact that, as happens
in every army all over the world, some marginal
elements have committed abuses that we deplore and
condemn. My Government has taken the necessary
steps to ensure that they are punished. Consider
the violence that occurred in the Kasais, where the
Kamwina Nsapu militia attacked our security forces,
killing and beheading some of them and exhibiting
their heads like trophies. If that happened in Council
members’ countries, how would their forces of law and
order react? When a country’s armed forces sometimes
react violently in the face of even minor events, that
we all live through, how do Council members react?
What steps do they take? I think we should avoid
double standards on such issues. To bring closure to
this topic, I would like to assure the Council that justice
will be rendered for the United Nations experts as well
as for their four Congolese companions, whose bodies
have never been found. Ultimately, justice will finally
be rendered to all of our compatriots who have fallen
victim to the violence of the Kamwina Nsapu militia.
The report also mentions the mass graves that have
been found in those parts of the country. In that regard,
I should point out what happened just in some cases
investigated by a joint mission carried out by MONUSCO

17-2100113/14

S/PV.7998

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

11/07/2017

and the military prosecutor of the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) in the
commune of Nganza a Kananga, where MONUSCO
claimed to have identified seven mass graves. When the
first alleged mass grave was opened, they found one
body. About 100 metres away, in a second alleged mass
grave, the investigators found a 12-bore shotgun. In the
third, they found two headless bodies. In Tshimbulu
territory, an alleged mass grave had been dug near the
place where the two United Nations experts’ bodies
were found. The joint MONUSCO/FARDC teams found
a motorcycle in it. We are not saying that mass graves
do not exist. It is up to those who say that they exist
to show them to us and for investigators to establish
their existence. Unfortunately, as the Council will have
realized, in the cases I referred to, which MONUSCO
announced with much fanfare, the report avoids saying
anything that would contradict it.

Besides these refugees, there are also many foreign
armed groups. The regional approach to the situation is
therefore important and should continue.

The deplorable situation of displaced persons is
not confined to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
To date, as the report clearly highlights, the number
of refugees in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
at the beginning of June was 467,473, most of them
from neighbouring countries mentioned in the report.

The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.

14/14

As the report acknowledges with regard to the
deployment of MONUSCO and its fulfilment of its
mandate, the drawdown of 3,600 peacekeepers that
is the subject of one of the provisions of resolution
2348 (2017) has not yet taken place. Nor has the
operationalization of the Intervention Brigade.
According to our information, that cannot happen until
the current troops are replaced by far more seasoned
troops with equipment that is better adapted to dealing
with asymmetric conflict.
I should not conclude without thanking the United
Nations for its commitment and dedication to my
country’s cause, as well as reiterating our gratitude to
all the members of the Security Council.

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

17-21001
