S/PRST/2006/31

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 July 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5486th meeting of the Security Council, held on 13 July 2006 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms all its previous statements and
resolutions concerning the situation in Somalia, in particular the statement by
its President of 15 March 2006 (S/PRST/2006/11).
“The Security Council reiterates its commitment to a comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia and its respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia,
consistent with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. François Fall. The Security
Council encourages Ambassador Fall and other United Nations agencies and
offices to actively engage in the region to promote peace and stability. It calls
upon all Member States to provide him their full support in this regard.
“The Security Council supports the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) and Transitional Federal Parliament (TFP) as the internationally
recognized authorities to restore peace, stability and governance to Somalia. It
notes the importance for stability in Somalia of broad-based and representative
institutions and of an inclusive political process, as envisaged in the
Transitional Federal Charter (TFC).
“The Security Council welcomes the agreement reached in Khartoum on
22 June between the TFG and the Islamic Courts, sent to the Presidency of the
Security Council on 29 June 2006 (S/2006/442). The Security Council
commends the League of Arab States (LAS) for facilitating the talks. The
Security Council condemns the recent fighting in Mogadishu and requests all
parties to adhere to the ceasefire agreed on 22 June. In this regard, the Security
Council emphasizes the importance of dialogue between the Transitional
Federal Institutions (TFIs) and the Islamic Courts.
“The Security Council therefore urges all parties involved in this
dialogue to engage constructively at the next round of talks scheduled for

06-42918 (E) 130706

*0642918*

S/PRST/2006/31

15 July, where it looks forward to further progress in pursuit of a lasting
political process.
“The Security Council requests all parties inside and outside of Somalia
to refrain from action that could provoke or perpetuate violence and violations
of human rights, endanger the ceasefire and political process, or further
damage the humanitarian situation.
“The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Somalia, and demands that all Somali leaders ensure
complete and unhindered humanitarian access, as well as providing guarantees
for the safety and security of the humanitarian aid workers in Somalia.
“The Security Council commends the African Union (AU) and the InterGovernmental Authority for Development (IGAD) for their continuing efforts
to promote peace and stability in Somalia and the region. The Council notes
their meetings of 19 June and 28-29 June 2006, and welcomes the role of the
AU/IGAD/LAS and European Union fact-finding mission to Somalia on
5-7 July 2006 in promoting peace, stability and a political process.
“The Security Council welcomes the meeting of the Heads of State and
Government of the AU in Banjul on 5 July 2006, and notes that meeting’s
request for the Security Council to consider an exemption to the arms embargo
imposed on Somalia by resolution 733 (1992) of 23 January 1992, to pave way
for a possible deployment of a Peace Support Mission (PSM) and to help
facilitate the re-establishment of the national security forces of Somalia.
“The Security Council states its willingness, if it judges that a PSM
would contribute to peace and stability in Somalia, to consider the above
request for a PSM, on the basis of a detailed mission plan from IGAD or the
AU.
“The Security Council welcomes the fact that the TFG and the TFP were
able to agree on 14 June 2006 to adopt the National Security and Stabilization
Plan for Somalia. The Security Council believes that the adoption of a security
plan is an important step towards providing a framework for effective security
sector reform in Somalia, in order to help deliver peace for all Somalis.
“The Security Council expresses its readiness to consider a limited
modification of the arms embargo to enable the TFIs, on the basis of a
sustainable peace process, to develop Somalia’s security sector and national
institutions capable of responding to security issues.
“The Security Council emphasizes, however, the continued contribution
made to Somalia’s peace and security by the arms embargo, and calls on all to
comply with it. The Security Council reiterates its intention to consider
urgently how to strengthen the effectiveness of the arms embargo.
“The Security Council welcomes the outcome of the first meeting of the
International Contact Group on Somalia.”

2

06-42918
