TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

nd
MEETING: 22 NOVEMBER 1967

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS

Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 382) . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . ., I. . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . . . . . . . . . ,.......

1

a I....,......,..

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic addressed to the President of the Security Council
..,...........,....*.*..
(S/8226) . . . . . . . . . . . ..a.......

1

S/IV.1382

j
!
j
/

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of $he Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-SECOND MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 22 November 1967, at 3.30 p.m.
fiesident: Mr. Mamadou Boubacar K.ANTE (Mali).

aggression against the Arab States and the conquest of Arab
territories; which resulted in what is referred to now,
ominously, by Mr. Eshkol as “Greater Israel”.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

4. Today the Council is considering draft resolution
S/8247, submitted on 16 November by the representative
of the United Kingdom. As this session of the Security
Council constitutes but another phase in the tragic history
of Palestine-tragic only because of the unbridled ambitions
of Israel, world Zionism, their allies, and the conspiracy of
silence and callousness that up till now have surrounded
Arab rights-my delegation feels it its duty to state once
more, and in the cIearest terms, the stand of the Syrian
Arab Republic vis-a-vis the United Kingdom draft resolution.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l382)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/8226).

5. That this session may prove to be crucial and a turning
point has been expressed by many representatives in the
Council, which has had “The Palestine question” on its
agenda for the last twenty years; whether it may be so
depends basically on the safeguarding of Arab rights, so far
ignored and disregarded.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

6. In every great historical cause there comes a moment,
the moment of truth, when the whole past convergeson the
present and the future. In such rare and unique moments
one is motivated only by concern for the truth.

The situation in the Middle East
letter
dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/8226)

7. But as one looks around this Council table, when the
future of a whole area and the destiny of a whole people
are being decided on, one is struck by an anomalous fact,
namely, that the party directly concerned, the Arab people
of Palestine, who should themselves be the first speakersto
be heard-since they have never ceded their inalienable
rights to anybody nor forfeited them-are totally absent
from the picture. No reference is made to them in the draft
resolution, except, belatedly, in sub-paragraph (b) of operative paragraph 2, as constituting the refugee problem. Yes,
this is the Arab people of Palestine, the uprooted, dispossessedpeople in exile, crying for justice for over twenty
years now, without so far finding justice in the councils of
the world.

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council at its 1373rd
meeting on 9 November and at its 1375th meeting on 13
November, I propose with the consent of the Council to
invite the representatives of the United Arab Republic,
Israel, Jordan and Syria to take places at the Council table
and to participate without vote in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mahmoud Riad
(Uizited Arab Republic), Mr. A. Eban (Israel), Mr. A. M.
Rifa’i (Jordan) and Mr. G. J. Tomeh (Syria) took places at
the Council table.

8. The United Nations Charter, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, indeed, all the international documents
pertaining to the unhappy history of Palestine, were not
meant in any way to deprive peoples of their inalienable
rights to self-determination in their own lands and their
right to their homeland in which they had lived for over
two thousand years; what is of pertinence here is enshrined
in Article 1 of the Charter, to which no reference whatsoever is made in the United Kingdom draft resolution.

2. The PRESIDENT
(translated from French):
The
Council will now resume its discussion of the question
before it. The first speaker on my list is the representative
of Syria, and I now call upon him.
3. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): During the 1377th meeting of the
Security Council, held on 15 November, my delegation
stated in the clearest terms the stand of the Govmment of
the Syrian Arab Republic regarding the Israel war of
1

9. in our last statement, on 15 November, we outlined
what we believe should be the basic guidelines for the
solution of the present crisis. We stated then that:

homeland, endorsed the recommendation of the slain
Mediator, Count Folke Bernadotte; at that third regular
session the Assembly, recognizing the right of the refugees
to return to their homes, directed, in its resolution 194 (III)
of 11 December 1948, that they be permitted to do so “at
the earliest practicable date” if they so chose, and that
compensation be paid for “loss of or damage to [their]
property”.

“ . . . one of the cornerstones of the Charter is the
non-recognition of the fruits of aggression . . . that any
solution of the present crisis which does not recognize
that principle is a negation of the Charter itself . . . that
the new international order envisaged in the Charter . . .
involved the renunciation for ever of the use of force for
aggressive purposes . . . and non-recognition of any right
based on conquest.“(l377th
meeting, para. 6.1

14. The recognition of the right of the refugees to
repatriation to their usurped homeland in accordance with
their free choice has been recalled by the General Assembly
at every regular session it has held since 1948-eighteen in
all; but what has happened to those rights, affirmed
regularly every year since 1948? Why have they been
glossed over in the present draft? Why is no reference
whatsoever made to those resolutions, as if they did not
exist at all? It is in the light of this experience and of
Israel’s disregard of those resolutions that we consider the
present United Kingdom draft resolution.

In fact, and once more, the very first Article of the Charter
is a confirmation of these principles.
10. It goes without saying that the withdrawal of the
Israel aggressive forces from occupied territories is at this
stage the central point of the problem and should be the
focus of the attention and efforts of the international
community. The advocates of the draft resolution must
know this axiomatic fact very well. That is why the
question is a prerequisite for efficiently tackling the United
Kingdom draft resolution.

15, A mere review of the events which took place after the
Israel aggression of 5 June would show the rightness of oul:
position vis-Lvis the grave situation obtaining in the Middle
East and the reasons which compel my delegation not to
accept the present draft resolution submitted for our
consideration. In fact, Israel conducted its occupation, its
invasion of Arab territories, while the Council was in
session. In the case of Syria, the invasion of our territoty
started after we had accepted the cease-fire. There could be
no better illustration to demonstrate how Israel wasacting
in fulfilment of a preconceived programme of aggression
and expansion. The momentum of premeditation was so
strong that the fact that the Security Council wasjust at
that time considering the very problems involved did not
deflect it from its course. Everybody remembers what
happened in the Council during those dramatic and
catastrophic days. My delegation referred more than once
to the use of delaying tactics that would have allowed a
new Israel fait accompli to materialize, more especially in
the territory of Syria.

11. I While there is a mention of the withdrawal of Israel
forces, this reference is almost nullified by the absence of
any time limit or any modus operandi for ensuring this
withdrawal. No clearer proof could be given to illustrate the
ambiguity of this withdrawal than its description by
Israel-Zionist sources. The Jewish Telegraphic Agency’s
Daily News Bulletin of 20 November describes it in these
words:
“Israelis are known to have indicated unofficially that
Israel ‘could live’ with the British formula. The draft does
not spell out Israel’s withdrawal as to timing, nor does it
say that the withdrawal is to be to the preJune 5
armistice lines.”
12. Moreover, this mention of withdrawal is made subject
to a score of concessions to be imposed on the Arab
countries, thus coupling it with conditions amounting to
the liquidation of the whole Palestine question, a question
which is basically and primarily the product of colonialism
in the area, All of this is done purposely with a view to
ignoring the will and rights of the Palestine Arab people.
Even in the very mandate entrusted to the special representative-to-be, the call for withdrawal of the Israel
occupying forces is not provided for. He is merely asked to:
“proceed to the Middle East to establish and maintain
contacts with the States concerned in order to promote
agreement and assist efforts to achieve a Peaceful and
accepted settlement in accordance with the provisions and
principles in this resolution” [S/8247/.

16. The draft resolution under consideration falls to take
account of all these factors, contents itself with a mere,
vague call on Israel to withdraw its armed forces and is
completely silent on the systematic violation of the
Council’s cease-fire resolutions and the rejection by Israel
of the resolutions of the General Assembly cbnceming the
status of Jerusalem [2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (J%Y-V)] and
the return of the new refugees since 5 June 1967
[2252 (ES-V)]. It is inconceivable to Syria that this draft
resolution be accepted because it ignores the roots of the
problem, the various resolutions adopted by the United
Nations on the Palestine question and the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination, and goes further
than that; it crowns all those failures by offering to the
aggressors solid recognition of the illegitimate truths of
their wanton aggression when it speaks of “secure and
recognized boundaries”.

13. Twenty years of experience in the United Nations of
trying to resolve the conflict between the Arab States and
Israel arising out of the Palestine question, involving scores
of resolutions emphasizing the rights of the Arabs of
Palestine, have been completely disregarded by the Israel
authorities. Suffice it to mention that the General Assembly, at its very first session held after the expulsion of
the majority of the Arab inhabitants of Palestine from their

17. While the Arabs are being asked to surrender, the
Israelis, who ought to withdraw their forces, on the
contrary are consolidating more and more their grip 0x1the
occupied territories. If any confirmation is needed, a
2
i

dispatch fi-om Tel-Aviv gives loud testimony as to tile scorn
with which Israel is treating the Security Council ‘and the
international community. For, as the Security Council has
been deliberating and is deliberating, the Israelis are
building new colonies in occupied Syrian territory, as
indeed they have been doing in all other occupied territories. The following dispatch in Lc Ilfc~zde of 12/13
November is entitled “The Israelis establish a new paramilitary kibbutz on occupied Syrian territory”, and it
states:

west bank of the Jordan River. More than anything else,
their presence has given rise to skepticism about Israel’s
intention of giving back the land she occupied during the
war.

“At the moment, Nahal Yam (Nuhal is an acronym f’or
‘fighting pioneers’; Yam means ‘sea’ in Hebrew) consists
of a number of large army tents pitched next to two
single-story brick buildings, A clump of eucalyptus trees
provides a meager patch of shade, but otherwise the scene
is strictly sand.”

“Tel-Aviv, 11 November (AFP).-A kibbutz of paramilitary type has been established at Kuneitra, on the
Syrian heights occupied by Israel forces.

19. ,Are not the latest Israel attacks on the Jordanian
refugee camp of Karameh, the massacre of children and
women and the murder of policemen the actual translation
into deeds of the deceiving and clamorouscaIls for peace
with which the Israel Foreign Minister is inundating the
Council? Has the history of the tragic past twenty years
been anything other than Israel utterances of peace
accompanied immediately by killings and massacres on the
spot?

“The members of the kibbutz, which is established at
the gateway of the old garrison town, plan to build a
tourist hotel. In the meantime, they have started to round
up the cattle abandoned by the Syrian farmers who fled
during the Israel-Arab conflict.
“The provisional headquarters of the new kibbutz has
been set up at Golan, near Kuneitra, and it was visited on
Friday by Mr. Yigal AIlon, the Minister of Labour,

20. Yet when we compare those criminal acts of genocide
with Nazi pradtices the representatives of Israel protest with
indignation. What, in their opinion, is the fit description of
Deir Yassin, Qibya, Qalqiliyah, As &mu (for which Israel
was condemned by this very Council only last year, in
November 1966) and, recently, the burning of Suez and its
installations and the murder of innocent Jordanians? We
wonder how these acts differ from those of the Nazis. Of
course, the only difference historically is that the Nazis
have received punishment for their crimes, but the new
Nazis, created to play the role of the henchmen of the
colonialists, pouring the fire and napalm supplied to them
by their masters on the heads of the rising Arabs, anxious
for dignity and justice-these new Nazis continue to carry
out their crimes with impunity. The conscience of the Arab
people cannot be expected to acquiesce in this persecution,
nor should the United Nations continue to evade its
responsibility for putting an end to this outlawry.

“On Tuesday the President of the State of Israel,
Mr. Zalman Shazar, accompanied by General Moshe
Dayan and General Yitzhak Rabin, paying his first visit to
the heights overlooking Lake Tiberias, ‘confirmed’-and I
repeat the word-‘confirmed the intention attributed to
the Israel Government not to restore those strategic
heights to Syria.’ “I
18. And today, this very day, as the Council contemplates
the liquidation of Israel aggression in the area, new proofs
are given which indicate Israel’s own interpretation of
withdrawal. I will quote part of the article appearing in
today’s New York Times under the heading “Israelis, Living
in Tents, Work on New Fishing Kibbutz in Sinai”. The very
title of the news item is indicative. It is datelined ‘Nahal
Yanz, United Arab Republic”; so already a colony with a
Hebrew name has been established on the land of a
sovereign State which is a Member of the United Nations.
The article states:

21. Special attention should be paid to what is referred to
as “a state of belligerency”, especially in the light of what I
have just stated. Who, in fact, is the actual belligerent? For
twenty years acts of aggression have been committed by
Israel againstthe Arab countries, resulting time and again in
untold suffering and destruction and more claims on the
part of Israel. Those acts always constituted infringements
of the sovereign rights of the Arab States, annexing more
lands and territories and displacing and dispossessing
hundreds of thousands of Arabs. All that is done while
Israel representatives are preaching law and at the same
time practising lawlessness.

“Nahal
Yam, United Arab Republic,
19 November.-The
westernmost settlement in the Israeloccupied Sinai peninsula lies beside a salt-water lagoon on
the Mediterranean coast, less than fifty miles from the
Suez Canal.
“It is a paramilitary fishing kibbutz, or communal
s;ettlement, established by the Nuhal, a branch of the
Israel Army that combines fighting and farming. Its
members are boys and girls in their late teens who
volunteer for the often dangerous job of settling Israel’s
border areas.

22. If there is a doubt about who is the actual belligerent,
the records of the Security Council and the General
Assembly condemning Israel for aggression should dispel it.
The last of those was on As Samu last November, and I
shall read three operative paragraphs of Council resolution
228 (1966):

“Nuhal Yarn, as the new settlement is called, is the most
remote of the four Israel settlements that have put down
roots in the occupied territories since the June war. The
others are scattered through the Syrian heights and the

“I. Deplores the loss of life and heavy damage to
property resulting from the action of the Government of
Israel on 13 November 1966;

1Quotedm Frenchby the speaker.
3

“2. C~~LWVS Israel for this large-scale military action
in violation of the United Nations Charter and of the
General Armistice Agreement between Israel and Jordan;

Nations representative in the Middle East, so that such a
representative could establish contact with the parties
concerned and prepare the ground for the achievement of a
just and lasting settlement of the difficult problems
involved.

“3. Ewllasizes
t0
Israel that actions of military
reprisal cannot be tolerated and that, if they are repeated,
tk@ SecLirity Council will have to consider further and
more effective steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure
against the repetition of such acts”.

l

I
28. We have now reached the end of the road in our I
ceaseless search for an agreed formulation and it becomes t,
our inescapable duty to decide on some set of guidelines
which will best serve as the basis for the mission that we ’
intend to entrust to a United Nations special representative,

23. There are no human beings who, individually
or
collectively, would on a rational basis resort to war for the
sake of war. Peace is a goal which everyone desires and
longs for, but measures of self-defence are perfectly
legitimate and recognized by the Charter, and there is no
measure whatsoever that we have taken which does not fall
into the category of self-defence.

29. In that first step which we want to take in the 1
direction of establishing permanent peace in the Middle
East, time is a factor of decisive importance, and I earnestly !\
hope that we shall not fail to reach a final decision at our ,
meeting today. The recent and repeated firing incidents
across the truce demarcation lines are obvious reminders of
the danger inherent in the present situation and emphasize ’
the compelling need to decide on the first step that we need
to take on the road which will lead from a state of fragile
truce to one of permanent peace.

24. If the United Kingdom draft resolution is adopted by
the Security Council, despite its deficiencies and shortcomings, it is to be feared that another unjust and tragic
chapter in the history of the Arab world will be begun,
because more gains will be secured for Israel, to the
detriment of Arab rights. That is the more so since up to
the present time hardly any nation in the world has been
subjected to irrational hatred and defamation as have the
Arabs at the hands of world Zionism, and indeed of
imperialism, Our non-acceptance of the draft resolution
should be construed, therefore, as placing things in their
real, true and legal context. Regrettably, in a world where
values are reversed, where wreaths of glory are offered to
the victor of aggression, a restoring of values to a more just
perspective becomes a moral imperative.

30. Since I last spoke on the subject a number of new
proposals have been put forward for our consideration.
Having studied those proposals very carefully, as we always
do, we have found it necessary to reassessour attitude and
to indicate the line that we intend to follow in taking a
final position on the proposals now before the Council.

,
31, As I have already indicated on a number of occasions ,
in the past, my delegation’s attitude and its final position
on any proposal will depend upon three considerations, 1
each of which is in our view of the utmost importance.
First, no proposal can be worthy of our consideration, let
alone of our support-nor indeed is any proposal likely to I
produce lasting results-unless it is based on the Charter of ’
the United Nations and its relevant principles. Secondly, no I
resolution can have a chance of successful implementation
unless it is balanced in its affirmation of principles as well
as in its clear recognition of the complicated problems
involved. Thirdly, the set of guidelines within which the
special representative will have to operate must be suchas, 1
on the one hand, not to depart from the basic principles of
the Charter while, on the other hand, to allow reasonable
room and discretion in the representative’s delicate taskof
contacts and preparations and in his search for a negotiated
settlement.

25. In taking that attitude we most sincerely believe that
we owe it not only to the Arab people of Palestine, not
only to the Arab nation as a whole, not only in the interests
of a just and everlasting peace but also, and primarily, to
the Charter, to this high Council and to this Organization,
on which the hopes of small nations are pinned. Consequently it is our duty towards the prindiples and purposes
of this Organization to stress the fact that peace and
security, while being the cherished goal of every society,
would only mean new oppression if they were voided of
their basic tenet, which is justice. History has taught us all
that the seeds of past wars were sown in every unjust peace
imposed by force, A lasting peace cannot be imposed by
force, One does not open the,way for it by seizing another’s
property and demanding certain concessions before that
property is given back to its legal, lawful owner.

32. The preceding are the three tests of balance and equity
that we have always intended to apply to any resolution
before we would commend it for adoption by the Council.

26. Should the principle be approved of putting on an
equal footing the aggressor and the victim of aggression,
thus offering rewards to the aggressor, no safeguard would
remain in the world to prevent one Power from overwhelming another and extracting concessions therefrom.

33. With regard to the principles that need to be affirmed,
we deem it most essential that due emphasis be put on the
inadmissibility of acquisition of territory by war and hence
on the imperative requirement that all Israel armed forces
be withdrawn from the territories occupied as a result Of
military conflict, and likewise on the need to ensure
conditions of permanent peace in which all States in the
area can live in security free from threats or acts of force. It
follows from this that we seek the termination of all claims
or states of belligerency and consider that tliere should be
mutual respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of all States in the area.

27. Mr. MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): In my Statement
before
the Council on 9 November 1967 [1373rd nzeetingl I had
occasion to give a clear indication of my Government’s
attitude and preference with regard to the draft proposals
presented then for our consideration. My delegation felt
then, and feels now, that our paramount objective at this
stage should be to expedite Council accord on a United
4

.

34. Moreover, in our consideration of the deep-rooted
problems that have afflicted the nations in that vital region,
the problem of the refugees comes uppermost in our mind.
We believe that so long as the refugee problem remains
unresolved, it is bound to continue to poison relations of
the States in the area. It is therefore the duty of the
international community to insist that justice be done with
resplect to the refugees and that a final and constructive
solution be promoted in order to resolve this grave and
painful problem.

them. My delegation was particularly encouraged in this
connexion by the spirit of co-operation expressed in the
statement made before the Council by the distinguished
Deputy Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union in the course
of the 1381st meeting on Monday, 20 November. I recall
with equal satisfaction the similar assurances of cooperation expressed at earlier stages of our deliberations by
the representative of the United States, our colleague,
Mr. Goldberg. This, I submit, is a most welcome element in
the common search for a negotiated settlement and one
that can greatly facilitate the urgent task of bringing peace
and calm to this war-tormented region.

35. There is likewise the problem of freedom of navigation
which has in the past been the cause of so much
controversy and conflict. It is, we believe, in the interest as
much of the Middle Eastern States themselves as it is of the
international community at large that freedom of navigationl through international waterways in the area be
guairanteed for all nations.

42. Finally, everything will depend on the co-operation
and support of the parties directly concerned, and I wish to
seize this opportunity of addressing a humble but sincere
appeal to them to co-operate with and to assist the special
representative in his difficult mission of conciliation and
peace.

36. These, in short, are some of the vital elements that we
havl: always wished to see included in a resolution of the
Security Council at this stage; and if we have shown
preference for any proposal in the past, it is only because
we have found these elements in them and have been
guided by the belief that they were fair, balanced and
reas,onable in their presentation.

43. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the hope that we
shall decide today on the first and meaningful step in our
common endeavour and that we shall take this first step not
divided but united for peace.
44. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): Many of us around
this table have tried very hard and sincerely to find a
balanced approach to the solution of the West Asia crisis,
The draft resolution [S/8.247] introduced by the United
Kingdom is one example of the sincere efforts which have
been made since the outbreak of the conflict in June 1967.
Another such effort is a draft resolution of 20 November
[S/8253]
introduced by the Deputy Foreign Minister of
the Soviet Union.

37. It is again with the same fair and open attitude of
mind that we have studied the draft proposals that have
been submitted since we last spoke in the Council. I do not,
of course, intend to make any detailed comments on the
prolposals at this stage. I can only repeat that in the light of
the statement that I have just made, our final position on
any proposals will depend on whether or not they go a
reasonable way to meet our test of balance and equity and
on the extent to which they accommodate the basic
elements that we consider to be essential for any Security
Council decision at this crucial stage.

45. At the 1373rd meeting of the Security Council on 9
November 1967, my delegation, while introducing the
three-Power draft resolution of 7 November [S/8227/, had
explained our basic approach to the course of action which
the Security Council should take to break the impasse in
the West Asia crisis. I shall not repeat all that I said then,
but I shouId like to emphasize a few points. In working out
the three-Power draft resolution my delegation proceeded
from certain fundamental considerations. First, any resolution to be adopted by the Security Council should be fair
and balanced and should ensure mutuality of rights and
obligations. Secondly, it should spell out in clear and
unambiguous language the principles and guidelines within
the framework of the. Charter of the United Nations in
order to achieve a just and lasting peace. Thirdly, disputes
should be settled by peaceful means in accordance with
Article 33 of the Charter.

38. I need hardly remind the Council that the appointment of a special representative is only the beginning, albeit
a good and necessary beginning, in what is likely to be a
long and difficult process of building permanent peace in an
area which has for so long lived under the dark cloud of
mutual animosity and in a state of constant hostility and
belligerence.
39.’ The United Nations has indeed a challenging opportunity to help usher in a new era of Middle Eastern
relations based on mutual respect of rights and on
constructive co-operation. But this can only happen if all
concerned are willing and prepared to co-operate with the
United Nations to bring this about.
40. A United Nations presence in the area can only be
helpful if it can enjoy the full co-operation and support of
all members of the Council and of the permanent members
in particular, The permanent members of the Council need
to put all their power and influence behind the United
Nations effort if our Organization is to succeed in creating
an atmosphere conducive to the establishment and maintenance of a just and durable peace.

46. Members of the Council will recall that during the
fifth emergency special session an overwhelming majority
of Member States of the United Nations, whether they
voted for the Latin American draft resolution2 or the
non;aligned, Afro-Asian draft resolution,3 had reaffirmed
the principle of non-acquisition of territory by military
conquest and had supported the call for the withdrawal of

41. Much will obviously depend on the co-operation of
the major Powers and equally on understanding between

Special Session, Annexes, agendaitem 5, document AIL.5 231Rev.l.
3 Ibid., document AlL.522lRev.3.
’

2 official

5

Records of the General Assembly, Fifth EmergencY

For this reason, the three-Power draft resolution gives equal
validity to the principles of withdrawal, non-belligerency
and secure borders. It also ensures a balanced and fair
approach by calling for equal obligations from all the
parties concerned.

Israel armed forces to the positions they held prior to the
outbreak of the recent conflict on 5 June 1967. On this
- point there wasuniversal agreement among the membership
of the United Nations. Similarly, there was considerable
agreement on the principle that every State has the right to
live in peace and complete security free from threats or acts
of war and consequently all States in the area should
terminate the state or claim of belligerency and settle their
international disputes by peaceful means. This was considered essential so that withdrawal does not lead to the
emergence of the unfortunate situation of part war and part
peace which existed in the area prior to the outbreak of
hostilities on 5 June 1967.

50. I have listened with great care and attention to the
statements made in this Council by Lord Caradon, the
representative of the United Kingdom. Before commenting
on the United Kingdom draft resolution, I should like to
quote from two statements of policy delivered in the
General Assembly by Mr. George Brown, the British
Foreign Secretary. This has already been done by Lord
Caradon at the 1381st meeting, but it will bear repetition.
During the fifth emergency special session, Mr. Brown said
the following on 21 June 1967:

47. I should like to remind the members of the Council
that the three-Power draft resolution provides for the right
of all States in the area “to live in peace and complete
security free from threats or acts of war”. While the first
principle of our draft requires the withdrawal of Israel
armed forces from all occupied territories, the second
requires the termination of belligerency by all States in the
area. The equality of obligation of all States is thus
maintained in a fair and balanced manner and takes account
of the views of the great majority of the Members of the
United Nations as well as of the views of the parties
concerned. The third principle of our draft affirms the right
of every State of the area to be secure within its borders
and also stressesthe obligation of “all Member States of the
area to respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of one another”. Taken together,
these three principles of withdrawal, security and nonbelligerency and the right of every State to be secure within
its borders, form the core of our approach to the problem
and correspond to the second point of our basic approach;
namely, that the Council should spell out in clear and
unambiguous language the principles within the framework
of the Charter to bring about a just and lasting peace in the
area.

“The attitude of the British Government is clear. We
want the area to be at peace. We recognize that peace
demands the greatest measure of justice in its political
arrangements. And on this foundation the progress of its
peoples, especially of those whose need is greatest, must
be based.
“I should like, if I may, to set out certain principles
which I believe should guide us in striving collectively for
a lasting settlement. Clearly, such principles must derive
from the United Nations Charter. Article 2 of the Charter
provides that:
“ ‘All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State . . .‘. Here the words ‘territorial integrity’ have a
direct bearing on the question of withdrawal, on which
much has been said in previous speeches. I see no two
ways about this; and I can state our position very clearly.
In my view, it follows from the words in the Charter that
war should not lead to territorial aggrandizement.“4

48, These three principles of our draft provide an over-all
context within which the long-standing problem of the
Palestine refugees and that of freedom of navigation in
internationai waterways can be solved. As I had occasion to
state at the 1375th meeting of the Council on 13
November, the purpose of our draft resolution is to initiate
the process of peaceful settlement of the West Asia crisis.
Our draft resolution provides for the adoption of all
peaceful means under Article 33 of the Charter to settle the
dispute and gives the choice to the parties to seek solutions
by any means of their own choice under that Article. We do
not ask the Council to suggest or recommend any of these
methods. It is left to the parties concerned to choose any of
the methods of peaceful settlement,

51, On 26 September 1967, at the twenty-second session
of the General Assembly, Mr. Brown’had this to say:
“I should like to repeat what I said when I was here
before: Britain does not accept war as a means of settling
disputes, nor that a State should be allowed to extend its
frontiers as a result of a war. This means that Israel must
withdraw. But equally, Israel’s neighbours must recognize
its right to exist, and it must enjoy security within its
frontiers. What we must work for in this area is a durable
peace, the renunciation of all aggressive designs, and an
end to policies which are inconsistent with peace.“5
52. My delegation has studied the United Kingdom draft
resolution in the light of these two policy statements of the
British Foreign Secretary. It is our understanding that the
draft resolution, if approved by the Council, will commit it
to the application of the principle of total withdrawal of
Israel forces from all the territories-I
repeat, all the

49. The principle of the inadmissibility of territorial
acquisition by force is absolutely fundamental to our
approach and we cannot accept or acquiesce in any decision
that leaves out territories occupied by military conquest
from the provision of withdrawal. This is the central issue
in any approach to th’e solution of the West Asia crisis.
Once we are agreed on this principle, then the process of
bringing a just and lasting peace to the area becomes an
integral whole in which all principles that I have
enumerated above acquire equal importance and priority.

4 Ibid., Plennry Meetings, 1529thmeeting, paras.14and15,
5 Ibid., Twenty-second Session, Pkwy
Meetings, 1567th
meeting, para. 91.

6

territories-occupied by Israel as a result of the conflict
which began on 5 June 1967.

on Monday: “Every delegation is entitled, indeed is
expected, to state the separate and distinct policy of the
Government it represents” [1381st meeting, para. 401.

53, In other words, the draft commits the Council to the
wj.thdrawal of Israel forces from the whole of Sinai, Gaza,
the Old City of Jerusalem, Jordanian territory west of the
Jordan River and the Syrian territory. This being so, Israel
cannot use the words “secure and recognized boundaries”,
contajned in sub-paragraph (ii) of operative paragraph 1 of
the United Kingdom drift resolution, to retain any territory occupied in the recent conflict. Of coul:se, mutual
territorial adjustments are not ruled out, as indeed they are
not in the three-Power draft resolution co-sponsored by
India. This is our clear understanding of the United
Kingdom draft resolution. Our vote on the draft will be
dl:termined accordingly.

61. But the draft resolution does not belong to one side or
the other or to any one delegation; it belongs to us all. I am
sure that it will be recognized by us all that it is only the
resolution that will bind us, and we regard its wording as
clear. All of us, no doubt, have our own views and
interpretations and understandings. I explained my own
when I spoke on Monday last. On these matters each
delegation rightly speaks only for itself.
62. I trust that now we can all go forward to approve the
draft resolution. By so doing, we can put the maximum
weight of this Council behind a ntw and determined effort
to bring, at long last, peace and justice to all the peoples
concerned.

54. In view of the position stated above, in which the
dldegations of Mali, Nigeria and India, the three co-sponsors
of the draft resolution (S/8227/ concur, I have been
authorized to state that we will not press our draft to a vote
a’t this stage.

63. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): The
United States is prepared to grant priority to the draft
resolution presented by the United Kingdom, and will vote
for it. If the United Kingdom draft resolution is adopted, as
we hope and trust, we shall not press our draft resolution of
7 November [S/8229] to the vote.

55. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): As sponsor of
the draft resolution in the name of the United Kingdom
[S/8247/, I wish to speak very briefly before the vote to
which we now are about to proceed. I shall do so in sincere
respect for the part played by every member of the Council
and with the utmost care not to raise any new dispute or to
embark on any new controversy. On the contrary, w,e are
all, I am sure, determined to conclude agreement.

64. As Lord Caradon pointed out both on Monday and
today, various members of the Council have views of their
own for supporting the United Kingdom text. The voting of
course takes place not on the individual or discrete views
and policies of various members but on the draft resolution.
We will vote for that draft resolution. We do so in the
context of, and because we believe it to be consistent with,
United States policy as expressed by President Johnson on
19 June and as subsequently reaffirmed in statements made
by me to the Security Council, including those made
recently. Accordingly, I give our consent to priority for the
British text.

56. We must now alI strain every effort for harmony and
unity, and it is in that spirit that I warmly welcome the
d.ecision which has just been communicated to us by the
diistinguished Ambassador of India, speaking on behalf of
himself and the other co-sponsors of the draft resolution
which they presented to us. It is a decision certainly of the
utmost importance. It marks a turning-point; I feel that it
opens the way to agreement and to action.

65. The PRESIDENT

(translated from French): As there
are no further speakers on my list, I propose, With your
agreement,
to put the draft resolutions before the Council
to the vote. The order in which the draft resolutions were
submitted is as follows:

57. Throughout this debate I have tried to put forward
five propositions, and it might be well if, immediately
before the vote, I repeat them very briefly. As to the policy
of my own Government, we stand by our votes and we
stand by our declarations. We have throughout made our
Inational position and our national policy quite plain.

(a) Draft resolution submitted by India, Mali and Nigeria
[S/822 71;

58. Secondly, the draft resolution which we have prepared
is not a British text. It is the result of close and prolonged
consultation with both sides and with all members of this
Council. As I have respectfully said, every member of this
CounciI has made a contribution in the search for common
ground on which we can go forward.

(b] Draft resolution submitted by the United States of
America [S/8229] ;

(c) Draft resolution submitted by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics [S/8236] ;
(d) Draft resolution submitted by the United Kingdom
[S/8247];

59. Thirdly, I would say that the draft resolution is a
balanced whole. To add to it or to detract from it would
destroy the balance and also destroy the wide measure of
agreement we have achieved together. It must be considered
as a whole and as it stands. I suggest that we have reached
the stage when most, if not all, of us want the resolution,
the whole resolution and nothing but the resolution.

(e) Draft resolution submitted by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics [S/8253/.
66. The sponsors of draft resolution S/g227 and the
sponsor of draft resolution S/8229 have indicated that yt
this stage they will not press for a vote on their texts. It 1s
alSo my understanding that the representative of the Soviet

60. Fourthly, I would say that every delegation has a
right, of course, and a duty to state its own views. As I said
7

:

least, of being ready to co-operate with the special
representative to be appointed under the terms of our draft,
This we ourselves had recognized. My colleagues will recall
that at the conclusion of my statement on 9 November I
did say that if there should emerge from our proceedings a
different formulation to which the parties to the dispute
were prepared to lend their support by co-operating with
the special representative to be appointed under that
formulation, nothing would more delight the co-authors of
our draft resolution.

Union will not press for a vote, at this stage, on the draft
resolution he submitted in document S/8236.
67. If there are no objections or observations on the part
of the members of the Council, I shall put to the vote the
United Kingdom draft resolution (S/8247].
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted tmanimously.6

68. Mr. KUZNETSOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The Soviet delegation
wishes to state that, in view of the situation that has
developed, it will not insist, at the present stage of our
consideration of the situation in the Neaf East, on a vote on
the draft resolution submitted by the Soviet Union in
document S/8253.

72. Thanks principally to the labours of Lord Caradon of
the United Kingdom, we now have adopted such a
resolution. We all know how hard Lord Caradon laboured
for this compromise draft. He worked like a Trojan. His
performance and the results of that performance demonstrate what, given the right instructions from his Govemment, an able, experienced and fair-minded person like
Lord Caradon can achieve in the councils of the United
Nations. The Nigerian delegation heartily extends to him
and to his country a well-deserved tribute for this contribu.
tion to our proceedings.

69. Mr. ADEBO (Nigeria): When on 9 November last I
spoke in support of the three-Power draft resolution
[S/8227], I said the following:

73. Two months ago, at the opening of the twenty-second
session of the United Nations General Assembly, one of the
most experienced correspondents at the United Nations
accosted me and asked me whether I thought, in the
current state of the world, the United Nations could reacha
decision on the Middle East situation in the course of this
session. I replied, in American parlance, “I sure do”. He
said, “You seem to me to be an optimist”. I replied, “Yes, I
am; not only am I an optimist, I am an incurable optimist”.
He said, “Are you sure that your optimism will not prove
to be unfounded? ” I replied, “I prefer to be an optimist
proved by events to have been wrong than to be a pessimist
proved by events to have been correct”. Being an optimist
and holding strongly to the conviction that anything can
happen, I work very hard to see that what I believe in does
happen and, with the co-operation of colleagues, sometimes
what seemed to have been impossible at the start does get
achieved in the end, as has been the case on this occasion.

“May I appeal to my colleagues around this table, as
well as to the general public-and especially to members of
the press, who disseminate news of our proceedings to
them-to
deal fairly with the draft that we have
presented.” (1373rd meeting, para. 115.1
70. Since that time a lot of statements have been made
both by the parties to the dispute before us and by
members of this Council. Those statements disclosed what
we knew beforehand: that our draft did not satisfy
everybody. But unfortunately, some of those statements
seemed to suggest that the people to whom I addressed my
appeal of 9 November had not taken that appeal too
seriously. A number of unkind things were said about the
draft resolution that we put forward that I think were
unfortunate. In that draft resolution we had, as faithfully as
possible, followed the Latin American draft resolution
[A/‘L..523/Reu.I]
that had been put before the fifth
emergency special session of the General Assembly. A
number of representatives here have done what we also
have done: they have paid a great tribute to the Latin
Americans for their wisdom and their balanced position in
regard to this matter. It was therefore very surprising to
those of us who had done the Latin Americans the
compliment of following their draft that some of those who
joined us in paying that compliment for the balanced
nature of that draft nevertheless said unkind things about
our own.

74. But the resolution that we have just adopted is, of
course, only the beginning, although a promising beginning,
to our labours. The immediate duty of the Council is for all
of us to avoid, in the course of our present interventions
and outside at the conclusion of this meeting, any action or
statement calculated to weaken the effect of what we have
just accomplished.
75. Lord Caradon said a moment ago that it wasfor each
of us to hold his own opinion about the effects of this or
that clause of the resolution that we have adopted. I could
not agree more.

71. .I refer to this phenomenon because I do wish once
more to appeal to my colleagues by pointing out that in
this forum, the greatest of the United Nations, it would
help our work very greatly if we refrained, all of us, from
unnecessary misunderstandings caused by apparent misinterpretation. The truth of the matter, of course, is that
our draft was as balanced as the Latin American original
draft was. What was deficient in it for the purpose of the
consensus here wasthe fact that the parties to the dispute
were not agreed upon accepting that draft to the extent, at

76. We, for our part, feel that the resolution that we have
adopted does provide for what we believe are the essential
factors to the peaceful and just settlement of the Middle
East situation. One of those factors, as we have reiterated
more than once, is the recognition of the inadmissibility of
territorial aggrandizement by military conquest and, as a
consequence, the withdrawal of Israel forces from all the
territories that they occupied as a result of the recellt
conflict. But one of the essential factors also is that this

6 See resolution 242 (1967).
8

r

withdrawal should take place in a context in which all the
countries in the area, including Israel and all the Arab
States, can feel and enjoy a sense of security. We therefore
subscribe very heartily to what Lord Carndon said when he
stated that the resolution must be taken as a whole.

8 1I What is our objective in the Middle East? It is not the
achievement of any special interests that Nigeria, India, the
Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom or
any other Member State wishes to secure. Our objective is
the well-being of all the peopIes of the Middle East. We
hope that what we have done today will contribute to that.
We hope that it will help to begin to create in the Middle
East a region free from insecurity, free from fear and free
from hatred, a Middle East where stable peace and
tranquillity will begin to reign.

77. We have supported this resolution because, taken as a
whole, we think it can promote peace in that disturbed area
known as the Middle East. And yet, as we all know, if we
succeed in our objectives, that success will not be due
simply to the fact that WChave adopted a resolution today
and1have adopted it unanimously. That success will turn
ver:ylargely on what follows upon this achievement.

82. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call
upon the representative of Israel.
83. Mr. EBAN (Israel): I regret +hat this meeting should
have begun with the statement that we heard from the
representative of Syria. On his interpretation of the
resolution I have nothing to say, but on his comments on
my country’s policy I must say a few words.

78. It is the duty of all of us, as one or two of my
colleagues have already indicated, to follow up our action
of today by consistently courageous action in the future.
None of us must encourage any of the parties to this
controversv to cheat under this resolution. We must
&courage -them to help us open a new page in the Middle
Ear;t. I think the parties-all of them-are now in a mood to
respond favourably to that encouragement. And in this
connexion, I should like to pay a tribute to the representatives of the parties for the relative restraint with which
they have expressed themselves before this Council, because,let us face it, we are dealing with a very difficult and
delicate situation. But may I, after this performance of
today, appeal to the parties to follow up the restraint they
have shown here with even more restraint if they intervene
in these proceedings and when they arrive home in their
respective capitals. We all know that there are a good
number of people in those capitals who may not quite
approve of what we have done today. Therefore, a lot of
courage will be required on the part of the leadership to
explain and support what we have done not because it
representsexactly the point of view of this or that country,
but becausewe think that we have achieved a compromise
solution which could help them to settle their differences, a
settlement which, we all know, will require a real change of
heart on the part of all the peoples of the Middle East.

84. The Syrian utterance speaks for itself; it was a hymn
of hate and aggression trumpeted by the Government
which, more than any other, was responsible for disrupting
the tranquillity of the Middle East in 1966 and 1967. The
Syrian representative has repeated the revolting attempt to
hang the odious Nazi label on the only people that
sustained the full brunt and fury of Nazism without
interruption or compromise for all the twelve Nazi years.
What a sorry spectacle it is to see a tribunal of peace thus
transformed into an arena of hate.
85. The policy of the Israel Government and nation
remains as it was when I formulated it in the Security
Council bn 13 and 16 November (1375th and 1379th
meetings/, namely that we shall respect and fully maintain
the situation embodied in the cease-fire agreements until it
is succeeded by peace treaties between Israel and the Arab
States ending the state of war, establishing agreed, recog
nized and secure territorial boundaries, guaranteeing free
navigation for all shipping, including that of Israel, in all the
watenvays leading to and from the Red Sea, committing all
signatories to the permanent and mutual recognition and
respect of the sovereignty, security and national identity of
all Middle Eastern States, and ensuring a stable and
mutually guaranteed security. Such a peace settlement,
directly negotiated and contractually confirmed, would
create conditions in which refugee problems could be justly
and effectively solved through international and regional
co-operation.

79. Another factor that is going to contribute to the
success of this scheme that we have built up in the
resolution is, of course, the personality, competence, ability
and experience of the person who is going to be chosen by
tb? Secretary-General to be the special representative
charged with this mission. We are very glad that fortunately
we have a Secretary-General to whom it is not necessaryto
give advice in this connexion. We know how carefully he
goes about complying with the resolutions that we adopt.
All we can say is that we wish him luck, we wish him
successin choosing the right man, And to whomever may
be chosen for this task, we also wish to say that we wish
him luck and success. He will require all the luck in the
world to be able to succeed.

86. Those are our aims and positions. They emerge from
five months of international discussion, unchanged, unprejudiced and intact. It is now understpod as axiomatic
that movement from the cease-fire lines can be envisaged
only in the framework of a lasting peace establishing
recognized and secure boundaries.
87. The time has come to adapt the Middle Eastern
situation to the general principles and concepts which
regulate the international order. Let us be done, after
nineteen years, with truces, armistices and “demarcation
lines based on military considerations” which leave territorial problems unsolved. The relations between States in
the Middle East for nineteen years have been fragile;

80. But the Nigerian delegation feels that if the parties are
wpared to live with the scheme we have here built up, if
thley are prepared to co-operate with the special representative and if the Council is prepared to follow his action
with as much support as he needs from time to time, we
shall be able to achieve the success that we hope for from
our performance of today,
9

indeterminate and unresolved. The hour is ripe
for building a stable and durable edifice within which the
peoples of the eastern Mediterranean can pursue their
separate national vocations and their common regional
destiny. The tensions and rancours of the past cannot be
ended overnight, but if the relations of States in the Middle
East are contained in a permanent and contractually
binding framework the patient task of reconciliation can go
forward,

anomalous,

91. I also note that the Soviet text [S/8253/, like that of
the United States [S/8229], included a reference to the
need for curbing the destructive and wasteful arms race, I
hope that the absence of this provision in the text on which
the Council has voted does not mean that that objective
will be lost from sight.
92. The termination of this debate takes us into a new
phase, of which the centre lies not here in New York, hut in
the Middle East. What will henceforward be decisive is not
the particular words of an enabling resolution, but the spirit
and attitude and policies of the Middle Eastern States. One
of the points most strongly emphasized around this table
and in all the exchanges which I and my associateshave
been privileged to have with representatives of Member
States is that the only peace that can be established in the
Middle EdSt is one that the Governments of the Middle East
build together. Peace can grow by agreement. It cannot be
imposed. Our Governments in the area must look more and
more towards each other. For it is only from each other
that they can obtain the satisfaction of their most vital
need, the need of peace.

88. The Security Council, like the General Assembly, has
consistently refused to endorse proposals which would have
sought a return to the ambiguity, vulnerability
and insecurity in which we have lived for nineteen years. It has
IIOW
adopted a resolution of which the central and primary
affirmation is the need for “the establishment of a just and
lasting peace” based on secure and recognized boundaries,
There is a clear understanding that it is only within the
establishment of permanent peace with secure and recog
nized boundaries that other principles can be given effect.
As my delegation and others have stated, the establishment
for the first time of agreed and secure boundaries as part of
a peace settlement is the only key which can unlock the
present situation and set on foot a momentum of constructive and peaceful progress. As the representative of the
United Kingdom indicated in his address on 16 November,
the action to be taken must be within the framework of a
permanent peace and of secure and recognized boundaries.
it has been pointed out in the Security Council, and it is
stated in the 1949 Agreements, that the armistice demarcation lines have never been regarded as boundaries so that, as
the representative of the United States has said, the
boundaries between Israel and her neighbours: “must be
mutually
worked out and recognized by the parties
themselves as part of the peace-making process” [1377th

93. I reiterate that in negotiations with our neighbours we
shall present a concrete vision of peace. Before saying what
that vision is, I should like to make one comment on the
course of this debate with special reference to the remarks
of the Indian representative. The establishment of a peace
settlement, including secure and recognized boundaries, is
quite different from what he had been proposing, namely,
withdrawal, without final peace, to demarcation lines. The
representative of India has now sought to interpret the
resolution in the image of his own wishes. For us, the
resolution says what it says. It does not say that which it
has specifically and consciously avoided saying.

meeting, para. 6S].

94. Thus, if the representative of India is in any predica.
merit, he should not escape it by reading into a text
adjectives and place-names which do not occur in the text.
He must know that the crucial specifications to which he
referred were discussed at length in consultations and
deliberately and not accidentally excluded in order to be
non-prejudicial to the negotiating position of all parties.
The important words in most languages are short words,
and every word, long or short, which is not in the text, is
not there because it was deliberately concluded that it
should not be there.

89. We continue to believe that the States of the region, in
direct negotiation
with each other, have the sovereign
responsibility for shaping their common future. It is the
duty of international agencies at the behest of the parties to
act in the measure that agreement can be promoted and a
mutually accepted settlement can be advanced. We do not
believe that Member States have the right to refuse direct
negotiation with those to whom they address their claims.
It is only when they come together that the Arab States
and
Israel will reveal the f~kll potentialities of a peaceful
settlement.

95. I have said that we would, in peace negotiations,
present a vision and a programme of peace. I draw attention
to the ideas which I proposed to the General Assembly at
its 1577th meeting on 3 October 1967 under the heading of
an “agenda for peace”. III direct negotiation, we would seek
the discussion of juridical problems, including the establishment of peace treaties instead of cease-fire or armistice
lines; security and territorial problems, including the
establishment of permanent and agreed frontiers of Peace
and security; population problems, involving regional effort
and international co-operation to resolve the problems of
displaced populations created by wars and perpetuated by
belligerency; economic questions, including the replacement of blockades and boycotts by intense eccricm]e
co-operation; communications problems, including the
opening of the Middle East to a free and normal flow of

90. There were proposals, including those submitted by
three Powers and then by the Soviet Union, which failed to
win the necessary support because they rested in our view
on the wrong premise that a solution could be formed on
the basis of a return to the situation of 4 June. We hold
that that premise has no Iogica] or moral international basis.
Similarly, the failure to understand that Israel’s action last
June was a response to aggression has prevented certain
Governments from keeping pace with the development of
international
thinking. Israel notes, however, that recent
Soviet statements and drafts reflect an understanding that
the establishment of peace requires, amongst other things,
an explicit respect of Israel’s national identity and international rights.
10

commerce; cultural and scientific problems, involving an
attempt to substitute the best traditions of Arab-Jewish
co-operation for the recent tensions and disputes, thus
ending the epoch of alienation and hostility.

it was in our draft resolution. However, we do not conceive
that the mandate of the special representative to be
designated by the Secretary-General excludes his exploring
this important and urgent requirement of peace, as he
establishes and maintains contacts with the States concerned. His mandate encompasses the search for a just and
lasting peace and in pursuing that search he should be
encouraged by the fact that two great Powers, the Soviet
Union and the United States, have indicated their willingness to have the problem of a limitation on the arms race
discussed and explored.

96. These are the horizons to which we Shdll address
omehes. For all the States and peoples of the Middle East,
they hold the promise of a new and better age.
97. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): The
United States is gratified that the United Kingdom draft
resolution has received the unanimous support of the
Council. AS 1 made clear in my brief intervention before the
vote, we have voted for the resolution because we found it
entirely consistent with the policy of the United States
Government on the Middle East, the five principles enunciated by President Johnson in his statement of 19 June, and
my several statements in the Council since then.

101. As for my own Government, we have stated before
and I renew that statement now that the United States will
use every recourse of diplomacy, including co-operating
with the special representative, to find a course which will
put an end to the waste and futility of the arms race in the
Middle East. A beginning, but only a beginning, could be
made if the United Nations, as we have proposed, would
call upon all its Members to report all shipments of all
military arms into the area and keep those reports on file
for all the peoples of the world to observe.

98. My delegation has worked unceasingly since last May
for the constructive result we have reached today, but I
should like to acknowledge that, whatever the differences
of view, all other members of the Council, many other
Members of the United Nations, you, Mr. President, and
your predecessor, Ambassador Tsuruoka, the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the General Assembly have
also contributed their unstinting efforts towards bringing
about today’s result. We cannot and should not ignore the
contributions made under very difficult and trying circumstances by certain of the key parties immediately concerned. We owe particular gratitude, I am sure, to the
United Kingdom delegation and its head, my esteemed
friend Lord Caradon, and to the Latin American group as a
whole and their representatives on the Council, Ambassador
Ruda of Argentina and Ambassador de Carvalho Silos of
Brazil.

102. The special representative will need all the help and
support he can get both from the parties and from the
international community. I have already given my Government’s pledge on this score and I wish to reiterate it
today-a pledge to this Council and to the parties concerned that the diplomatic and political influence of the
United States Government will be exerted in support of the
efforts of the United Nations special representative to
achieve a fair, equitable and dignified settlement so that all
in the area can live in peace, security and tranquillity.
Similar pledges from other members of the Council and the
United Nations membership, particularly those with great
diplomatic and political influence, would be invaluable
because they would not drily lend weight to the efforts of
the special representative but would help to reassure all the
peoples of the Middle East that they are not alone as they
turn their attention to the search for the foundations of a
just and durable peace:

99. We trust and we believe that the Council has the right
to expect that the parties concerned, without prejudice to
their respective positions, will receive the United Nations
special representative and co-operate with him in the
peace-making process which this resolution sets in motion.
Successwill depend, in the final analysis, upon the spirit in
which the parties receive him and work with him to find
solutions that will permit the Middle East to benefit from a
permanent state of peace, security, justice and tranquillity.
For this reason, we strongly urge all parties not only to
participate in the peace-making process, but to do SO with
the maximum spirit of accommodation, of respect for each
other’s vital interests and legitimate grievances and of
mutual accommodation and magnanimity.

103. In creating the framework of peace in the Middle
East, the Security Council took the first step in June 1967
by helping to bring about a cease-fire. It is vitally important
that the cease-fire be maintained. Violations by any party
cannot and must not be condoned. Today we have taken a
second step-the appointment of a special representative to
go to the area in order to promote agreement and assist
efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement. For those who
sometimes wonder about the value and effectiveness of the
United Nations, perhaps by those two steps we have
provided an answer to their worries and concerns. All who<
have contributed to those two steps can draw satisfaction
from the fact that they have been taken. But we know
realistically from the nature of this complex problem that
those two steps are very far from the goal we have set, a
just and durable peace, and we must recognize that
although we have begun we shall not achieve that goal
easily or without many difficulties. We must persevere with
patience and fortitude. just as we have been persevering
since May 1967, in the search for peace.

100. Were it not for the fact that the United Kingdom
resolution was so delicately balanced, and our realization
that the offering of any amendments from any source could
have upset that balince and jeopardized the chance of
successful action by the Council, my delegation would have
offered an amendment so that the Council could have
endorsed the need to achieve a limitation of the wisteful
and destructive arms race in the Middle East. This was one
of President Johnson’s five points. We have taken particular
note of and have been encouraged by the fact that a
provision to this effect was included in the draft resolution
placed before the Security Council by the Soviet Union, as

104. I would conclude by quoting a portion of President
Johnson’s speech of 19 June, for it is an accurate
11

description of the mood of the world community
wish godspeed to the special representative:

as we

112. We were likewise gratified to hear the United
Kingdom representative stress the link between this paragraph of his resolution and the principle of inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territories by force, and quote he
words used last September by his Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs in the General Assembly. In his statement,
Mr. George Brown, expressing a concern shared by his
French colleague, also said:

“The world . . . will look for patience and justice, it will
look for humility and moral courage, It will look for signs
Of movement from prejudice and the emotional chaos of
conflict to the gradual slow shaping steps that lead to
learning to%live together and learning to help and mould
and shape peace in the area and in the world.”

“I believe that Jerusalem too requires a special mention
here. The British position was made quite clear when,
with the vast majority of the Members of this Assembly,
we voted this summer for the resolutions calling on Israel
to do nothing to prejudice the status of Jeruslem.“y

105. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French):
For the past six months, in all their statements in the
Security Council and the General Assembly, the represent atives of France have stressed the need and expressed the
sincere hope that in this troubled region of the Middle East,
Arabs and Israelis, Jews and Moslems, may be able to live
together in peace, tolerance and mutual respect.

113. We are also glad to see that the resolution stressesthe
second principle, namely, the termination of all belligereacy, respect for and acknowledgement of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of every
State in the area and its right to live in peace within its own
boundaries.

106. They have also stated that in present circumstances,
if any settlement is to be possible and difficulties are to be
overcotne whose importance we do not underestimate, it
would seem essential that there should be a measure of
co-operation among the great Powers to help the parties to
arrive at a solution, and that the United Nations, and in
particular the Security Council, seemed to be an appropriate framework. For this is the place to formulate the
principles which must be the basis of any peaceful
settlement, to define the problems, and to help to bring
about the developments necessary for the achievement of a
just and lasting settlement of the crisis.

114. We take note of the fact that the text affirms the
necessity to achieve a just settlement of the refugee
problem, to which, as we have said, the military operations
have given a new and tragic dimension; and that it calls for
guarantees for the freedom of navigation through the
international waterways in the area.
115. Since the United Kingdom draft enabled us to take a
positive decision, and since we felt that it contained the
general principles necessary for solving the problem, my
delegation voted in favour of it.

107. These are the points that my delegation has borne in
mind in studying the various draft resolutions submitted to
us. It seemed to us that to be really useful they should leave
no room for ambiguity and that the principles on which the
special representative to be appointed by the SecretaryGeneral would base his actions should be clearly set out.

116. A favourable vote for the United Kingdom resolution
is, of course, only a starting point. Long and arduous
efforts will still be needed to implement those principles
and to arrive at a solution. We hope that the spirit of
conciliation and understanding of which the great Powers,
including my country, have given an example today will,in
the months to come, help to promote this settlement so
fervently desired.

108. I must confess that in this respect the three-Power
draft, or a draft based on certain ideas of the Latin
American text proposed in the General Assembly in July,
would in our opinion have had considerable advantages. It
appeared, however, that the desired agreement could not be
achieved on those texts, whatever their merits.

117. Mr. KUZNETSOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The Security Council has
just reached a decision on the question of the situation in
the Near East. The Soviet Government would have preferred the Security Council to adopt the Soviet draft
resolution which is more in keeping with the need to
eliminate the consequences of Israel aggression and to
restore lasting peace to the Near East.

109. We are, incidentally, grateful for the persistent and
praiseworthy efforts made by the United Kingdom delegp
tion to produce a text which would be rejected by no one,
and we wish to pay our tribute to that delegation.
110. We are fully aware that inevitably such a text could
not entirely satisfy either side. No one will be surprised,
therefore, if I say that we would have preferred the text to
bc tnore explicit on certain points, including the terms of
reference of the special representative.

118. However, we voted for the United Kingdom draft
resolution, as interpreted by the representative of India,
whose views we share.
119. Thus, in the resolution adopted by the Security
Council, the “‘withdrawal of Israel armed forces from
territories occupied in the recent conflict” becomes the
first necessary principle for the establishment of a just a-ad
lasting peace in the Near East. We understand the decision

1 11, We must admit, however, that on the point which the
French delegation has always stressed as being essential-the
question of withdrawal of the occupation forces-the
resolution which has be& adopted, if we refer to the
French text which is equally authentic with the English,
leaves no room for any ambiguity, since it speaks of
withdrnwal “des territoires occup&“, which indisputably
corresponds to the expression “occupied territories”.

1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twemy-second
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1567th meeting, para. 96.

12
-

t&en to mean the withdrawal of Israel forces from all, and
we repeat, all territories belonging to Arab States and seized
by Israel following its attack on those States on 5 June
1967. This is borne out by the preamble to the United
Kingdom draft resolution /S/8247/ which stresses the
‘%-admissibility of the acquisition of territory by war”. It
follows that the provision contained in that draft relating to
the right of all States in the Near East “to live in peace
within secure and recognized boundaries” cannot serve as a
pretext for the maintenance of Israel forces on any part of
the Arab territories seized by them as a result of war.

to all of them which could be presented on their behalf to
the Council.
124. Unfortunately, we did not succeed in drawing up a
text that could secure the undivided support of all those
who participated in our discussions. But we reached
unanimous agreement on three essential points that I
should like, with the Council’s permission, to restate: first,
the resolution of the Security Council should fall within the
scope of Chapter VI of the Charter; second, a special
representative of the Secretary-General should be promptIy
dispatched to the area; third, a set of principles should
guide the action of the special representative. The first two
points did not raise serious difficulties, but on the third
complete agreement failed to materialize .

120. It has been made clear, both from representatives’
statements in the Security Council today and from the
many statements made during the preceding days, that this
is the basic content of the resolution and that it has thus
been interpreted by all the members of the Security
Council. The same view wasexpressed in the fifth emergency special session of the General Assembly, in resolutions
which were put to the vote, although they were not
supported by an overwhelming majority. But, in the
resolution
presented by Latin American countries
[A/L.523/Rev.l]
and in that submitted by non-aligned
Staltes [A/L.522/Rev.3/,
the provision relating to the
withdrawal of forces was stated so clearly that it could not
possibly have been misinterpreted.

125. It is our hope that the principles included as
guidelines offered to the special representative, even if they
do not give full satisfaction to any of the different currents
of opinion, may well become the common denominator
acceptable to all.
126. The main immediate purpose of the action of the
Council is to secure the appointment of a special representative of the Secretary-General with a vikw to paving the
way for achieving a peaceful solution in the area.

121. In this connexion, I should like to draw the attention
of the members of the Security Council to the statement
which has just been made by the Israel Foreign Minister.
His remarks regarding the resolution which has just been
adopted cannot but alert the Security Council. It cannot be
concluded from that statement that Israel is disposed to
co-operate with the United Nations Organization, or is
prepared to co-operate with the Security Council in seeking
a swift political settlement in the Near East in accordance
with the resolution just adopted. And if Israel is going to
nmintain this attitude when the special representative visits
that region, it can be expected that the representative will
meet with no little difficulty before the resolution now
adopted can be put into effect.

127. I should like to restate, on behalf of my delegation,
the general principle that no stable international order can
be based on the threat or use of force, and that the
occupation or acquisition of territories brought about by
such means should not be recognized. The validity of this
rule cannot be contested and is not being chaIlenged by
anyone around this table. Its acceptance does not imply
that borderlines cannot be rectified as a result of an
agreement freely concluded among the interested States.
We keep constantly in mind that a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East has necessarily to be based on secure
permanent boundaries freely agreed upon and negotiated
by the neighbouring States; on a full and just settlement of
the refugee problem; and on the guarantee of free transit
for Israel ships through both the Suez Canal and the Gulf of
Aqaba.

122. The most important task now is to implement
without delay the decision which has been taken and, above
all, to secure the withdrawal of Israel forces from all
territoly occupied by them as a result of aggression. We feel
that, given the co-operation of all States and of all members
of the Security Council, this task can be completed in a
very short time in the interests of peace in the Near East
and of all countries in that region.

128. Bearing these facts in mind, and after extensive
consultations with the parties concerned, my delegation
came to the conclusion that its support of the United
Kingdom draft resolution [S/8247] would represent a
positive contribution to a peaceful solution of the Middle
East crisis. This text does not give full satisfaction to my
delegation. But, on the one hand, the United Kingdom
draft includes a set of principles that reflect most of those
suggested by my Government and embodied in the Latin
American proposal submitted to the fifth emergency special
session of the General Assembly. My Government, of
course, remains faithful to those principles. On the other
hand, the implementation of the resolution presented by
the United Kingdom seems to be viable.

123. Mr. DE CARVALHO SILOS (Brazil): Since the very
beginning of the recent conflict in the Middle East the main
concern of the Brazilian Government has been to contribute to supporting, either in the General Assembly or in the
Selcurity Council, a formula which while having the viability
of implementation could also embody the set of principles
thiit have already guided my country’s policy in relation to
the situation in that area. The members of the Security
Council are, of course, aware that we have taken an active
part in all the discussions conducted either in public or in
private since this matter first came under the consideration
of the Council. The non-permanent members spared no
efforts to arrive at a consensus or at a resolution acceptable

129. On behalf of my delegation I should like to thank the
representatives of France, Nigeria, the United Kingdom and
the United States for their words here today and last
Monday on the role played by the Latin American
countries since the fifth emergency special session of the
13

I
I

General Assembly. My Government has acted inspired only
by the desire to see peace, stability and economic progress
re-established in the area and by its commitments
and
duties as a member of the Council.

130. Mr, IGNATIEFF
(Canada): I shall be very brief in
explaining the position of the Canadian delegation on the
draft resolution which has just been adopted unanimously.
The Canadian approach towards all proposals has been
determined by the extent to which any particular proposal
could have the effect of getting under way those diplomatic
processes which we believe would lead to a peaceful
settlement of the crisis in the Middle East.
131. It is with this consideration in mind that Canada
willingly supported the United Kingdom draft resolution
which is now the resolution of the whole Council. We think
that this resolution, which is clear and speaks for itself, has
the best prospects of opening the way to the result which I
believe we all desire, namely, a state of just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

tension in that area which constitutes a real danger to peace
and security. We would have liked to see the Security
Council take much more energetic and effective measures.
Several proposals have been made to that effect, including
condemnation of the aggression and the aggressor, and a
number of such proposals are included in the various draft
resolutions submitted to the Security Council. They could
not be adopted because of the prevailing conditions in the
Security Council because of the violent opposition of
certain countries which would not be at their ease jf the
Council were to begin to give practical application to the
condemnation of the aggression and the aggressor.
136. The delegation of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria
considers, however, that any endeavour, any attempt to
bring about a peaceful settlement of the crisis in accordance
with the principles of the Charter, must be supported. An
end must be put to the present explosive situation which
inflicts intolerable sufferings on the Arab population of the
occupied territories and also represents a threat to peace,
137. Generally speaking, the resolution just adopted gives
a satisfactory answer to the question of the withdrawal of
Israel troops; it stresses, first of all, “the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by war”. That is a fundamental
principle of contemporary international law which flows
from the inadmissibility of aggression and the prohibition
of the use of force against the territorial integrity and
political independence of States.

132. The resolution just adopted does, in our view, meet
the essential positions of both sides, taking into account the
various ideas which emerged from consultations among
non-permanent members and among permanent members
of ~the Council, as well as with the States in the area. The
resolution represents a fair, balanced and non-prejudicial
basis for the dispatch to the Middle East of a special
representative of the Secretary-General. Furthermore, the
unanimous adoption of the resolution is in itself a positive
contribution which should provide the best framework for
the successful launching of the task of the special representative.

138. Confirming the principle of the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by war, the Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria,
Mr. Zhivkov, made the following statement at the fifth
emergency special session of the General Assembly:

133. This is the main step now being taken by the
Security Council, namely, to put the presence of a
representative of the Secretary-General into the area to help
bring about negotiations and peaceful conditions. As for
the mandate of the special representative, it entails, in the
words of the criterion which I set out when I spoke in the
Council on 9 November, “an equitable balance of obligations” on both sides [1373rd nzecting, para. 21#/. It is
most important that the Council has finally acted to have a
special representative appointed and that his influence
should be brought to bear as soon as possible in the area in
the interests of establishing a just and lasting peace. We
hope very much that the special representative will have the
necessary co-operation of all the States directly concerned
in the area.

“The People’s Republic of Bulgaria, just as the other
so&list and peace-loving countries, does not recognize
the forcible seizure of Arab territories by Israel.“*
139. We note with satisfaction that in the resolution
adopted, the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory
by force, proclaimed in the preamble as a general principle,
is clearly and explicitly confirmed in the first operative
paragraph, which calls for the “withdrawal of Israel armed
forces from territories occupied in the recent conflict”.
Thus it is a definite call for the withdrawal of Israel’s troops
from all the territories occupied since 4 June 1967. That is
a practical application of the principle of the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by war stated in the preamble
to the resolution.
140. The same applies also to the question of the
acknowledgement of the “territorial integrity and political
independence of every State in the area and their right to
live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries”. The
peace and security of all States is precisely what makes it
necessary, above all, to prohibit any acquisition by one
State of the territory of another through war.

134. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
French): The resolution which the Council has.just adopted
has proved to be the only possible compromise at the
present time which does not jeopardize the interests of the
victims of the aggression and could point the way to a
peaceful settlement of the crisis in the Middle East,
provided of course that it was strictly and judiciously
implemented.

141. The provision concerning the withdrawal of Israel
troops from all the occupied territories is an important

135. This compromise, the outcome of prolonged and
often difficult and hard-fought consultations, represents the
minimum positive alternative that the United Nations has
been able to present in the face of the steadily mounting

8 Ibid., Pifth Emergency
15 28th meeting, pun. 3 1.

Special &?ssion, Plenary hfeetings,

14
-

condition for the implementation of the other principles set
out in operative paragraphs 1 (ii) and 2 of the resolution,

Nations, belong in the highest and most essential category
of the norms and rules of our present international order.
These rights should under no circumstances be allowed to
fall by the wayside. Historically, legally, constitutionally
and morally, this Organization is inescapably committed to
the rights of the people of Palestine.

142. The Security Council resolution defines the terms of
reference of the special representative of the SecretaryGeneral satisfactorily. He is to establish and maintain
contacts with the States concerned in order to promote
agreement and assist efforts to achieve a peaceful and
accepted settlement in accordance with the provisions of
the resolution; in other words, he is to participate in the
negotiations and help to solve the problem.

r 50. In conclusion, the United Arab Republic will be
guided by these considerations in its continuous search for
a peaceful and just solution of the present crisis in the
Middle East.

143. It is now essential that the resolution should be
strictly respected and applied in good faith by the countries
cloncerned, as well as by all other States; it must be
implemented immediately, without any attempt to evade
it:s provisions. Today’s vote is only the first step; it will
undoubtedly be followed by others on the part of the
United Nations and its Members with a view to ensuring
peace in the Middle East, for this is essential to world
peace.

151. The PRESIDENT (translated
the representative of Jordan.

from

French):

I call

upon

152. Mr. RIFA’I (Jordan): Now that the Security Council
has concluded its present discussions, I feel duty bound to
make the following remarks. My Government has been
following with special interest and appreciation the efforts
of the members of the Council to arrive at a positive result.
We, for our part, share with the members the genuine desire
to establish conditions in our area conducive to peace,
based on justice and on the fulfilment of the legitimate
rights of our people. Indeed this has always been and
continues to be our aim.

144. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call
upon the representative of the United Arab Republic.
145. Mr. Mahmoud RIAD (United Arab Republic): On 7
November, the United Arab Republic requested the Security Council to meet in urgent session to resume its
consideration of the grave situation in the Middle East
‘/#S/8226]. This situation resulted from Israel’s war of
aggression on 5 June and its subsequent occupation of Arab
tlerritories in Jordan, Syria and the United Arab Republic,
as well as territories under United Arab Republic administration.

153. In the present crisis the basic issue which has to be
remedied as an essential step towards peace is the immediate and complete withdrawal of Israel armed forces from all
the territories they occupied in the recent conflict. The
resolutions which were adopted both by the Security
Council and the General Assembly, as well as the statements made on the question, have stressed this basic
requirement. Whether those resolutions pertain to the
cease-fire, to the return and safety of the Arab inhabitants
in the occupied territories, to the invalid Israel measures
taken in Jerusalem or to the problem in its entirety, they all
emphasize the fundamental principle that military aggression and occupation should neither pay nor stay. The
discussions and prevailing opinion in the Council and in the
General Assembly have made it clear that the United
Nations does not accept in full or in part the illegal Israel
occupation or any measures taken by Israel from the
position gained by this occupation or as a result of it. That
would be contrary to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, to the rules of international law, to the
spirit and letter of the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations and indeed to peace itself.

146. The Council responded to the request of the United
Arab Republic and convened on 9 November, at which time
I stated the position of my Government f 1373rd meeting].
I emphasized that it was the duty of the Security Council
to apply the Charter of this Organization and thus eliminate
the consequences of the present aggression, by forcing
Israel to withdraw from all the territories it occupied after
4 June 1967.
1.47. On 16 November, I again addressed the Council
[2379th meeting/ and I reaffirmed that the United Arab
Republic would never accept aggression, and that the
Security Council should not be allowed to compromise on a
question of such primary importance to the Charter and to
international peace and security.

154. On these premises the position of my Government is
based.

148. Today, I wish to affirm once again our position that
the first step towards peace lies in the full withdrawal of
Israel forces from all territories they have occupied as a
result of their aggression on 5 June. The efforts on behalf
of peace which would then follow would of necessity be
within the framework of this Organization and its Charter.
The provisions of our Charter prohibit aggression and
require all States to assume in good faith their obligations
arising from the Charter as well as from international
agreements and other sources of international law.

155. Mr, RUDA (Argentina) (translated from Spanish):
Ever since the outbreak of the crisis in the Middle East my
delegation has been active in seeking a basis for a solution
to the conflict to enable us to pass beyond this acute stage
of indecision and to enter a new phase where real results
can be obtained.
1.56. We have striven tirelessly after formulas for a system
providing a proper balance of interests, a real give-and-take.
We have felt all along that the road towards final peace was
through sound and effective decisions involving mutual
concessions such as are normal in this type of conflict.

‘149. The inalienable rights of the people of Palestine,
recognized and continually reaffirmed by the United
15

Basically, this means the withdrawal of troops from the
occupied areas on the one hand and the cessation of
belligerency on the other.

163. We trust that the implementation
of the formula
adopted will achieve these ends; it is the only solution. We
have always contended and still contend that, as the
Brazilian representative pointed out, no international order
be based on the threat or use of force, and that no
recognition should be given to any territorial arrangement
which has not been arrived at by peaceful means, nor to the
validity of any occupation or acquisition of territories
accomplished by force of arms.

1.57. For these reasons we have felt from the outset that
peace could not be brou&t about by withdrawal pure and
simple, but that such a step must of necessity be accompanied by other measures to enable the parties, without any
coercion, to seek a spontalreous agreement to any commitments to which they may subscribe in the future.

164. The second point is that of the right “to live in peace
within secure and recogniied boundaries”. We take this
expression as really meaning to live in security within
agreed boundaries. There are many parts of the world
where frontier boundaries are not secure, if we attach to
this concept a geo-strategic meaning which goes beyond
mere legal connotations; yet despite that, the States
concerned have the right to live in peace within those
boundaries.

158. These ideas essentially represented the position of
my country and the other Latin American countries which
submitted draft resolution A/L.523/Rev.I
in the General
Assembly. It is with great satisfaction for us today, in the
hour of decision for the Security Council, to note the
extent to which our ideas have been adopted and used as
the basis of the drafts submitted to the Council.
159. Our satisfaction was even greater when we learned,
through a number of channels, that one of these drafts, that
submitted by the United Kingdom [S/8247/, while it did
not have the acquiescence of all parties, did at least have
the promise of co-operation with the special representative
to be sent to the Middle East by the Secretary-General. This
implies a large area of agreement with regard to his terms of
reference.

165. The United Kingdom Secretary of State, Mr. George
Brown, defined this concept in a felicitous phrase when he
spoke recently in the General Assembly, as follows-and I
quote: “But equally, Israel’s neighbours must recognize its
right to exist, and it must enjoy security within its
frontiers.“9
166. Subject to the comments I have just made, my
country supported the draft resolution in the hope of
bringing about an agreement capable of producing effective
results within a reasonable time. We wish the SecretaryGeneral’s special representative the greatest successand we
trust that the parties will give him their full and unreserved
co-operation.

160. My delegation has been ready at any moment to
submit to the Council another draft resolution framed
strictly in accordance with the terms of the Latin American
draft. This has been withheld because we did not wish to
hamper in any way the success we desired for the United
Kingdom draft resolution, once we had knowledge of it and
were convinced that the co-operation of the parties could
be counted upon. Oiherwise my delegation would not have
hesitated to present its own draft resolution, which
incorporated the principles and purposes of the original
Latin American draft while bearing in mind two further
points: its adaptation to the new forum in which it had to
be submitted, namely; the Security Council, and its drafting
in the light of Chapter VI of the Charter.

167. In concluding the explanation of our vote cast in
favour of the draft in question, my delegation wishes to
express in the Council its thanks for the efforts made by all
the delegations, particularly those of the so-called group of
six, composed of Brazil, India, Mali, Nigeria, Ethiopia and
my own country, with which we collaborated for so long
on a very difficult task. At the same time, I wish to express
and place on record our gratitude to the United Kingdom
delegation, Whose spirit of CO-OperatiOn,
genthnanhK?SS
and ability has made it possible to achieve highly important
results which we trust will lay the groundwork for true
co-existence in the Middle East.

16 1. Because of its general acceptability, in the first place,
and because it was in large measure based on the ideas we
ourselves have been advocating since July, we voted in
favour of the United Kingdom draft resolution, We cannot,
however, help but observe that we would have liked to see
some improvements
made ,in the drafting. Thus, for
example, it would have been preferable if the preamble had
widened the undertaking by the Member States to act not
only in conformity with Article 2 of the Charter but also
with the Charter as a whole, and particularly with Articles 1
and 33.

168. This has also made it possible *for the Security
Council to meet the challenge with which it has faced, and
to show once again that it is an effective instrument for the
difficult task of preserving peace.
169. Before concluding, I wish on behalf of my delegation
and my Government to thank the delegations of the United
Kingdom, Nigeria, the United States and France for their
kind words regarding our work and that of the other Latin
American countries in the negotiations which have taken
place over these many months. We have been guided all
along exclusively by the desire to serve the cause of peace
and justice.
--

With regard to the formula for the withdrawal of
troops, which reads: “withdrawal of Israel armed forces
from territories occupied in the recent conflict”, this does
not, in our view, reflect a fully rounded-off notion; and
although my delegation voted for paragraph 1 (i) of the
draft, we would have preferred a clearer text, such as that
submitted to the General Assembly by the Latin American
countries in July, which provided for the withdrawal of
Israel armed forces from all the territories occupied as a
result of the recent conflict.
162.

5 Ibid., Twenty-secondSession,Plenary Meeting:, 1567th

meeting, para. 91.
16

170. Mr.

TSURUOKA (J~PuI):

WBS

&Id

The Japanese delegation
of the United Kingdom
draft resolution. The adoption of that resolution by the
Council is a very substantial contribution towards the goal
of a just and durable peace in the Middle East. My
delegation is immensely pleased by this accomplishment
and expresses a debt of gratitude to our friend and
colleague Lord Caradon and to the United Kirlgdom
delegation for the initiative that has led to this fortunate
result.
Very

et)

VOk

h

FdVOUr

171, As I said in the Council on 0 November /1373&
~rlectillg], my delegation very much hoped that intensive
consultations would lead to a compromise and a consensus
that the members of the Council could support. We are
delighted that our hope has been realised. We are particularly pleased that this resolution has been adopted unanimously. I sl10~11d like to express our respect and our warm
thanks to all W~IO have contributed SO much to the result
we have 11ow achieved.

cerned is essential. On behalf of the Japanese delegation, I
should like to offer to the special representative, in
advance, our very best wishes and to pledge to him our
whole-hearted co-operation.
176. I do not wish to conclude my statement on a note
that may seem to be too visionary; but my delegation can
foresee the time-and we ardently hope that it will soon
arrive-when the dissensions, the belligerency and the war
that have so grievously tom asunder the countries of the
Middle East for SO long a time will give way to an era of
peace, an era when those countries will find it possible to
co-operate harmoniously for the benefit of the peace and
security, the prosperity and the welfare of all the peoples of
the area.
177. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): In explaining the vote cast
by my delegation on the draft resolution presented by the
United Kingdom, I can refer to my statement in the 1373rd
meeting of the Security Council on 9 November in which I
presented the substance of the policy pursued by my
Government in the crisis in the Middle East. But let me, for
the sake of clarity, once again underline the importance
that we have always attached to the desirability of having a
resolution that should be so carefully balanced that the
parties to the conflict would be able to feel that they at
least could live with it and could reasonably be expected to
co.operate under its terms. We voted in favour of the draft
resolution presented by the United Kingdom because that
text, as it was voted upon and as it stands,.meets with our
point of view as to procedure and is compatible with our
position as to substance.

172. To you in particular, Mr. President, I should like to
pay a tribute on behalf of my delegation for the wisdom
with which you have guided our delicate and difficult work
to a successful conclusion.

173. Peace, of course, cannot be built in a day. But
resolution 242 (1967) which we have now adopted states in
clear and simple terms the principles and objectives upon
which peace in the Middle East must be based. We
emphasize “the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war and the need to work for a just and lasting
peace in which every StiltC! in the area can live in security”,
We affirm that “the establishment of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East , . . should include the application
of both the following principles:

178. The adoption today of the draft resoIution presented
by the United Kingdom is indeed a most auspicious
development. As Lord Caradon stated the other day, the
text is based upon a number of ideas and views that were
brought up during the long and arduous consultations
among members of the Security Council during the last
month. It is a compromise in the best sense of the word. It
does take into account all the essential interests of the
parties involved. III the words of my Canadian colleague,
which I fully endorse, this resolution represents a fair,
balanced and non-prejudicial basis for the dispatch to the
Middle East of a special representative of the SecretaryGeneral.

“(i) Withdrawal of Israel armed forces from territories
occupied in the recent conflict;
“(ii) Termination of all claims or states of belligerency
and respect for and acknowledgement of the
territorial
integrity and political
sovereignty,
independence of every State in the area and their
right to live in peace within secure and recognised
boundaries free from threats or acts of force”,

179. The Government of Denmark would strongly urge all
the parties involved to extend their full co-operation and
goodwill to the special representative in the exercise of his
most difficult and equally important task and in the
realization of the high principles embodied in the Council’s
resolution of today.

174. We are, very hopeful that the mandate given to the
special representative who is to be designated by the
Secretary-General will enable him “to promote agreement
and assist efforts to achieve a peaceful and accepted
settlement in accordance with the provisions and principles
in this resolution”.

180. Lord Caradon has on various occasions been generous
in his appraisal of the contribution made by other members
of the Council. As a newcomer to this table I cannot
conclude these brief remarks without giving expression to
my admiration and respect for his essential contribution at
the right time to the successful and constructive result of
the deliberations.

17.5. We all know that the mission assigned to the special
representative is not going to be an easy one. A very heavy
responsibility will rest upon him. At the same time, I would
strongly emphasise that the successof his mission demands
the utmost support by the Council and, indeed, the full and
effective co-operation of all Members of the United
Nations. Above all, the co-operation of the parties con-

181. Mr. LIU CHIEH (China): During the past weeks,
indeed months, members of the Council, particularly the
17

elected members, have been busily engaged in consultations
in search of the principles and procedures by which a just
and enduring peace could be established in the Middle East.
Those consultations have been useful in providing the
c0mnlon ground as a basis for the resolution which has just
been adopted. We owe these members of the Council a debt
of gratitude for their untiring and persistent efforts in this
difficult task.

189. In the name of the delegation of the Republic 0f
Mali, I should like to say that the adoption by the Security
Council of draft resolution S/8247 should in no way be
construed as indicating that my country abandons the
fundamental principles which throughout the centuries
have guided men who cherish peace and justice, to which all
mankind has constantly aspired throughout history, and
which are embodied in the noble ideals of the Charter 0f
the United Nations. My delegation therefore wishes its vote
today to be interpreted in the light of the clear and
unequivocal interpretation which the representative of
India gave of the provisions of the United Kingdom text,
namely: first, that the withdrawal of all the armed forces of
Israel from all the Arab territories occupied since 5 June
cannot be made subject to any condition whatever.
Secondly, in its view the just solution of the refugee
problem lies in the effective implementation of the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the Security
Council with a view to restoring the inalienable rights of the
Arab people of Palestine.

182. We realize that the issues in the Middle East are
extremely complex and deep-rooted and that they cannot
be resolved overnight by a single resolution of the Security
Council. We are encouraged, however, by the fact that the
parties involved, while they have certain reservations in
regard to the resolution, have shown a willingness to
co-operate with the Council in its efforts to bring about the
necessary conditions for peace in the Middle East.
183. My delegation is particularly gratified that the
Council, thanks to the timely intervention of the representative of the United Kingdom, has arrived at a formulation
which commanded unanimous support. Surely issues involving war or peace are too serious to be viewed simply as a
voting contest in this Council. On a question as vital and
difficult as the present one, anything short of unanimity
would not carry the kind of weight needed for effective
implementation.

190, We have constantly stressed, here and wherever the
occasion has arisen, that it is the perpetuation of a flagrant
injustice against that people which is the root cause of the
tragedy that has been acted out in the Middle East for the
last twenty years. In my delegation’s opinion, the solution
of this problem must be based above all on the need to
recognize that every people has a natural right to a
homeland and to a decent life within the great human
family.

184. The special representative to be appointed by the
Secretary-General can now press forward in his important
assigrwmt
backed by the full weight of this Council and
with the support of responsible opinion throughout the
world.

191. Motivated by the same desire for justice, my delegation further wishes to stress the special obligations which
flow from the adoption of this resolution for the parties to
respect the Charter, that is, to renounce belligerency, since
this would ensure each of the States in the area the right to
live in peace and security, free from threats or acts of war,
in respect for their sovereignty, political independence and
territorial integrity.

185. It is the earnest hope of my delegation that the
parties concerned will not allow the intensity of their
feelings to impair the prospects for constructive steps on
the long and tortuous road to peace in the Middle East.
186. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I shall
be very brief. 1 should like merely to observe that in
explanation of vote various members of the Council, as is
their right, have expressed views of their own for supporting the United Kingdom draft resolution. I should like to
repeat what I said earlier. The voting, of course, has taken
place not on the individual views and policies of various
members, but on the draft resolution. I, and I assume other
members of the Council, voted for the draft resolution and
not for each and every speech that has been made. Of
course, I hastily add that I have voted for my own speech,
and I assume others hnvc done likewise with respect to their
speeches.

192. As to the guarantee of freedom of navigation through
the international waterways in the area, it must be granted
to all States, in accordance with the international conventions and agreements currently in force.
193. The delegation of Mali wishes to state that ifs
country can in’no circumstances accept in the eyes of men
and of history any part of the responsibility for endorsing
the violation of the territory of States. This represents a
serious infringement of the Charter and would have
grievous consequences for the international community.
194. If we fail to live up to our vote fully in accordance
with the duty of each and every one of us scrupulously t0
see to it that all nations, large and small, respect the
Charter, we shall surely be helping to bring about new order
based exclusively on the principle of “might is right”, Such
a trend would undoubtedly block the laudable efforts by
the international community to curb the arms race, and it
would create a temptation for the countries of the Third
World to increase their military potential to the detriment
of their economic and social development programmes.
Their peoples would thus be doomed to become even
poorer. We cannot allow the role of the Organization to be

187. The PRESIDENT (tmslated fro~z Frerzch): I should
now like to speak on behalf of the delegation of MALI.
188. Mr. KANTE (Mali) (trmzslatad from French): Allow
me first of all to express to the representative of Japan my
ak>preciation of the kind words he addressed to me just
now. His thanks and kind words go surely beyond me and
iIxciu& all of you, all the members of the Council, with
WIWII~ as President for the month of November I share the
credit for the result we have achieved today. On your
bellalf, therefore, I should like to thank the representative
of Japun once again.
18

limited henceforth to noting and condoning @its accomplis.
The lesson of history is that the most powerful State today
can be the weakest tomorrow; that is the way of the world.
This danger which hovers over us therefore concerns all the
Sta.tes Members of the United Nations, however powerful
and whatever their level of technological, development.

aggressive acts and intentions to Syria. I need nbt go into
the details of what happened on 7 April 1967, which we
put before the Council when’ an attack was perpetrated
against Syria, and which included seven sorties by the Israel
air force, with a battle ensuing that took place over
Damascus, the capital of Syria.

195. For all those reasons my delegation, in voting for the
draft resolution on the Middle East submitted by the
Un.ited Kingdom, was anxious to record its unshakable
adherence to the principles of the Charter. My country
therefore continues to believe more than ever that the
withdrawal of forces from territories occupied by military
conquest is a prior condition for any solution of any armed
crisis. This is a deeply held conviction on its part. Mali is a
country of peace and is in favour of peace, that is to say,
pe,ace based on justice and equity. It therefore expresses a
most fervent wish for peace, true peace this time, in the
Middle East.

199. Finally and briefly I should like to comment on the
description given by Mr. Eban of my statement as a “hymn
of hate” [supra, para. 831. That is really an amazing
interpretation because,. reduced to its basic principles, my
statement invokes two of the Ten Commandments: “Thou
shalt not kill”; and “Thou shalt not covet” other people’s
property. That two of the Ten Commandments should be
interpreted as a “hymn of hate” is really beyond my
understanding, but the twisting of words and meanings can
result in anything. We condemn killing and the stealing of
other people’s property most strongly and most vehemently, whether it has been committed by Nazi Germany against
the innocent Jews, the French, the Danes or the people of
any other country which it occupied, just as we condemn it
most strongly and vehemently when it is committed by the
Israelis against the Arabs-by Dayan and Begin and justified
by Mr. Eban.

196. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
upon the representative of Syria.

I call

197. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): The test of the success or
failure of any major resolution can be measured only by its
results, The future will prove whether or not the resolution
adopted today will secure the cause of peace in the Middle
East.
198. I have listened very carefully to Mr. Eban’s statement
and his interpretation of the resolution, but not equally so
to the acrimonious part about Syria, which is to be
expected, His interpretation of the withdrawal only confirms’, but in a very roundabout way, the full intent of
Israel to consolidate its gains as a result of its aggression,
which wasamply explained in my statement to the COUI~.~.
Again, the words spoken are denied by the intent expressed
and the deed achieved. I should have liked Mr. Eban to have
denied some of the facts and occurrences which I brbught
out in my statement. However, it is to be noted that the
following sentence occurred in Mr. Eban’s statement:
“Peace : . . cannot be imposed” [supra, para. 921. I should
like to quote what I said in my statement about peace,
which was the following: “A lasting peace cannot be
imposed by force. One does not open the way for it by
seizing another’s property and demanding certain concessions before that property is given back to its legal, lawful
owner.” [supra, paru. 25.1I Mr. Eban went on to attribute

200. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call
upon the representative of Israel.
201. Mr. EBAN (Israel): I do not propose to maintain the
discussion with the representative of Syria, except to say
that if he is interested in the document of Hebrew literature
to which he referred I recommend that he should not stop
short with two commandments but should also study the
statement “Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy
neighbour”, because the quotations which he put in my
mouth were not there.
202. I intervene for another purpose, which is to say that I
am communicating to my Government for its consideration
nothing except the original English text of the draft
resolution as presented by the original sponsor on 16
November. Having studied that text, document S/8247, my
Government will determine its attitude to the Security
Council’s resolution in the light of its own policy, which is
as I have stated it.
The meeting roseat 7 p,m.

19

HOW

~0 OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications.maY
the world.
Consult
Your bookstore
or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
tar United
Nations,
Sales Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIE’S

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
aont en vente
dans
les librairies
et les agences
deporitaires
du monde enfier.
Informer-vous
aupres
de votre librairie
ov adressez-vous
a:
Nations
Unies, Section
des venter,
New York au Geneve.
KAK

llOIlY’4,MTb

MSAAHMR

OPTAHH3AWlM

ObbEAMHEHHblX

HAlJMh

h~aIlIIJI
Op~allWaI~tfIi
06~~AIiIIOIlilI;rX
IIaynt
~1O)IiIlO KyIUITb 11 I~lIIlil~lII~IX
PIara31111aX
11
IWCIITCTIBX
IIO BCCS pailomv
ampa.
H~BOAHTC
cnpamw 06 mAamm
n RIIIIC~I IiIllliliItOY
Yara:lIIIIe
11.111 nl1uII1T0
II0 aapCCy
: O~naIISI3aqHn
Oi)‘h0,&Il11c11111~1~
IIal&III?,
COIiI~W~
no

upoAaxe

ns~aurrir,

COMO

CONSEGUIR

I-Ibm-1Toprc
PUBLICACIONES

rim Xmena.
DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicocioner
de lar Naciones
Unidas estdn
en todos partes del mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
Yentas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in U.N.

Price:

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y casas dirtribuidorar
o dirljase
a: Naciones
Unidos,
Section

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

de

35888-January

1971-2,J

00
