General A11embly-Twenty-third Se11ion

62

to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained
in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling its resolution 2311 (XXII) of 14 December
1967 and other relevant General Assembly resolutions,
Talling into account the relevant reports submitted
by the Secretary-General, 8 the Economic and Social
Councilº and the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples 10 concerning the implementation of the
Declaration by the specialized agencies and international institutions associated with the United Nations,
Bearing in mind that the national liberation movements in sever~l colonial Territories, and particularly
in Africa, require the urgent assistance of the specialized agencies, especially in the field of education, health
and nutrition, in their strnggle to attain freedom and
independence,
N oting with regret that some of the specialized
agencies and international institutions associated with
the United Nations, and in particular the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the
International Monetary Fund, have not so far implemented General Assembly resolution 2311 (XXII)
and other relevant resolutions,
Considering that, by virtue of the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular Chapters IX and X, the
U nited N ations shall make recommendations for the
co-ordination of the policies and activities of the
specialized agencies,
l. Reiterates its appeal to the specialized agencies,
the International Atomic Energy Agency and the international institutions associated with the United Nations
to extend their full co-operation to the U nited N ations
in the achievement of the objectives and provisions of
General Assembly rescilution 1514 (XV) and other
releYant resolutions;
2. E).·presses its appreciation ,to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
to those specialized agencies and the international institutions which have co-operated with the United
Nations in the implementation of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions;
3. Recommends that the specialized agencies and
international institutions concerned should assist the
peoples struggling for their liberation from colonial
rule and, in particular, should work out, within the
scope of their respective activities and in co-operation
with the Organization of African Unity and, through
it, with the national liberation movements, concrete
programmes for assisting the oppressed peoples of
Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and the Territories under
Portuguese domination ;
4. Appeals once again to ali the specialized agencies
and international institutions, and in particular the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and International Monetary Fund, to take all
8 !bid., agenda item 69, A/7301.

9[bid., Twenty-third Sessio11, S11pplement No. 3 (A/7203),
chapter XVI, section C; ibid., Supp/ement No. 3A (A/7203/
Add.1), chapter VII, section A.
10 ]bid., Twenty-tltird Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/7200/Rev.l), chapter III.

necessary steps to withhold from the Governments of
Portugal and South Africa financia!, economic, technical and other assistance until they renounce their
policies of racial discrimination and colonial domination;
5. Recommends that the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development should withdraw the
loans and credits it has granted to the Governments of
Portugal and South Africa, which are being used by
those Governments to suppress the national liberation
movement in the Portuguese colonies and in Namibia,
and against the African population of South Africa;
6. Requests al! States, through action in the specialized agencies and international institutions of which
they are members, to facilitate the ful! and speedy
implementation of the relevant General Assembly
resolutions;
7. Req11ests the Economic and Social Council to
consider, in consultation with the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, appropriate measures for the co-ordination of the policies and activities
of the specialized agencies in implementing the relevant
General Assembly resolutions;
8. I n·vites the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
and international institutions concerned in working out
appropriate measures for implementing the relevant
General Assembly resolutions and to report thereon to
the Assembly at its twenty-fourth session;
( b) To obtain and transmit to the Special Committee for its consideration concrete suggestions from the
specialized agencies and international institutions concerrted regarding the best ways and means of achieving
the full and speedy implementation of the relevant
resolutions;
9. Req11ests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question lind to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-fourth session.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December 1968.

2427 (XXIII). Queation of Papua and the Tnut
Territory of New Guinea
The General Assembly,
H aving examined the report of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 1 July 1967 to 19
June 196811 and the relevant chapter of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Grantin2
of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,1'1
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,
Recalling further its resolutions 2112 (XX) of 21
December 1965, 2227 (XXI) of 20 December 1966
and 2348 (XXII) of 19 December 1967,
11 /bid.,

Twe11ty-third Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/7204).
Twenty-third Session, Anneres, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/7200/Rev.l), chapter XXIII.
12 lbid.,

Reeolutions adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

Having heard the statement of the representative of
the administering Power, 13
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Papua and the Trust Territory of N ew Guinea to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Regrets the fact that the administering Power
has not yet fully implemented the provisions of resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions
relating to Papua and the Trust Territory of N ew

Guinea;
3. Calls upon tl\e administering Power to implell)ent
fully resolution 1514 (XV) and to this end to take
the following measures in particular:
(a) To fix an early date for self-determination and
independence in accordance with the freely expressed
wishes of the people of the Territories;
(b) To hold free elections under United. Nations
supervision on the basis of universal adult suffrage in
order to transfer effective power to the representatives
of the people of the Territories;
4. Requests the administering Power to report to the
Trusteeship Council and the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples on the action taken in
this regard ;
5. Reqiiests the Trusteeship Council and the Special
Cornmittee to continue to examine this question and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
twenty-fourth session.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December 1968.

2428 (XXIII).

Question of Ifni and Spanish
Sabara

The General Assembly,

Having e.~amined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territories of Ifni and Spanish Sahara, 14
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also the resolution adopted on 16 October
1964 by the Special Committee, 15
Reaffirming its resolutions 2072 (XX) of 16 December 1965 and 2229 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
Noting that the Government of Spain, as the administering Power, has not yet applied the provisions
of resolution 1514 (XV),
Recalling the decision concerning the Territories
under Spanish administration taken by the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its third ordinary session, held
at Addis Ababa from 5 to 9 November 1966,
Reaffirming its resolution 2354 (XXII) of 19 December 1967,
13 ]bid., Twenty-third Session, FCJUrth Committee
1799th
meeting, paras. 1-35.
'
14 /bid., TwentJHhird Sessio,i, Anneres, addendum to agenda
ítem 23 (A/7200/Rev.l), chapter XIII.
lS ]bid., Nineteenth Session, Anneres, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter IX, para. 112.

63

N oting the statement made by the administering
Power on 7 December 1966 relating to Spanish
Sahara,16 particularly with respect to the sending of a
special mission of the United N atio11s to this Territory,
the return of exiles and the free exercise by the indigenous population of its right to self-determination,
N oting further the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of the administering Power on 29
November 1968,17 according to which an official Spanish
delegation would leave in the immediate future for
Rabat with a view to signing a treaty with the Government of Morocco on the transfer forthwith of the
Territory of Ifni to Morocco,
N oting the difference in nature of the legal status of
these two Territories, as well as the processes of
decolonization envisaged by General Assembly resolution 2354 (XXII) for these Territories,

I
lFNI

l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Ifni to self-determination in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Ifni;
3. Requests the administering Power to take immediately the necessary steps to accelerate the decolonization of Ifni and to determine with the Government
of Morocco, bearing in mind the aspirations of the
indigenous population, the procedures for the transfer
of powers in accordance with the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
4. Invites the administering Power to continue the
dialogue which has begun with the Government of
Morocco, with a view to implementing the provisions
of paragraph 3 above;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in the Territory of Ifni
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
twenty-fourth session;
II
SPANISH SAHARA

l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Spanish Sahara to self-determination in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Spanish Sahara;
3. Invites the administering Power to determine at
the earliest possible date, in conformity with the aspirations of the indigenous people of Spanish Sabara
and in consultation with the Governments of Mauritania and Morocco and any other interested party,
the procedures for the holding of a referendum under
United Nations auspices with a view to enabling the
indigenous population of the Territory to exercise
freely its right to self-determination and, to this end:
11 ]bid., Twenty-first Session, Fo11rth Committ,e,
1660th
meeting, paras. 1-4.
1i !bid., Twenty-third Session, Fourth Committee, · 1799th
meeting, paras. 43-46.
