IX.

Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principie of Non-Use
of Force in lnternational Relations,
Reca/ling, in particular, its resolutions 33/96 of 16 December 1978 and 34/13 of9 November 1979, in which it
decided that the Special Committee should continue its
work,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee, 9
Taking note of the fact that, owing to lack of time, the
Special Committee was not able to consider in depth the
new proposals submitted to it during its last session,
Taking into account that the Special Committee has
not completed the mandate entrusted to it,
Reaffirming the need for universal and effective application of the principie of the non-use of force in international relations and for assistance by the United
Nations in this endeavour,
Expressing the hope that the Special Committee will,
on the basis of ali the proposals before it, complete the
mandate entrusted to it as soon as possible,
l. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee
on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principie of NonUse of Force in International Relations;
2. Decides that the Special Committee shall continue
its work with the goal of drafting, at the earliest possible
date, a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations as well as the peaceful settlement of disputes or such other recommendations as the Committee
deems appropriate;
3. Requests the Special Committee to consider
thoroughly, and to take duly into account, all the
proposals submitted to it with a view to ensuring a successful completion of its mandate;
4. Invites the Governments which have not yet done
so to communicate their comments or suggestions or to
bring them up to date, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 31 /9;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and services;
6. Invites the Special Committee to submit a report
on its work to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda ofits
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Report of the
Special Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of
the Principie of Non-U se of Force in I nternational Relations".

81 st plenary meeting
4 December 1980

35/51.

259

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United N ations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work of
its thirteenth session, 10
Recalling its resolutions 2205 (XXI) of 17 December
1966, by which it established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law and defined the ob' /bid., Thirty-fifth Session, Supplement No 41 (A/35/41).
'º !bid.. Supplement No. 17 (A /35/ 17)

ject and terms of reference of the Commission, 3108
(XXVIII) of 12 December 1973. by which it increased
the membership of the Commission, 3 I /99 of 15 December 1976, by which Governments of Member States
not members of the Commission were entitled to attend
as observers the sessions of the Commission and its
working groups, and 34/142 of 17 December 1979, by
which the co-ordinating function of the Commission in
the field of international trade law was emphasized, as
well as its previous resolutions concerning the reports of
the Commission on the work of its annual sessions,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 3201 (S-YI) and 3202
(S-YI) of I May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974 and 3362 (S-YII) of 16 September 1975,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law, in
reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international trade, especially those affecting the developing countries, would significantly contribute to universal economic co-operation among ali Sta tes on a basis of
equality, equity and common interests and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and,
thereby, to the well-being of ali peoples,
Having regard for the need to take into account the
different social and legal systems in harmonizing the
rules of international trade law,
Stressing the usefulness and importance of organizing
symposia for promoting better knowledge and understanding of international trade law and, especially, for
the training of young lawyers from developing countries
in this field,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on lnternational Trade
Law on the work of its thirteenth session:
2. Takes note of the successful conclusion of the
United Nations Conference on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods, held at Yienna from 10 March
to 11 April 1980, which has resulted in the adoption of
the Convention on Contracts for the International Sale
of Goods 11 and a Protocol Amending the Convention
on the Limitation Period in the lnternational Sale of
Goods: 1 '
3. Commends the United Nations Commission on
lnternational Trade Law for the progress made in its
work and for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of its
working methods;
4. Notes with satisfaction that the United Nations
Commission on lnternational Trade Law has unanimously adopted the Conciliation Rules of the Commission; 11
5. Calls upon the United Nations Commission on
lnternational Trade Law to continue to take account of
the relevant provisions of the resolutions concerning the
new international economic order, as adopted by the
General Assembly at its sixth and seventh special sessions;
6. Welcomes the decision of the United Nations
Commission on lnternational Trade Law to the effect
that its Working Group on the New lnternational
Economic Order shall be composed of ali States members of the Commission;
7. Takes note with appreciation of the fact that the
United Nations Commission on lnternational Trade
1

"

"A/CONF.97/18, annex l.
'·' {bid annex \ 1
'' Offi;ial Records o/ the General Assembly, Thirtv-fi.frh Session,
Supplement No. 17 (A;35017), paras. 105 and 106. ·
'' !bid .. para. 14.1.

160

General Assembly- Thirty-lifth Session

Law has welcomed the recommendation of the Working
Group on the New I nternati~:rnal Economic Order concerning subject-matters to be mcluded in the prog_n_imme_
of work of the Commission and endorses the dec1s1on of
the Commission that preparatory work be carried out in
respect of contracts on supply and construction of large
industrial works and on industrial co-operat1on:''
8. Reaffirms the mandate of the United ~ations
Commission on lnternational Trade Law 111 coordinating legal activities in the field of international
trade law;
9. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law should:
(a) Continue its work on the topics included in its
programme of work;
(b) Continue its work on training and ~ssistance in
the field of international trade law, taking mto account
the special interests of the developing countries;
(e) Maintain close collaboration with the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the lnternational Law Commission and the United N ations
Industrial Development Organization and continue to
collaborate with international organizations active in
the field of international trade law:
(d) Continue to maintain liaison with the Commission on Transnational Corporations with regard to th_e
consideration of legal problems that would be susceptible of action by the United Nations Commission on
lnternational Trade Law:
1O. Expresses its apprec{atio_n to ali Sta tes which
have offered to make contnbut1ons to the holding at
Vienna in 1981 of the second symposium on international trade law of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the occasion of the fourteenth session of the Commission;
11. Appeals to other States and to organizations_, institutions and individuals to make similar contnbutJons
so that the number of participants in the second symposium from developing countries might be increased:
12. Reaffirms the importance of the legal work that
is being undertaken by the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law and of the increased role of
the I nternational Trade Law Branch of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat as the substantive secretariat of the Commission and, in this connexion:
(a) Recognizes the relevance of summary records for
the legisla ti ve history of U nited N ations treaties. conventions and other texts of a legal character and emphasizes the advisability of continuing the prac_tice of
drawing up complete summary records for meetmgs of
the Commission that are devoted to the preparat1on of
draft conventions or other legal instruments:
(b) Requests the Secretary-General to earmark, out
of the funds allocated to the common library of the
Vienna International Centre, such an amount as is necessary for the maintenance of the law library of the
Commission and for the acquisition of matenals that are
required in the context of the programme of work of the
Commission;
(e) Appeals to Governments to contribute to the \aw
library of the Commission at Yienna legal matenals
which are relevant to the work of the Co1Pmission. including official journals, gazettes and legislative texts:
(d) Further appeals to Governments to provide _the
secretariat of the Commission with relevant matenals
pertaining to arbitration procedure so that it can complete its work on a model law on arbitral procedure:

13. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
United Nations Commission on lnternat1onal Trade
Law the records of the discussion at the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly relating to the report of
the Commission on the work of its thirteenth session.

8 I st plenary meeting
4 Decemher 1980

35/52.

Conciliation Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the value of conciliation as a method _of
amicably settling disputes arising in the context of mternational commercial relations,
Convinced that the establishment of conciliation rules
that are acceptable in countries with different legal,
social and economic systems would significantly contribute to the development of harmonious international
economic relations,
Noting that the Conciliation. Rules of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law were
adopted by the Commission at its thirteenth session 11 after consideration of the observations of Governments
and interested organizations,
1. Recommends the use of the Conciliation Rules of
the United N ations Commission on International Trade
Law in cases where a dispute arises in the context of international commercial relations and the parties seek an
amicable settlement of that dispute by recourse to conciliation:
2. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for the
widest possible distribution of the Conciliation Rules.

8 / st plenary meeting
4 December 1980

35 / 160.

Peaceful settlement of disputes between Sta tes

The General Assemhly.
Having examined the item entitled "Peaceful settlement of disputes between States",
Deeply concerned at the continuation of conílict situations and the emergence of new sources of disputes and
tension in international life, and especially at the growing tendency to resort to force or the threat of force and
at the escalation of the arms race, which gravely endanger the independence and security of States, as well
as international peace and security,
Reafjirming its resolution 34/102 of 14 December
1979. in which it urged ali States to co-operate in the
elaboration of a declaration of the General Assembly on
the peaceful settlement of disputes between States,
Considering that the elaboration of a declaration on
the peaceful settlement of disputes between States could
contri bu te to the elimination of the danger of recourse
to force or the threat of force and, therefore, to the
strengthening of international peace and security,
Noting with satisfaction the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 11 containing the opinions, suggestions and proposals of States regarding the declaration on the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States,
.\ 35 1 J9 l and Add.
