S/2002/611

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 June 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 3 June 2002 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo covering
the period 1 to 30 April 2002.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-40986 (E)

050602

*0240986*

S/2002/611

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on KFOR operations
1.
Over the reporting period (1 to 30 April 2002) there were just over 39,200
KFOR troops in theatre.
2.
The security situation in Kosovo during the month of April remained calm and
stable, although a riot occurred in Mitrovica on 7 April, leaving 17 policemen of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) injured, one
seriously. Overall there was an increase in the number of demonstrations across the
province. Illegal border-crossing incidents also increased.
Security
3.
Public demonstrations on political, social and economic issues increased
significantly, with 76 demonstrations reported during the month of April. Apart from
the incident in Mitrovica, these demonstrations were peaceful for the most part.
Minor incidents of inter-ethnic violence occurred across the province, particularly in
the Gnjilane region and in Mitrovica. Although the overall level of serious crimes
remains low, five murders were committed during the reporting period.
4.
On 3 April, a grenade was thrown from a passing car into the garden of a
Kosovar Serb house in Obilic. Two similar incidents have taken place recently in the
same area. As a consequence, KFOR and UNMIK have increased patrols to provide
more security for the Kosovar Serb minority in the area.
5.
On 6 April, a European Union representative was injured in Pristina when
someone attempted to steal her handbag. She was evacuated by KFOR and given
medical treatment for a broken arm and facial injuries after being thrown down a
staircase during the incident.
6.
The incident that took place in Mitrovica on 7 April began when an UNMIK
police patrol attempted to search a stolen vehicle and was attacked by a crowd of
people. On 8 April, following another vehicle search operation near the main bridge
in Mitrovica North, a crowd of up to 250 people rioted and attempted to release the
driver of the vehicle. Rocks, bricks and a grenade were thrown at the UNMIK
policemen, and 17 of them were injured. KFOR provided area security for the
UNMIK police. UNMIK police detained four Kosovo Serbs, including a well-known
Kosovar Serb activist who is being treated in hospital for injuries sustained during
his arrest. Demonstrations against his detention continued for several days — eggs
and stones were thrown at the UNMIK police station, and UNMIK vehicles were
stoned. KFOR and UNMIK began conducting joint patrols in northern Mitrovica on
27 April.
7.
KFOR continued to carry out search operations throughout the province to
deter weapons smuggling and terrorist activity. The monthly total of items
confiscated came to 216 weapons, 334 grenades and mines and 45,383 rounds of
ammunition. Forty-five people were arrested for possession of illegal weapons.
8.
During the weapons amnesty period, which ran from 15 March to 15 April,
some 459 weapons, 7 rockets and missiles, 670 grenades, 90 mines and 58,771
rounds of ammunition were recovered from all the ethnic communities across the
province.

2

S/2002/611

9.
By the end of April, 10,725 weapons had been destroyed under the weapons
destruction programme. The new weapons destruction furnace began operating on 8
April.
Border/boundary security
10. During the month of April, there was a sharp increase in the number of
attempts to move illegally across the borders with Albania and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. 1 Twenty-seven incidents were reported on the border with
Albania and seven along the border with the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. In all, 43 individuals were detained by KFOR and handed over to
UNMIK police following the seizure of a significant amount of contraband.
11. In an incident reported on 1 April, a Serb patrol claimed it had been fired upon
in the ground safety zone, on the administrative boundary line with Serbia, by
automatic weapons coming from within Kosovo. Although KFOR carried out an air
and ground search of the area, the attackers were not found.
12. On 17 April, KFOR forces intercepted a large-scale cigarette-smuggling
operation in the border region with Albania, and subsequently handed over nine
individuals and large quantities of cigarettes to UNMIK police.
13. On 26 April, an exchange of fire took place between ethnic Albanians in a
truck heading into Kosovo and the Border Brigade of the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, in an area contested by Kosovar Albanians. One person died and two
were wounded in the incident. KFOR provided assistance to prevent any illegal
cross-border activity.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
14. Although the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia security forces remain in general
compliance with the provisions of the Military Technical Agreement, KFOR
discovered air defence equipment (35 systems including guns and missiles) in two
barracks during an inspection of the air safety zone on 8 April. The Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia military authorities were requested by KFOR to remove the
equipment in accordance with the Military Technical Agreement and the temporary
operating procedure. Confirmation of its removal was provided during a joint
inspection carried out on 17 April.
15. KFOR is currently investigating a separate incident that occurred on 29 April,
when a Federal Republic of Yugoslavia patrol crossed about 700 metres into Kosovo
before returning across the administrative boundary line.
16. With regard to the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), UNMIK has approved the
peacetime establishment list reviewed by KFOR in December 2001, which will
eventually be issued officially to the KPC. On 30 April, a further 374 members were
transferred to the reserve. The current strength of KPC stands at 4,086.
17. Sixteen cases of KPC non-compliance were reported during the month of
April, eight of which related to unauthorized attendance at public ceremonies.
Sixteen members were recommended for dismissal by the Commander of KPC for
lack of discipline and absenteeism. On 4 April, members of KFOR’s Multinational
__________________
1 Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.

3

S/2002/611

Brigades attended morning roll calls, unannounced, at all KPC locations across the
province, and found 28 per cent of KPC personnel absent. More than three quarters
of the personnel absent were considered to be on leave or had a valid medical
excuse.
18. During the reporting period, Multinational Brigade East personnel and 700
KPC members carried out joint navigation and search and rescue exercises.
19. On 24 April, an earthquake measuring 5.5 on the Richter scale shook the
eastern Kosovo region of Gnjilane, resulting in one death, seven serious injuries, 62
minor injuries and damage to buildings. UNMIK personnel and more than 400 KPC
members dealt with the relief operations, and KFOR provided engineering advice.
Some 100 KPC members continue to be involved in relief operations. KPC was
praised by KFOR, UNMIK and provincial President Rugova for its swift and
effective response in providing emergency aid to all ethnic groups in the province.
Cooperation with international organizations
20. KFOR continues to provide daily assistance to international organizations and
non-governmental organizations throughout Kosovo, on request, and to provide
security assistance in support of UNMIK police operations.
21. KFOR and the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Police and Justice signed a memorandum of understanding on cooperation between
UNMIK police, the Kosovo Police Service and the KFOR Multinational Specialized
Unit in order to conduct joint operations and coordinate activities of mutual interest.
22. KFOR is providing on-board security for the train running from Lesak to
Deneral Jankovic as part of the effort to improve freedom of movement throughout
the province.
Refugees and displaced persons
23. Of the displaced persons from Kosovo still living outside the province,
201,241 are estimated to be in Serbia and approximately 29,658 in Montenegro.
24. A further 80 refugees from the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
returned home during the reporting period, leaving more than 10,700 still displaced
in Kosovo.
Outlook
25. The overall security situation in the province is stable, although it is expected
that a low level of violence related to inter-ethnic tension and criminal activity will
continue to be reported.

4
