United Nations

S/PV.6259

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6259th meeting
Thursday, 14 January 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Yesui . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Mugoya
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2009/684)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-20953 (E)

*1020953*

S/PV.6259

I invite Mr. Lamamra to take a seat at the Council

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
table.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia (S/2009/684)
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Somalia, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Duale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ahmedou Ould
Abdallah, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Ould Abdallah to take a seat at the
Council table.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 8 January 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of Uganda to the United
Nations, in which he requests that the Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union
Commission, His Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
in accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure. If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 to Mr. Lamamra.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

2

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 6 January 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations, in which he requests that the Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the United
Nations, His Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure. If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 to Mr. Mahmassani.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mahmassani to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2009/684, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Ould Abdallah, Mr. Lamamra and
Mr. Mahmassani. I now give the floor to Mr. Ould
Abdallah.
Mr. Ould Abdallah: I would like to begin by
offering my sincere condolences to all the victims of the
terrible earthquake in Haiti. I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me this opportunity.
Concerning Somalia, recent well-publicized
international and regional developments have shone a
new, stronger spotlight on the country. The crisis,
which has become a tougher challenge than ever, can
no longer be ignored. Indeed, the conflict is no longer
local or even regional. It is global. Since my last
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6173), the
Government of Somalia has made significant progress,
despite repeated armed assaults to overthrow it by
externally funded extremists.
The Government’s accomplishments include
establishing itself in the capital, drawing up a budget
for the first time in years, presenting its priorities and
plans to the international community, recruiting and
10-20953

S/PV.6259

training security forces, and keeping its political
legitimacy over violent and extremist groups. At the
same time, the Government has remained open to all
Somalis who are ready for dialogue and reconciliation.
The United Nations fully backs this peaceful approach,
which is already making progress on the ground with
some patriotic Somali groups.
After years of conflict, the situation in Somalia
will not change overnight. However, the country is
moving from being a failed State to being a fragile
State. That represents progress. To prevent the situation
from deteriorating further and spilling over into the
region and further afield, we should join the dots. In
Somalia, the international community still has some
good cards; it should play them right. That will allow it
to overcome two main challenges.
The first is the absence of a concrete commitment
and a determined international policy towards Somalia
and its present leadership. Continued hesitation and the
absence of effective action have encouraged the
extremists and, at the same time, weakened the
Government, which is frequently attacked by wellsupported extremist groups. These groups have made it
clear that their agenda is global and that Somalia is an
easy and convenient entry point.
Here, it should be understood that the extremists
responsible for the violence include many foreigners
who seek not only to overthrow the Government by
force, but also to oppose the establishment of any
authority. Their ultimate objective is either to maintain
a permanent state of anarchy or to establish a militant
State. Their ambitions go well beyond Mogadishu and
Somalia. Neither of these objectives — anarchy or a
militant regime — represents the desire of the Somali
people, whose basic wish, like that of all people the
world over, is to have peace and a Government that
protects them and delivers services.
Moreover, the objectives of the extremists pose a
real threat to the neighbouring countries, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
region and countries afar. In fact, a closer evaluation of
the situation demonstrates what we already know —
that Somalia has long been a threat not only to itself,
but also to the wider world, with piracy being only the
latest costly reminder. Even more worrying is the
extremists’ deep conviction that the crisis in Somalia is
not important to the larger international community.
This perceived lack of engagement provides them with

10-20953

a strong incentive to keep fighting. As a consequence, a
line has been crossed in relation to security threats to
many countries inside and outside Africa, including
members
of
this
Council,
exposing
their
vulnerabilities.
The second challenge is that, despite a massive
consensus of support for the Government from the
international community, that backing has yet to be
translated into the necessary material assistance. For
example, at the Brussels donors conference on Somalia
in April 2009, chaired by the Secretary-General, $213
million were pledged. However, what has been
disbursed is too small to have had the desired impact.
In fact, since its formation, the Government has been
operating with limited external resource disbursements.
The only direct financial contributions were made by a
small group of committed countries through a
mechanism managed by a well-known international
auditing firm. Another donor Government has
innovated with payment directly through the Central
Bank of Somalia.
Over the past 10 to 15 years, the international
community has spent more than $8 billion in various
forms of assistance for Somalia. Although this is a vast
amount, it addressed primarily the symptoms of the
crisis and may have exacerbated the overall situation.
At the same time, the Government lacks the resources
to fund even some of the most basic requirements
needed to function, such as regularly paying salaries,
including those of parliamentarians and the security
forces. By contrast, the opponents of the Government
and allied extremists receive unlimited and unchecked
financial support.
The crisis in Somalia has persisted for almost 20
years. Conditions will never be totally perfect for
intervening in an optimum way. Therefore, we cannot
afford to keep managing the status quo while waiting
for the perfect conditions. We should start somewhere.
The Djibouti Agreement provides the international
community with a practical entry point, and the
Government is the body through which to channel
resources provided by the international community.
As a contribution to the Council’s debate, I would
like to propose the following recommendations as
crucial measures towards improving the situation.
The first is for the international community to
depart from the past practice of undertaking
uncoordinated efforts and individual diplomatic

3

S/PV.6259

initiatives, including the convening of reconciliation
conferences and meetings one after another. A common
policy objective must be supported. In that context, the
Djibouti Agreement should remain the means through
which the combined efforts of the Somalis and their
international partners achieve progress.
The second recommendation is to fully support
the Government. The Security Council should send a
strong and clear message to the extremists by
strengthening the Government in a practical manner.
The Government needs to be helped to gradually
become more effective in delivering services to the
population and a more able partner to the international
community. Specifically, the international community
should provide more vigorous moral, diplomatic and
financial assistance. Assistance delayed is assistance
denied. In the face of the mounting danger, sitting on
the fence is no longer an option.
Thirdly, working more closely with the
subregional organization IGAD and the African Union,
along with the League of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Conference, has become
imperative. The African Union Mission in Somalia
deserves, as a matter of emergency, support through an
increase of troop allowances to the international level,
their timely disbursement and payment for critical
equipment. This is not only fair and a boost to the
morale of the troops on the ground, but it will send the
right message of interest from the international
community to potential troop-contributing countries.
The fourth recommendation is that the Council
should address vigorously the role of spoilers. It should
encourage or pressure spoilers, both internal and
external, to cease supporting violence. A clear and
effective message, backed by concrete action, would
demonstrate that those who fund extremists — creating
misery for innocent civilians and violating
international law in ways that include the widespread
recruitment of child soldiers and threatening peace and
stability in the whole region — will no longer enjoy
impunity. The protection of civilians is an obligation
long ignored in Somalia.
The last recommendation I would like to make is
that these recommendations will be more effectively
implemented once the United Nations bodies working
on Somalia operate, as in other United Nations political
and peacekeeping missions, in an integrated and
harmonized manner. Security Council resolution 1863

4

(2009) has addressed this question. I believe the
leadership at the Secretariat will ensure that this is put
into action in the next few weeks. At the same time, the
move by the United Nations and the international
community from Nairobi to Mogadishu should be
accelerated. To help the Somalis, especially the
victims, we have to be with them on the ground.
I realize that the Security Council has numerous
critical issues to address. Somalia is only one of them.
However, failure to actively intervene to restore
stability to that country is already threatening the
effectiveness of the international community in
addition to costing vast amounts in resources. Failure
to act now in a decisive manner can only increase that
cost dramatically.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Ould Abdallah for his briefing.
I now give the
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra.

floor

to

His

Excellency

Mr. Lamamra (spoke in French): Now that the
effects of the earthquake that hit Haiti so hard are
beginning to be seen in all their tragic scope and it is
confirmed that there has been considerable loss of
human life, I would like once again to express on
behalf of the African Union our heartfelt condolences
to the people and the Government of Haiti and to the
families and loved ones of the deceased, to whom we
extend all our sympathies. We are thinking of our
colleagues — leaders, members, partners and even
visitors who are there with the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, including Mr. Hédi
Annabi, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, whose whereabouts are still unknown. We
assure their families of our full solidarity.
On behalf of the African Union (AU), I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Council for so opportunely scheduling
this meeting on Somalia so early in the year. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/684), as well as his Special Representative,
Mr. Ahmadou Ould Abdallah, for his extremely clear
and useful introductory comments and for his
praiseworthy perseverance in carrying out his mission.
I would also like to express my appreciation to the
representative of Somalia and the Permanent Observer
of the League of Arab States and to assure them of our
continued cooperation, while thanking them in advance

10-20953

S/PV.6259

for the useful information on developments in Somalia
that they will be giving the Council.
The year 2009 was a particularly difficult one for
Somalia. However, it was also different from many of
the preceding years inasmuch as the cruel tribulations
and complex problems have begun to be addressed as
major challenges that are also harbingers of
opportunity. The enemies of peace and reconciliation,
inside and outside the country, have redoubled their
aggression and cruelty, blindly determined to wreck the
results of the Djibouti process and beyond that to make
Somalia a regional focal point and base of operations
for maritime piracy and international terrorism.
The affiliation of Somali armed groups,
particularly
the Al-Shabaab
movement,
with
international jihadist terrorists has been confirmed and
reconfirmed through public declarations of allegiance
to Al-Qaida, an influx of foreign fighters into Somalia,
and the introduction of typical modi operandi
previously unknown there. There has been a detectable
quantitative growth in the capacity of insurgent groups
to do harm, which in turn has led to increases in deadly
terrorist acts and a territorial expansion that has yet to
be sufficiently contained. One of the effects of the
insurgent groups’ spectacular acts that magnifies their
propaganda and their impact is the perception that the
situation in Somalia is structurally volatile, precarious
and uncertain.
In fact, the past year in Somalia has set in motion
a tenuous but nonetheless genuine momentum toward a
rebirth of the Somali State, led by the pluralistic and
inclusive Transitional Institutions, the expansion of the
bases of President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed’s
Government, and the functioning of Government
structures that are working to bring about good
governance, while vital public services such as national
police and security forces are gradually and effectively
being put in place. The legitimacy and credibility of
the present Transitional Federal Institutions, with clear
aims, objectives and expectations, have made sure that
a broad consensus of the international community is
united behind them.
The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), which in 2009 witnessed twice as much
loss of life as in the rest of its existence, has increased
in terms of numbers, capacity and experience; it is
motivated by a heightened sense of its responsibilities
and the desire to accomplish an undertaking for peace

10-20953

which Africa is pursuing on behalf of the entire
international community — and with its support. Here
I would like to once again pay tribute to Burundi and
Uganda for their decisive contribution to this mission.
On 8 January, the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union renewed AMISOM’s mandate for
another 12 months and is counting on the Security
Council’s support for its decision. It expressed its
appreciation for the considerable logistical support that
the United Nations has provided to AMISOM, as well
as for the encouraging results of the pledging
conference held in Brussels. The AU Peace and
Security Council also welcomed the United Nations
Security Council’s adoption of resolution 1907 (2009)
and called for its genuine implementation, while urging
the Security Council to respond positively to its request
to impose a no-fly zone and port controls in order to
deprive Somali insurgents and their allies of the use of
the country’s air and maritime spaces. The Peace and
Security Council also expressed its concern over the
ongoing piracy and the phenomenon of the payment of
ransoms that fuel crime, terrorism and extremism.
Based on all of these considerations, the Peace
and Security Council
“reiterated its appeal to the United Nations
Security Council to take the necessary steps for
the United Nations to play a role commensurate
with the gravity and complexity of the situation
on the ground, including through the
transformation of AMISOM into a United Nations
peacekeeping operation and by putting in place
all other legal, budgetary, logistical and
operational arrangements that could decisively
enhance the effectiveness of the action of the
international community in Somalia”.
Clearly, Somalia and the international community
have made considerable gains on which it would be
desirable and possible to base a bold strategic vision
for ending the crisis in Somalia by the end of the
transitional period in October 2011, which is not a long
time from now. With the necessary political will,
decisive progress can be made in an ongoing effort of
effective Somalization of the country’s national
security and by the Somali State’s assumption of its
other sovereign functions.
At the same time, humanitarian assistance, quick
impact projects and the launch of development
activities that create jobs should all be part of a

5

S/PV.6259

comprehensive, consistent and multidimensional effort
to mobilize collective energies to ensure that Somalia
is no longer a threat to its own people, to its region, to
Africa and to the world. Somalia must no longer be
seen through the lens of the trauma of its past
experiences. Rather, Somalia must be vigorously
supported in creating the leverage for a recovery that
will be healthy both for Somalia itself and for the
entire international community.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Lamamra for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mahmassani.
Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to
reiterate the condolences of the League of Arab States
to the families of the victims of the earthquake in Haiti.
We also thank the President for this opportunity to take
part in this important meeting. I also thank Mr. Ould
Abdullah, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and Mr. Ramtane Lamamra for their briefings.
We reaffirm our solidarity with them.
Allow me also to take this opportunity to
welcome the new members of the Council. We wish
them every success.
The question of Somalia has become the main
challenge to peace and security in the Horn of Africa.
The deteriorating security and humanitarian crisis in
Somalia is one of the worst Africa has ever known.
That has been affirmed by the Secretary-General in a
number of reports. The ongoing conflict among the
various parties in Somalia and the international
community’s failure to end it will further exacerbate
the situation in Somalia, with serious repercussions for
the countries of the region and for international peace
and security.
Seventeen years of international and regional
experience have shown us that the long-awaited
political solution to the Somali crisis must be based on
national consensus. That is at the heart of the solution.
The framework for these efforts has been determined
by the Djibouti process. The African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) can safeguard that framework, but
it needs all the support it can get. Dialogue among the
various parties to the conflict, none of which should be
marginalized or rejected, must be pursued on the basis
of the agreements reached over the past few years with
the support of international and regional organizations,

6

with the exception of those that have chosen the path
of violence.
The League of Arab States supports AMISOM
and firmly condemns any military operation against it.
The League of Arab States will continue to call on
Member States and all regional groups to take part in
AMISOM and contribute to its full deployment. We
will continue to appeal to Member States to provide
financial and logistical support for that deployment.
The Security Council must renew its mandate in order
to protect the legitimate institutions of Somalia, while
taking all necessary measures to ensure support for the
Mission and its deployment.
The disastrous humanitarian situation is
deteriorating on a daily basis. A true humanitarian
disaster is unfolding in Somalia. We must meet this
challenge and provide international and regional
assistance immediately through closer cooperation
among the various international and regional
humanitarian agencies. These agencies must coordinate
the delivery of humanitarian assistance and ensure that
it arrives safely.
The worsening security situation on the ground in
Somalia is the cause of real disorder along the
coastline. Piracy along the Somali coastline has
increased, becoming a genuine threat to maritime
security and safety in that strategic zone. While
international efforts are under way to end piracy along
the coastline of Somalia, the situation in that country
requires the international community, and the Security
Council in particular, to take the steps necessary to
deal with the Somali crisis by addressing its most
profound causes and reasons. That means strengthening
Somali State institutions and helping the various
parties to set aside their differences in the interests of
peace and stability in that country.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Mahmassani for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Somalia.
Mr. Duale (Somalia): I take this opportunity to
thank you, Mr. President, for enabling me to participate
in this discussion on Somalia today. At the same time, I
would like to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also take this opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral and all Governments, organizations and

10-20953

S/PV.6259

individuals that have supported Somalia’s efforts to
advance the cause of peace, stability, reconciliation,
humanitarian assistance, human rights, unity, political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In that connection, I wish personally to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, who in his briefing to the
Council has presented Somali issues better than I could
ever do. That is because he is on the ground. We hope
that the United Nations will now allow him to set up
his office in Somalia, and not outside it. I hope that the
same will happen when it comes to all United Nations
country offices that are now located in Nairobi.
I also wish to thank Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union (AU), for
his support and his briefing. Through him, I also thank
the AU, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the countries contributing troops to
Somalia, which, as he has said, has suffered a lot.
I also wish to thank the Permanent Observer of
the League of Arab States for his briefing and support.
I now wish to proceed to touch on a number of
issues raised in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2009/684) that were also highlighted by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in his briefing.
Clearly, our first priority is security. Without
adequate security for all, it is hard to see how any
meaningful progress can be achieved in the areas of
economic development, employment, peace and
stability, among others. Furthermore, we believe that
this could be achieved through the following steps,
which were also mentioned by the Special
Representative. The first is to sufficiently rebuild the
Somali national security force, including the army,
police, coast guard and justice and correction units.
The second is to adequately strengthen the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in all respects
to be part of a larger United Nations effort. The third is
the deployment of an adequate United Nations
peacekeeping force, of which AMISOM will become
an integral part at an appropriate time — which we
hope will happen sooner rather than later.
In that connection, we wish to go further and say
that we believe that the only way to improve security
and stability in Somalia is to empower Somali security
forces to subdue the most virulent insurgents and to
enable the Government to extend its areas of authority

10-20953

as far as possible if negotiations for peace fail. This is
clearly necessitated by the fact that, in the past two
decades, the political scene in Somalia has been
characterized by a state of anarchy and stalemate in
which none of the competing forces has been able to
overwhelm the others decisively, credibly and
definitively. In that scenario, we believe that it is still
possible to end the agony of the Somali people by
establishing a strong, well-trained and well-equipped
national force.
Secondly, with regard to the mobilization of
resources, the Council will no doubt have noted that
there are several references in the latest report to
inadequate progress having been made in several areas,
including security, due to the lack of or delays in
receiving resources. The Council will also note that, to
date, the Government has received only a very small
portion of the confirmed pledges made in Brussels in
April 2009. We therefore appeal to Member States to
urgently release their pledged contributions to the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG).
In that connection, we thank the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations organizations
concerned for their efforts to mobilize resources for
Somalia. When it comes to accountability and
transparency with regard to the funds disbursed
directly to the Transitional Federal Government, it
should now be noted that the accounting firm of
PricewaterhouseCoopers has been hired by the
Government to oversee all expenditures of resources
received from outside the country.
Humanitarian assistance is very essential and
important. We fully share the deep concern of the
Secretary-General over the significant decline in
humanitarian funding in 2009 and the delays in the
delivery of badly needed supplies. For its part, the
Transitional Federal Government is committed to doing
all it can to protect and speed up deliveries and access.
Again, we must point out that there is a genuine
connection between humanitarian assistance and
security. We believe that improving the security
situation is the way to proceed with regard to
improving the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
needy populations.
On the issue of piracy, we are on the record in our
support for the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/590). We again reiterate that piracy is only a
symptom of the security situation in Somalia.

7

S/PV.6259

Therefore, the way to tackle piracy is to tackle the
overall security situation on land. To that end, the
Government has already trained 1,000 coast guard
staff, but they lack the basic necessities to be deployed
to the areas affected and where they are most needed to
combat piracy on land.
As we noted in the case of humanitarian
assistance, the key to improvements in the human
rights situation is to improve the security situation.
Unfortunately, wherever there is conflict in the world
there will be some violence and violations of human
rights. The Transitional Federal Government is
committed to the observance of human rights. We
uphold the value of human life and dignity. As reported
in the Secretary-General’s report, the Somali Cabinet
has endorsed the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. In fact, the former Permanent Representative of
Somalia to the United Nations signed the Convention
on behalf of the Government in 2004. We now expect
Parliament to fully ratify it soon.
With regard to reconciliation and peacemaking,
the Transitional Federal Government is fully
committed to the process of reconciliation and the
fulfilment of the Djibouti process. Some progress has
already been made, but more definitely needs to be
done. Unfortunately, there are elements in the violent
opposition who neither will have anything to do with
reconciliation nor desire any peaceful settlement of
issues. They are only interested in armed struggle to
remove or wipe out all who disagree with their
interpretation of Islam, national goals, interests and
values. Nevertheless, the Transitional Federal
Government will continue to reach out to all elements
in the interest of bringing about peace.
However, it must be noted the TFG is also
obliged to do its utmost to repel and resist armed
violence while condemning all terrorist acts and the
use of violence for political ends. It must be noted
further that the TFG, at a meeting of the International
Contact Group on Somalia hosted by the Organization
of the Islamic Conference in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, on
17 December 2009, presented its strategy for 2010 on
the following areas: first, reconciliation and outreach;
secondly, security; thirdly, holding an international
conference on recovery and reconstruction; and
fourthly, effective coordination and cooperation
mechanisms between the Transitional Federal
Government, its neighbours and the international
community.

8

I would like to end my intervention with a few
remarks about the three-phase incremental approach by
the United Nations, as outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s April 2009 report (S/2009/210). It is possible
that this approach, had it implemented much earlier,
could have been useful. However, at this moment, and
given the dire Somali situation, especially the
humanitarian situation, of the past two decades, we
consider that this approach might prove to be
inadequate to say the least. The proposed piecemeal
solution does not seem to be commensurate with the
gravity of the situation. What is really needed is not a
light footprint. We believe the reality and gravity of the
current situation would in our view dictate a much
heavier footprint. When one is afflicted with a serious
disease that has persisted for so long, maybe a massive
dose of medicine — or at least a significant one — is
what is needed. Excuse me: I am a doctor by
profession, so this is the example I know best.
Finally, we support the Secretary-General’s
request to the Security Council to renew the mandate
of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia for
the biennium 2010-2011, as we also support the
renewal of the mandate of AMISOM for a further term
of 12 months.
I am now duty-bound to express on behalf of my
Government our appreciation and thanks to His
Excellency the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations country team for
Somalia for their untiring efforts. We wish them all a
happy and successful year.
Allow me also to join previous speakers in
conveying our most sincere sympathy, condolences and
solidarity to the Government and the people of Haiti,
especially the families who suffered most.
I also wish, finally, to thank the Security Council
for remaining seized of the case of Somalia and to urge
the Council to take express action.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of the
subject.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

10-20953
