A/S-26/PV.7

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Twenty-sixth special session

7th meeting
Wednesday, 27 June 2001, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Finland)

The meeting was called to order at 9 a.m.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
(b)

Credentials of representatives to the twentysixth special session of the General Assembly
Report of the Credentials Committee (A/S-26/5)

The President: We shall proceed to consideration
of the draft resolution recommended by the Credentials
Committee in paragraph 15 of its report.
The Assembly will take action on the
recommendation of the Credentials Committee set forth
in paragraph 15 of its report. The Credentials
Committee adopted this draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
S-26/1).
The President: We have thus concluded our
consideration of agenda item 3.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Review of the problem of the human
immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (HIV/AIDS) in all its aspects
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Majesty King Mswati III, head of
State of the Kingdom of Swaziland.

King Mswati III: Six years ago, I stood here at
the fiftieth anniversary summit of the United Nations
and expressed the expectations of my people for a
better world in the next 50 years. I spoke then of
HIV/AIDS as the enemy on the horizon, and now our
very worst fears have turned into terrible reality. Today
we speak not of the hopes for future generations, but in
terms of their very survival.
I say to you, my fellow members: my people are
dying. They are dying before their time, leaving behind
their children as orphans, and a nation in a continuous
state of mourning. A quarter of all Swazis are already
infected with the virus that causes AIDS, and we
cannot avoid an escalating tragedy of truly frightening
proportions.
We are all agreed that this summit addresses the
biggest risk to global security. It requires the total
commitment of all nations, because no country will
escape the effects of this catastrophe. It is not just
those of us closest to the fire who will get burnt; the
heat will spread to every corner of the globe.
We leaders cannot afford to neglect our
responsibilities in what must be a truly global effort to
meet this challenge. We must not allow this effort to be
undermined by political considerations, nor by a belief
that the crisis is confined only to certain areas of the
world.
The Kingdom of Swaziland understands its
responsibilities. Every resource is strained to the limit
to help our people through prevention, education, care

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

01-42858 (E)

*0142858*

A/S-26/PV.7

and treatment. We are grateful for support in our efforts
from the United Nations agencies and from our
international partners. But our combined strength is as
nothing in the face of the tidal wave that has broken
over us. We need much, much more.
However, we are not standing idle, with hands
outstretched. We are searching for home-grown
solutions to the different aspects of the crisis. The
tradition of the extended family and of community
spirit is the basis for our approach to providing care
and support for the needy. We depend increasingly on
the traditions and culture of the past for guidance —
especially in the promotion of abstinence. Our
traditional healers have much to offer in research
partnerships involving modern-day techniques and
effective medicines. Our healthy local foodstuffs
provide the right nutrition to those in need. Meanwhile,
given the limitations of our finances, we are looking to
raise funds by exploring beyond the routine, targeting
the huge reserves of goodwill and compassion among
the communities of the world.
Inspired by the example of the global response to
the live aid event “We are the world”, we will be
issuing later this year an album of music by
international artists, called “Songs for life”. Its title
carries the message of hope in the global language of
music, and the proceeds will go directly to HIV/AIDS
programmes throughout southern Africa. This is the
first in a programme of projects under the banner of the
royal initiative to combat AIDS, and it needs and
deserves the support of all who would help us in the
struggle.
We have found that there is a ready response from
all who learn of the crisis in the developing world. We
are grateful to the United Nations for organizing this
special session. It, too, will play an important part in
raising awareness and gathering resources for
programmes that must make a difference to those who
are suffering.
This afternoon we will lend our names to a
declaration of war against HIV/AIDS. Our peoples
must see clearly that we have a strong, global alliance
that will remain united until victory is won. Our words
must be backed up by action, and we must all show that
we are serious in our commitments of support, of
funding and of resources.
The success of this special session, and the only
justification for its substantial expense for us all as

2

Members, will be measured in terms of a reversal in the
numbers of the dead and the dying. Our people can
accept nothing less than that.
The survival of my own nation and of many
others facing the same fate hangs in the balance. I call
on the entire membership to rise up in an
unprecedented spirit of cooperation, compassion and
love for one another, so that, together, we can mobilize
the finances, materials and skills that we need to bring
relief to the suffering, and hope for the future.
May Almighty God have mercy on us all.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency The Honourable Said
Musa, Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and
Foreign Affairs of Belize.
Mr. Musa (Belize): Twenty years ago, when the
disease known as AIDS was first diagnosed, the
magnitude of its effects was unforeseeable. Few, if any,
considered that it would become the most devastating
epidemic in modern human history. With over 22
million people dead and another 36 million infected,
HIV/AIDS poses one of the greatest threats to
economic, social and human development, creating
higher levels of poverty and increasing the risk to our
already fragile societies.
In the face of this enormous and frightening
challenge, I joined with other heads of State and
Government at the Millennium Summit last September
to commit ourselves to halting and reversing the spread
of HIV/AIDS by 2015. Today I return to the United
Nations and join the Assembly at this special session to
offer the pledge of the Government of Belize to engage
in a global effort to accomplish this objective.
The excellent report of the Secretary-General, the
preparatory meetings and the subsequent deliberations
by experts have led to a draft declaration that provides
us an opportunity to support and inspire each other to
pool our resources in order to fight back in the firm and
certain conviction that together we can win the battle
over AIDS.
In November of 1999, at the Commonwealth
heads of Government meeting in South Africa, I joined
my 53 other colleagues in personally pledging to fight
the HIV/AIDS pandemic. In February, at the
conference of heads of Government of the Caribbean
Community in Barbados, we formulated a Partnership
Declaration, which followed the creation of a

A/S-26/PV.7

Caribbean Task Force on HIV/AIDS. A few weeks ago,
at a meeting with heads of State and Government of
Central America and the President of the Republic of
China on Taiwan, I raised the issues of HIV/AIDS in
our region and received the latter’s assurance of
assistance.
Belize is both witness and subject to the ravages
of this terrible disease in Latin America and the
Caribbean. As a part of the region, we are faced with
the staggering statistics showing that the Caribbean has
the highest rate of HIV infection in the world after subSaharan Africa, and that AIDS is the single greatest
cause of death among our young people. In Central
America, we are threatened by the ever-increasing rate
of infection, particularly among disadvantaged and
mobile populations.
In Belize, the national Health Information System
is currently reporting a 4.01 per cent prevalence rate,
ranking us as one of the highest in Central America and
ninth in the Caribbean region. With a population of
250,000 people who live in small communities, the
tragedy of HIV/AIDS directly affects many Belizean
families and our human resources and productive
capacities. The stigma associated with the disease
encourages a culture of silence, resulting in
underreporting and increasing attempts to deny and
hide its existence. Our young people, especially those
of poor and migrant families, are most at risk of
contracting and spreading the disease along the fault
lines of our society.
Once perceived to be driven by alternative
lifestyles, HIV/AIDS now attacks more than our way
of life; it attacks the very foundation of our society —
the family. Today the face of AIDS in Belize is young
and female. It has affected our personal as well as our
political reality, changing how we think, how we love,
whom we trust, what we teach our children and how we
protect them. In short, HIV/AIDS has changed our
lives.
Last January AIDS was declared to be one of the
greatest health challenges facing Belizeans. As a result
we established a National AIDS Commission chaired
by the Minister of Human Development, Women and
Civil Society. The primary responsibility of this
Commission is to coordinate, facilitate and monitor the
implementation of the National Strategic Plan, which
aims to change attitudes and practices, implement
intersectoral coordination and provide support services

to persons living with AIDS. This multisectoral
strategy addresses the issue of sexual behaviour and
practices in Belize, encouraging responsible sexual
behaviour and protection in addition to creating
nationwide awareness of the disease and its
consequences. The Commission is developing a
national policy and legal framework to address issues
of discrimination, education, migration and the
criminalization of wilful acts of transmission. On a
more personal level, issues of confidentiality,
compassion and respect for the dignity and quality of
human lives form an integral part of the National
Strategic Plan. But we cannot stop there.
If we are to be effective in the long run, we must
learn from the experiences of those caught in the centre
of this whirlwind pandemic. This includes working
harder to equalize the balance of power between men
and women, especially for our women, who make up a
large percentage of our poor. Gender equality is a
critical component in the process of changing sexual
behaviour. We know that only when a woman is free to
choose how she lives her life will she possess the
capacity to best protect herself from HIV/AIDS. We
have also begun to deal with the vital issue of motherto-child transmission protection.
Critical to our success is collaboration with the
international community. Support in the areas of
funding, research, information-sharing and access to
affordable medicines and treatment is essential and
requires timely and effective participation by all. We
welcome the decision of the Secretary-General to
engage the international business community in this
campaign.
There is no longer an excuse to shy away from
our collective responsibility in the face of this global
malady. Every nation must lead its own response.
Nothing can substitute for strong national commitment
and ownership. An effective national response,
however, cannot be successful in isolation. There is a
need for global solidarity and support. If we are to lift
the death sentence from the thousands of our fellow
human beings who fall prey to HIV/AIDS daily, we
must act together.
The Government and the people of Belize declare
their full commitment to halt and reverse the increasing
trend of this pandemic. We know this is a tremendous
undertaking, but failure on our part to act decisively
will condemn countless numbers, many in the flower of

3

A/S-26/PV.7

their youth, to certain death. To fail would be to break
the most sacred compact of all — the preservation and
advancement of humanity. We have neither the time
nor the resources to waste. The time for collective
action is now.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Pham Gia Khiem, Deputy Prime
Minister of Viet Nam.
Mr. Pham Gia Khiem (Viet Nam): The
devastation caused by HIV/AIDS is already quite clear
to all. Spreading across continents and countries, the
pandemic has not spared our own people. Since 1990,
we have detected in Viet Nam over 36,000 cases of
infection, accounting for about 0.1 per cent of the
world’s total. Among those people, over 5,000 have
developed AIDS and more than 3,000 have died.
Certainly, the real number of infected people is
many times higher. The prevailing situation presents us
with the question of what we must do to realize the
commitment made by the world’s leaders last
September in this very Hall of the United Nations to
halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV by 2015.
We hope that on the basis of our common concerns and
genuine efforts towards this end, we will be able to
agree on a balanced final declaration of commitment on
HIV/AIDS, which will constitute a great source of
inspiration for national, regional and global efforts in
fighting this fatal tragedy.
Let me briefly summarize the measures Viet Nam
has been undertaking for the past 10 years to fight the
spread of HIV/AIDS.
Considering prevention work crucial, we have
been focusing our efforts on education and
communication about HIV/AIDS, as well as on
prevention measures for people in all walks of life,
especially for groups having high-risk behaviours. As a
result, about 60 per cent of the population has been
equipped with basic knowledge about HIV/AIDS and
prevention measures.
In addition, the Government has been
strengthening measures to ensure safety in health-care
services. We have tried to mobilize available resources
to the maximum. Still, the number of HIV-infected
people is increasing rapidly. It is projected that by 2005
there will be more than 200,000 people infected with
HIV in our country, nearly six times the current

4

number. The situation could be worse in the absence of
effective measures.
Our experience shows that the following elements
are essential in order to effectively fight the spread of
this killer disease. First, there must be strong
commitment from leadership at all levels. They must
consider fighting HIV/AIDS an urgent and long-term
socio-economic task.
Secondly, there must be a multisectoral approach,
since fighting HIV/AIDS is a task not only for the
health branch, but also for many other ministries and
branches of Government, various social organizations
and communities themselves.
Thirdly, the fight against HIV/AIDS must be
integrated into the fight against drugs and into the
control of unsafe sexual behaviours, especially among
adolescents. It must be emphasized that success in the
fight against drugs and controlling unsafe sexual
behaviours are decisive for the success of the fight
against HIV/AIDS.
Viet Nam welcomes and supports the efforts of
the international community in the fight against
HIV/AIDS, in which the United Nations plays an
important and indispensable role. We highly appreciate
the tireless efforts made by scientists worldwide in the
search for a vaccine and special drugs that can save
mankind from the pandemic. We call upon developed
countries to increase assistance to poor developing
countries, both in terms of expertise and resources. We
appeal to pharmaceutical companies — for the sake of
humanity and that of the lives of the unfortunate — to
adopt policies aimed at making necessary drugs for
treatment available to poor countries at low prices.
For its part, Viet Nam commits itself to
cooperating with all countries, especially neighbouring
countries and other countries in the region, and with
international organizations, in the common fight
against the spread of HIV/AIDS.
Finally, on behalf of the Vietnamese Government
and people, I would like to express our sincere thanks
to the United Nations, especially to the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, to countries and to
international organizations worldwide for their
effective cooperation and assistance.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Kondi Charles Agba, Minister of
Public Health of Togo.

A/S-26/PV.7

Mr. Agba (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, on behalf of the delegation of Togo, allow me to
express our warmest congratulations to SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan on the quality of his report
presented to the twenty-sixth special session of the
General Assembly, on HIV/AIDS, and on his personal
commitment in the fight against this pandemic.
Mr. Gnassingbé Eyadema, President of the
Togolese Republic and current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) would have very
much liked to have taken part personally in this session
but was obliged to remain in Lomé at the last minute.
He has given me the great honour of reading out his
message to the Assembly:
“It is 20 years now since AIDS was
discovered. Many of us here have already made
an assessment of this catastrophe.
“I would like, as current Chairman of the
OAU, to stress the awful ordeal that the African
continent is going through, this affliction that,
more than any war, is killing the continent.
“You have the figures. These are figures of
shame, because it is unacceptable that we
Africans be forgotten on the bottom rungs of
history while the wealthier countries are moving
towards hope.
“Is it right that in the West modern
medicines that help HIV-positive people to
survive are virtually free of charge, distributed by
the various forms of social solidarity, whereas in
Africa virtually almost all of the people who are
HIV-positive do not have access to anything?
“Is it right that rich countries monopolize 90
per cent of the money spent on the fight against
this virus, whereas 90 per cent of those ill are in
Africa, dying and forgotten in the poor countries?
“We have to, for the sake of men and
women — for the sake of humanity, I would say
— bring about greater solidarity.
“Africans must have access to treatment.
“Medicines must be accessible to all.
“The revolt is already brewing. The richer
countries seem to be pricking up their ears and
are beginning to understand that this gulf between

rich and poor cannot be tolerated. We have to act
now.
“Let us be inspired by the decisions of the
special OAU Summit on HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Other Infectious Diseases, which met in
Abuja on 25 and 26 April 2001. In Abuja, we
declared that the HIV/AIDS situation was a state
of emergency on the continent, and we decided to
fight against HIV as a priority in our national
development plans.
“In this regard, we made a commitment to
undertake personal responsibility and to supervise
the activities of the national councils and
committees in the fight against AIDS. We also
undertook to adopt all measures necessary to
mobilize resources, and in particular to devote at
least 15 per cent of our annual budgets to
improving the health sector.
“We must always give all due importance to
our only effective weapon at this time, which is
prevention. In that vein, we need to use the most
appropriate channels in order to help all
communities, particularly the most vulnerable,
and make each individual aware of his or her
responsibilities and bring about a change of
behaviour.
“Today, let us set up the global fund
proposed by the Secretary-General, which will
help in particular to develop research by helping
the pharmaceutical laboratories, because although
there are modern medicines available today, they
do not cure the illness. As far as vaccines are
concerned, they are a long time in coming.
“I make a solemn appeal today to the
wealthy countries: do not ask the pharmaceutical
laboratories alone to bear the efforts of solidarity,
because it is on them and on their research that is
based the hope for a real treatment.
“Let us not make again the mistake that we
made with malaria. The pharmaceutical
laboratories stopped their research on an antimalarial vaccine on the grounds that it would not
be profitable.
“Today, 20 years after the beginning of the
HIV pandemic, perhaps now it is time to make
the awful assessments, but I plead that this must
also be the hour of hope and solidarity. Either

5

A/S-26/PV.7

selfishness will win the day and the third
millennium will get off to a very bad start, or,
together, we will be able to make the choice for
all men and women, and the word ‘humanity’ will
again have meaning.”
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
The Honourable Eliuel Pretrick, Minister of the
Department of Health, Education and Social Services
of the Federated States of Micronesia.
Mr. Pretrick (Micronesia): It is indeed an honour
and privilege for me to stand before this gathering on
behalf of my Government to address an issue of grave
concern to my country, a country with a small and
fragile population.
My country being a small one with a small
population, I cannot overemphasize the negative
impact the spread of HIV/AIDS will have on it. Any
damage caused by the havoc of HIV/AIDS will be felt
for a long time. My Government therefore appreciates
very much the convening of this special session so that,
together, the United Nations, in collaboration with
other regional and international organizations, can
work towards developing appropriate mechanisms to
combat and to prevent the continuing spread of the
HIV/AIDS virus.
The first case of HIV/AIDS infection in the
Federated States of Micronesia was confirmed in 1989.
This was a case where the victim was infected while
living outside of the Federated States of Micronesia.
However, as recently as a few months ago, and to the
dismay of my Government, the first new case of locally
acquired HIV/AIDS infection was discovered on one of
the very remote atolls in one of the states of the
Federated States of Micronesia. This unwelcome
discovery has caused great alarm, and there is grave
concern that the virus may have spread much wider
than believed. This new information may seem pale
and less significant in comparison to more seriously
affected areas in other parts of the world. Nevertheless,
the mere presence of HIV/AIDS in my country is a
matter of grave concern which, in the view of my
Government, must be taken very seriously and one
which should be dealt with in the most decisive way to
prevent any possibility of the situation getting any
worse.
In any discussion of HIV/AIDS, one of the more
sensitive issues centres on the question of human
rights. Our discussions at this forum will undoubtedly

6

impinge upon cultural and religious beliefs and,
perhaps, it will even be necessary to impinge on
personal lifestyles. This, however, is a disease that
knows no bounds, and its indiscriminate reach knows
no limits. We hope, therefore, that some flexibility can
be exercised so that we can successfully tackle the
issues of HIV/AIDS head on.
Prevention is another important aspect of dealing
with HIV/AIDS. Precautionary measures must be
considered in advance of any potential spread of the
virus. This is not to suggest that the United Nations
should change its focus of attention from its current
course of action. On the contrary, my Government
believes that all aspects of dealing with this deadly and
indiscriminate disease must be dealt with in their
entirety. The United Nations and its specialized
agencies, and other regional and international
organizations, should continue to assist countries that
are seriously affected and, at the same time, be very
active in reaching out to assist those which have not yet
been so seriously affected. By doing so, the United
Nations will succeed in preventing the spread of the
HIV/AIDS virus from becoming a truly global
problem.
It is obvious that one State cannot take on the
responsibility of combating this disease by itself. In
saying that, I am pleased to note that with assistance
from the United States Government, my Government,
in collaboration with the World Health Organization,
has developed some short- and medium-term
preventive educational programmes to deal with this
matter in the four states comprising the Federated
States of Micronesia. A comprehensive HIV/AIDS
monitoring system and a community AIDS council
have been established in the four states to educate the
general public about HIV/AIDS. Additionally, we have
been able to secure some assistance from some donor
partners, which enabled my Government to establish
and provide some basic preventive measures to highrisk individuals. While my Government sincerely
appreciates these, I must indicate here that more
assistance is still necessary for us to be more successful
in combating HIV/AIDS.
Again, my country is small and is not endowed
with many resources. On its own, therefore, it cannot
effectively continue some of these programmes. As it
is, we are experiencing difficulties in our efforts to
combat other high-mortality diseases such as
tuberculosis and diabetes. Members can imagine what

A/S-26/PV.7

it would be like to combat a full-blown epidemic of
HIV/AIDS in a State with a small population like the
Federated States of Micronesia.
Having said this, my Government expresses very
sincere appreciation to those Governments that have
already made commitments to providing financial
resources to the trust fund to combat HIV/AIDS and
encourages those that have not yet done so to please
follow suit by doing the same as soon as possible so
that the effective fight against the continuing spread of
the HIV/AIDS virus can be ensured.
In conclusion, my country takes this forum very
seriously. We know that without the partnership and the
collaboration of the United Nations and its specialized
agencies, including other regional and international
organizations, we will not be able to stop the threat and
the spread of the virus. We hope that any decisions
made at the end of this forum will assist all ongoing
efforts to contain further spread of this disease. While
HIV/AIDS is a global concern, its implications are
national. Therefore, it is critical that agreements
reached at the end of this important forum are within a
country’s means so that they can be effectively
implemented.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Mamadou Saliou Diallo, Minister for Public Health
of Guinea.
Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): In the
Declaration of the Millennium Summit, leaders from
all over the world made a solemn commitment to fight
the spread of HIV/AIDS. In this way, they set
themselves the goal of reversing the trend of
prevalence of the virus and of cases of the disease by
2015. On this basis, the international community must
help Africa, the continent most heavily hit by the virus,
to achieve these objectives and to bring assistance to
the orphans of the pandemic.
His Excellency the President of the Republic of
Guinea, General Lansana Conté, is extremely gratified
at the holding of this special session of the General
Assembly, which is the expression of our common will
to achieve the goal set by the Millennium Summit.
Africa, the continent that is paying the heaviest
price today for the pandemic of the century, is fully
cognizant of the danger that threatens its peoples. We
need only see as evidence the forum on African
development held in Addis Ababa in December 2000,

the meeting of international experts held in Windhoek
in November 2000 and the summit of the Organization
of African Unity in Abuja in April 2001. All these
events were an occasion for in-depth thought on
prevention and treatment strategies for people with the
disease, among which the mobilization of local
communities and authorities at all levels appears to my
country to be one of the most important.
Although Africans are fully aware of their
primary responsibility here, the efforts of their leaders
at all levels need to be supported and coordinated
within a framework of genuine partnership among
national and regional communities and the
international community. In this respect, my delegation
highly appreciates the Secretary-General’s initiative to
establish a global fund to fight AIDS and other
infectious diseases, in particular malaria, tuberculosis
and parasitic diseases, not to mention malnutrition,
which is an aggravating factor for all these diseases
and the rate of which is increasing constantly in certain
regions of Africa. My delegation is pleased to learn of
the pledges already made and appeals to all the
relevant actors of the international community to
pursue this humanitarian action.
In the light of the situation of the pandemic in the
Republic of Guinea, the Government, on the
instructions of the President of the Republic, has
undertaken a broad programme of social and economic
reforms. These reforms, inter alia, are aimed at
reducing and stabilizing the number of virus carriers,
control of the treatment of the sick and a full grasp of
the socio-economic impact of the pandemic.
To this end, the National Health Development
Plan — recently adopted by the Government and
approved by the development partners as an integral
part of the strategic document for poverty reduction —
places special emphasis on the strategic plan for the
fight against HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted
diseases. This is also evidence of our Government’s
determination to fight effectively against the pandemic.
Therefore, 70 per cent of resources resulting from
alleviating the debt burden of the heavily indebted poor
countries will go to social sectors, in particular health,
education and rural development.
The situation of the pandemic in Africa today is
such that the efforts of Governments and peoples will
be in vain without exceptional international solidarity
with regard both to prevention and to care for the

7

A/S-26/PV.7

victims of the disease, by procuring essential
antiretroviral medicines at a cost that is financially
accessible for patients and Governments. Indeed, I
would like to use this podium to ask how African
countries — where nearly 50 per cent of the population
live below the poverty line — can cope with their
health needs, given the current cost of essential
medicines, especially antiretroviral medicine. This is
the essential question.
The President: I now call on His Excellency Mr.
Osman Durmuş, Minister for Health of Turkey.
Mr. Durmuş (Turkey) (spoke in Turkish; English
text furnished by the delegation): Epidemics have been
a major threat to mankind throughout history. At times
they caused great destruction; some even wiped out
civilizations. Towards the end of the twentieth century,
the world was shocked by the emergence of
HIV/AIDS, which some describe as the plague of
modern times. The World Health Organization, alarmed
by the sudden rise of the threat, initiated studies in
developing so-called second-generation surveillance
techniques, underlining the relationship between social
strata, changes in risk-bearing behaviours, and the
connection with other contagious venereal diseases and
pregnancy.
In Turkey, we are well aware of the problem and
we
are
actively
seeking
solutions.
Rapid
industrialization and urbanization influence every
aspect of social and economic development. Economic
development, on the other hand, opens the way to a
consumer society and individualism, thus leading to
social changes in which large families gradually
disappear and, consequently, traditional values erode.
Moreover, Turkey, due to its geography, is prone to
large population movements, which also contributes to
high levels of risk. In spite of all these facts, we do not
face a boom in HIV/AIDS infection in Turkey, as is the
case for some parts of the world. Yet we are well aware
that for various reasons the task of establishing the real
dimensions of sexually contracted diseases is a rather
difficult one.
My country is still among those least affected by
this disease. Of the 1,141 cases reported between 1985
and 2000, two thirds of the individuals were carriers of
HIV virus, while the rest were in the advanced stages
of the disease. But it is significant that 14 per cent of
these cases were reported in 2000. This could also be
seen as pointing to a higher level of awareness among

8

the public. The majority of the cases are in the 25-to-35
age group, the disease having possibly been contracted
at younger ages. Although the majority of the infected
persons are male, the number of infected females is
rising.
According to statistics, more than half of the
infected persons contracted the disease through
unprotected sex, mainly heterosexual relationships. Ten
per cent of the total number are drug users, while cases
traced to blood transfusions remained at 0.4 per cent.
Persons who lived or travelled abroad constitute 25 per
cent of the total.
In Turkey, measures have been taken to provide
health care for all HIV/AIDS patients. The State also
covers the expenses of those patients who for any
reason are not covered within the existing health care
system. Various voluntary and non-governmental
organizations are also active in supporting the efforts
of the State in providing financial assistance,
employment and psycho-social counselling to HIV/
AIDS patients to overcome their ordeal, as well as
supporting the further development of existing
specialized medical facilities.
Efforts to change social behaviour, educational
measures to improve awareness and improvements in
self-protection are now bearing fruit. One palpable
result deserving of mention is the increasing use of
condoms.
As
mentioned
above,
educational
programmes, essentially similar to those in other
countries, have been proven instrumental in slowing
the spread of the HIV virus.
Finally, we are well aware that unless effective
and extensive prevention measures are taken,
HIV/AIDS may become a serious threat in Turkey as
well. Equally, efforts must be made to prevent AIDS
from disrupting, through prejudice and discrimination,
the very structure of families and of society as a whole.
Problems arising from this disease should be discussed
openly in all related forums, while efforts should be
made to overcome secretiveness and other cultural and
traditional restraints that prevail in society. Likewise,
safe sexual behaviour and the use of condoms should
be encouraged. AIDS patients and their families should
receive counselling so that they do not retreat from
society and risk falling into depression.
We commend the efforts of several international
bodies, headed by the United Nations, which have
resulted in the reduction to around $600 of the per

A/S-26/PV.7

patient cost of those drug combinations that slow or
contain the progress of the disease. However, even this
price is still beyond the reach of many countries, as the
funds they can allocate to health services are limited. It
seems this insufficiency will not be overcome in the
near future. In our opinion, more international
assistance must be forthcoming to support this struggle.
Turkey certainly appreciates the willingness of the
developed countries to contribute generously to the
fight against HIV/AIDS. But we also draw attention to
the need to tailor specific programmes which recognize
the social, cultural, and economic realities of the
recipient countries, rather than imposing standardized
programmes on them.
The President: I give the floor to Her
Excellency, Mrs. Sarah Flood-Beaubrun, Minister for
Health, Family Affairs, Human Services and Gender
Relations of Saint Lucia.
Mrs. Flood-Beaubrun (Saint Lucia): Very soon
the day will come, if it has not yet arrived, when
everyone — not only those sitting in this room, but
also those sitting in our parliaments and senates — will
intimately know someone who is HIV positive or is
dying of AIDS. There is still so much to do at the
sensitization and advocacy level that it is embarrassing
to admit that almost 20 years after the discovery of the
virus, we are still taking about sensitization.
Without overstating the obvious, we have seen
HIV/AIDS move from a health issue to a social issue,
to an economic issue, to a development issue, to a
national security issue, to an international security
issue, and now to a sustainable human development
issue. It can no longer can be ignored.
The economic impact of HIV/AIDS has already
reared its head in sub-Saharan Africa, and from the
projections of the Health Economics Unit at the
University of the West Indies, HIV/AIDS will consume
approximately 4 per cent of the gross domestic product
of Caribbean countries in the next 10 years. This is no
small attrition of a small country’s gross domestic
product. As such, this projection cannot be taken
lightly.
The Government and people of Saint Lucia
remain committed to maintaining the struggle in the
battle against HIV/AIDS and wish to categorically
declare our country’s support for the sentiments
already expressed by our colleagues of the Caribbean
Community who have spoken. We acknowledge that, at

this time, it is important to recognize that the struggle
against HIV/AIDS is not an individual effort but a
collective one, and more so for us in the small
Caribbean States. We specifically wish to endorse the
contribution made by the Prime Minister of Barbados,
Owen Arthur, to the effect that the response to
HIV/AIDS should be a three-pronged approach and
endorse the view that any such approach should include
a search for a cure.
We would like to propose two additional
strategies to this approach: first, adequate allocation of
the funding of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS to the Caribbean as the second hardest-hit
area, second only to sub-Saharan Africa; and secondly,
considering the economic impact of HIV/AIDS on the
labour force of small island States, the fact that
countries are making domestic commitments to deal
with the disease, and that tourism is the fastest-growing
sector of the Saint Lucian economy, not to mention the
growing perception of sex tourism. We would like to
propose that any international funds which are made
available to combat the epidemic should be available
on a grant basis and accessible in particular to small,
vulnerable States like Saint Lucia.
My Government looks forward to an open,
transparent discussion of the governance, use and
criteria for access to the proposed global fund. We
view this charitable initiative as a good supplement,
but not as the solution, to addressing the emergency of
the magnitude that we face. Of paramount importance
is the immediate and adequate adjustment of the rules
of the World Trade Organization, in particular the
Tripps Agreement, to allow countries to produce
affordable drugs to deal with this development crisis.
This is a more sustainable solution to the obstacles of
access and affordability, which must be addressed if we
are to make a meaningful contribution and difference to
the millions of people sentenced to death.
We wish to urge that all efforts be made to ensure
that the funds flow to the countries most in need,
including in the Caribbean. One of the major issues
that needs to be actively addressed in the region is the
mobilization of resources to fight this growing public
health and development problem. The University of the
West Indies has stated that a conservative estimate of
the cost of a comprehensive response by the Caribbean
countries to successfully combat HIV/AIDS is $260
million annually over the next five years. Several

9

A/S-26/PV.7

donors have already committed to funding the regional
strategic plan for HIV/AIDS.
Treatment, care and support continue to be
probably the single most underrepresented and
unaddressed issue in the region. This is not restricted
only to the issue of medication, but also includes
access to care. The most fundamental and critical
component of the treatment of AIDS is access to
affordable medication. Sadly, because of a lack of
access to antiretroviral therapy, those diagnosed with
HIV/AIDS continue to suffer as a direct result of the
prohibitive cost of treatment with antiretroviral drugs.
The crucial issues still affecting us in the
Caribbean region — more specifically, the small island
States — are infrastructure, education and access to
affordable drugs. In addressing access to affordable
drugs, my Government would like to reiterate the
importance of taking fully into account the
development dimension of this epidemic and the need
for financial and trading institutions to grant access to
concessional financing and assistance to structurally
weak, small and vulnerable economies like Saint
Lucia’s. This is a necessary source of development
financing denied our economies in our efforts at
addressing development challenges.
In the scenario of Saint Lucia, with a population
of 150,000, the statistics suggest that, since the
diagnosis of the first case in 1995, 284 HIV-positive
cases have been reported; 136 — that is, 48 per cent —
have developed AIDS and 126 — 44 per cent — have
died. Despite the fact that significant efforts have been
made at the national level to mitigate the impact of the
epidemic on the population, including mother-to-child
transmission
through
prophylactic
management
through the administration of AZT to pregnant women,
the epidemic shows no signs of abating.
We still need to strengthen our surveillance and
testing capacity in terms of securing a wider coverage
of persons volunteering for testing. This continues to
pose a major public health challenge. Therefore, at this
time, we still do not have a true picture of the extent of
the prevalence of the disease in Saint Lucia. We
believe that, with sustained commitment and initiative,
such as this one, together with the necessary
international support and commensurate funding, a
solution to the HIV/AIDS pandemic will soon be at
hand.

10

The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Charles Goerens, Minister of Cooperation and
Humanitarian Action of Luxembourg.
Mr. Goerens (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Twenty years ago, when HIV/AIDS was clearly
diagnosed for the first time, it was an unknown
syndrome killing young people in isolated cases.
Twenty years later, it has become the worst epidemic of
modern times, compromising the development of entire
countries. It has lowered life expectancy once again to
below 45 years.
Luxembourg had its first case of HIV infection in
1984. Since then, there have been approximately 30
new infections a year, with a slight increase over the
past two years. In total since 1984, 470 infections have
been diagnosed in Luxembourg, 95 of them in women.
The most common vector for infection is sex. In total,
100 people have died of AIDS.
At the world level, the figures are frightening. All
sectors of society are affected, seriously jeopardizing
development in general and economic development in
particular. Like the Secretary-General, we have set four
objectives in this fight: prevention; preventing motherto-child transmission; access to treatment and care; and
the protection of vulnerable groups, collateral victims
and, above all, orphans.
Political commitment is crucial to achieving these
objectives. Civil society and local communities must
be involved. The role of women must be enhanced to
allow them to protect themselves and their children.
We must strengthen medical structures so that, through
arduous work, we are able to have the largest possible
impact on prevention and treatment. Of course, without
the necessary financial resources, the fight against
AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis cannot be won.
Luxembourg has also reacted in the area of
international cooperation. It has regularly increased its
budget for development assistance in the course of the
past decade, surpassing in 2000 our goal of allocating
0.7 per cent of our gross national product to official
development assistance. We intend to achieve the
objective of 1 per cent in 2005. Health is one of the
priority sectors in Luxembourg’s cooperation,
including the fight against HIV/AIDS. In parallel with
bilateral programmes for target countries receiving our
development cooperation, Luxembourg is also involved
multilaterally in the fight against the epidemic.

A/S-26/PV.7

In 2000, Luxembourg participated in the
coordination council of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS and wishes to congratulate
Mr. Piot and his team. In 2001, we have contributed
approximately €500,000 to the programme, as well as
€125,000 for the evaluation process. We expect to be
able to do even more in 2002. Luxembourg firmly
supports recent European initiatives, particularly the
action programme of the European Union known as
Accelerated Action Targeted at Major Communicable
Diseases Within the Context of Poverty Reduction.
The charging of different prices in different
markets will help make medicines available to patients
who heretofore have had little or no access to them.
Some pharmaceutical and multinational companies
have already implemented such an approach. It can be
complemented by measures to hinder re-importation.
However, reducing prices will not provide a miracle
cure.

These efforts are of course in addition to the
contributions already mentioned.
We must without delay move on to the
implementation of our programmes and keep in mind
that the prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS demand
a new, direct approach. The desire to save human lives
is part of all cultures, and without a doubt it is this
highest goal that we are seeking to attain.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
The Honourable Frixos Savvides, Minister of Health of
Cyprus.
Mr. Savvides (Cyprus): Humankind is facing one
of the worst health crises in its history. The HIV/AIDS
pandemic has left no corner of the world untouched,
and it is already affecting progress and development in
many countries, challenging development goals, as
well as most of the socio-economic achievements of
recent decades.

This is why Luxembourg is taking part in the
European initiative of solidarity in the provision of
therapeutic hospital care for HIV/AIDS patients. The
goal of this initiative is to make available medicines
and to provide medical treatment and psychosocial
care, as well as regular laboratory analysis and
resistance check-ups. This approach is also part of a
more global undertaking and is in addition to our
bilateral and multilateral contributions.

The countries most affected have found
themselves in a state of emergency, requiring urgent
measures for the reversal of the spread of the epidemic
and its disastrous impact on social and economic
stability, food security and the life expectancy of their
populations. Communities with weak economies are hit
hardest and are gradually deprived by the epidemic of
the very means that are needed for effective responses
against it.

In the Niger for four years we have been carrying
out a major prevention project. In Rwanda we have
contributed to the creation of an important national
blood-transfusion centre. In Burkina Faso we are
cooperating on the creation of a blood-transfusion
centre that also includes several regional units. In 2000
we have applied a total of 2.4 million euros to our
various projects, and we are going to increase these
efforts. According to the Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development, my country has the
highest ratio of expenditure to gross national product.

The countries least affected by HIV nonetheless
face the risk of sudden and dramatic bursts of the
epidemic, especially among the high-risk groups and
people suffering from the effects of armed conflict,
violence and sexual exploitation. Many women, even
in societies with institutionally protected human rights,
are often placed in situations of vulnerability regarding
their sexual safety and freedom of choice.

The fund that has been proposed here will be
integrated into our action programme. We note with
satisfaction that there is a new dynamism with regard
to marshalling the necessary financial resources to
fight HIV/AIDS. Once the operational modalities and
the management structures are in place, Luxembourg
intends to contribute to the fund some 1 million euros.
Similar contributions are foreseen for 2002 and 2003.

The global nature of the epidemic calls for urgent
and concerted action that will bring together all the
resources needed for an effective response, since no
country can bring about the necessary changes alone.
International support, solidarity and cooperation are of
paramount importance, not only on humanitarian
grounds, but also in the effort to win the battle against
this challenge to global prosperity and development.
We consider the role of the United Nations
central to the efforts to counter the scourge of HIV/
AIDS. In this respect, we salute the Secretary-General
for his determination to make this issue a priority, in

11

A/S-26/PV.7

order to direct all of us in taking effective action. We
welcome United Nations efforts to implement policies
regarding its own personnel that would safeguard them
from this terrible disease.
Cyprus has faced the HIV/AIDS problem since
1986, but remains a low-prevalence country. The main
modes of transmission are homosexual and
heterosexual intercourse, with a very small proportion
of the people diagnosed with HIV being women;
minimal risks for perinatal transmission and for
transmission through blood; and, for the moment, very
low rates among drug users.
The epidemic has been addressed as a priority
issue since the first AIDS case was reported, through
the development of an initial strategic plan in
cooperation with the World Health Organization and
the establishment of a National AIDS Committee, with
the participation of representatives from all relevant
Government departments, private enterprise and civil
society. Financing and funding mechanisms were
rapidly put into place to support people infected with
HIV and to implement educational campaigns among
the population and groups at special risk. Hospital care,
laboratory testing, counselling and medical treatment
— including the most advanced combination of
treatments — have been offered free of charge since
the beginning of the epidemic. Blood safety has been
ensured from the start, through universal screening for
HIV and other pathogens, the promotion of voluntary,
non-remunerated blood donation and the rational use of
blood. Though encouraging, these facts do not warrant
complacency or a relaxing of measures to tackle the
epidemic, since factors such as risky sexual behaviour
and increasing use of drugs are known to exist from
everyday experience and from the results of
behavioural studies.
The situation is being monitored through routine
and sentinel surveillance, as well as studies related to
behaviour, among several groups of the population.
The basic principles that have guided all our efforts so
far — which relate to prevention of the transmission of
the virus through sexual intercourse, perinatally and
through blood, as well as to the social support of those
affected and infected with HIV and AIDS — will be
the mainstay of the third medium-term plan, currently
under preparation. Special attention will be given to the
protection of the most vulnerable groups, with
strengthened measures for the prevention of the
transmission of the virus through the use of intravenous

12

drugs, the development of a gender-management
system in the health sector, the promotion of the sexual
and reproductive health of men and women alike, the
integration of the gender perspective in all healthrelated sectors of the economy, and the development of
non-discriminatory and protective legislation for those
affected or at special risk of HIV/AIDS and for society
at large.
In
addition,
appropriate
health-education
programmes will be further developed for groups
considered to be at high risk, as well as for students
and young army recruits. Existing services for
treatment, counselling and socio-economic support in
relation to HIV/AIDS and the infrastructure for the
development of epidemiological and behavioural
research in relation to AIDS and sex are in the process
of being strengthened.
Cyprus welcomes all international efforts directed
towards effective action to deal with this global
problem. We salute the Secretary-General’s initiative to
create the special fund and welcome the commitment
of developed countries to support it — particularly, the
commitment of the European Union, with whose
statement Cyprus has aligned itself. We have no doubt,
especially after having heard the statement by United
States Secretary of State Powell, expressing the
commitment of the United States to continue playing a
leading role in this effort, that the battle can and will be
won. In this respect and along these lines, Cyprus
commits itself to supporting all international efforts to
face the challenge of achieving a planet free of the HIV
virus.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Boydiel Ould Houmeid, Minister of Health and
Social Affairs of Mauritania.
Mr. Ould Houmeid (Mauritania) (spoke in
Arabic): It is a great honour for me to address the
Assembly on behalf of the President of the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania, Mr. Maaouya Ould Sid’Ahmed
Taya.
The holding of this special session of the General
Assembly and the increasing number of conferences
and initiatives, both international and regional, are
evidence that humanity is in the process of taking full
measure of the immense challenge that the HIV/AIDS
pandemic represents for its very existence and future.
The extent of physical and emotional suffering caused
by the virus in some 20 years and the disconcerting

A/S-26/PV.7

speed with which it has spread speak for themselves
and provide ample justification for worldwide
mobilization in the face of an enemy that knows no
frontiers.

community. It is our great hope that the decisions that
emerge from this session will measure up to the
challenges and the expectations of all who are faced
with this terrible scourge.

Statistics show that the African continent is, by
far, the most affected by this epidemic, having more
than two thirds of the carriers of this virus in the world.
But we do not want to believe that Africa’s destiny is
to live with this disease. The fact of the matter is that
the correlation between the conditions for the spread of
the disease and the socio-economic situation of the
people has become increasingly obvious.

The President: I give the floor to Her Excellency
Ms. Monica Còdina, Minister of Health and Welfare of
Andorra.

From this standpoint, the fight against the AIDS
epidemic can be considered effective only within the
framework of a global strategy of the fight against
poverty and underdevelopment. It requires immense
resources both for the prevention of the disease and for
care and follow-up for patients. That is why Mauritania
is highly appreciative of the proposal made by the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, to establish a
global fund for AIDS prevention.
Our country has by no means been spared this
horrific pandemic, with its challenges and causes for
concern. On the contrary, statistics from the World
Health Organization and UNAIDS estimate that the
number of HIV carriers in our country has exceeded
6,000. And the trend, unfortunately, is an upward one,
fostered by the extreme mobility of the people, both
within and beyond our borders. The national authorities
at various levels in the country are aware of the gravity
of the problem, and have mobilized their resources
accordingly.
A decentralized and multisectoral approach has
been adopted, and is reflected in the establishment of a
national coordination board for AIDS prevention, made
up of a dozen ministerial departments and
representatives of civil society and public-health
services. Sustained efforts have been focused on
awareness and the involvement of all members of
society, including members of parliament, religious
figures and grass-roots organizations in the AIDSprevention process. Our goal is to establish a national
strategic plan capable both of sustaining efforts made
at the national level and absorbing and sharing efforts
made at the international level.
The high level of this gathering and the urgent
tenor of the statements made here are clear evidence of
the degree of commitment of the international

Ms. Còdina (Andorra) (spoke in Catalan;
English text provided by the delegation): Twenty years
ago the first news broke about this disease, HIV/AIDS,
and today, after two decades, we as Member States of
the United Nations are meeting here to decide what
measures can alleviate the terrible personal and
community tragedy that has arisen during this period.
When we received the call of the SecretaryGeneral to hold a special session, we asked ourselves
what we could contribute and also what we could take
from all the experience that has so far built up in this
field.
During these years, in Andorra we have had to
learn to live with this disease, to help those suffering
from it and to prevent its spread among the population.
First of all, Andorra wishes to express its
solidarity in the dramatic situation being suffered by
many countries and its undertaking to all those
suffering from it that their right to a life with dignity
should be respected in all places.
After this special session, the taboos surrounding
the illness, which make the life of many of those
affected a tragedy, must disappear. They all have the
right to health care, and everyone has the right to be
respected as a person wherever he or she carries out his
or her activities.
We are fully convinced that prevention is the best
way of fighting the spread of the disease, and we share
the opinion of UNAIDS — to which we take this
opportunity of expressing our thanks for the enormous
effort it is making in its daily work and has made in
preparing this session — when it stresses, among other
things, that efforts must be concentrated on young
people.
We would also add that encouraging community
structures in which the family and the school have a
basic role is one of the most efficient ways of bringing
the challenges caused by the existence of HIV/AIDS

13

A/S-26/PV.7

clearly and precisely to the notice of the younger
public.
For our part, in Andorra, we have attacked the
subject of HIV/AIDS from various angles, but insisting
above all on the question of prevention and targeting
first and foremost the adolescent and young population.
Among our more notable actions are the following.
Every year for World AIDS Day, specific
information aimed at young people is published, and
information campaigns are carried out in leisure
centres. As teachers are considered to be the main
health agents in schools, various training activities
aimed at this group have been carried out so that they
can pass on true and useful information to their
students.
In 1999 the Ministry of Education, Youth and
Sports, together with the Ministry of Health and
Welfare and the Caixa-Banc Foundation, organized the
AIDS and Youth Forum, which every year includes
activities carried out by secondary school students,
culminating in days of debate.
Since 1993, Andorra has a youth information and
care service where HIV tests are carried out freely and
anonymously and all necessary information is given
out, whether on prevention or on health and social care.
In the days of preparation leading up to World
AIDS Day 2000, an action targeting women was
carried out: informing women in their workplace.
One issue that deserves our particular attention is
the difficulty faced by many women and girls in many
areas of the planet in resisting the epidemic. We are
convinced that after this special session there will be a
series of specific policies that will take into account the
needs of the female population, which is gravely
affected by the disease and needs a set of measures
aimed at protecting it effectively.
A basic element related to all these points is
access to medication. In recent months we have seen
how pharmaceutical companies have begun important
changes in their sales policies. Here we would like to
encourage them to continue in this vein and find a way
of facilitating access to medicines for those sectors of
the population that have most difficulty in obtaining
them. In Andorra, anyone affected has the right to
receive all the necessary health care.

14

Secondly, we wish to add our voice to those of all
the other speakers who have demanded that Africa be
enabled to escape from the situation in which the
spread of HIV/AIDS has affected a large part of its
population. The fact that 36 million people are carriers
of the virus worldwide and that 75 per cent of them are
found in Africa is the clearest possible illustration of
the magnitude of the situation in that continent.
We all know that the virus has destroyed the
structure of society in many areas, that schools lose
their teachers, that young people have to stay at home
to look after the ill and that the number of orphans
continues to rise. Here words can do no more. What is
needed is clear, precise action and an undertaking
including the firm will of every country to provide all
the assistance needed by its own ill people and to
prevent the spread of the disease, with the support of
the international community, which must understand
that this is not only a health crisis but a global one that
affects any plan for social and economic development
that may be undertaken.
We know that to achieve results much effort will
be needed and that the first step is a firm commitment
for financial help. In the draft declaration that we will
adopt at the end of the session, we have accepted the
figure of $7 billion to $10 billion as the sum needed to
combat the illness, and we have stressed the need for
joint participation by Governments and private bodies.
No doubt this is one of the projects in which
partnership is essential, because the whole of society
must feel involved in the situation. With this in mind, I
wish to announce that my Government has the
intention to contribute $100,000 to the fund, and that it
hopes that all countries will respond generously.
At the beginning of my speech I mentioned the
fact of a need for a better understanding of the
situation. I would now like to note briefly what we
have learned since the emergence of HIV/AIDS. No
doubt we are once again aware of our vulnerability as
human beings. Many have compared the illness to the
plague of the European Middle Ages. Nor can we
ignore the similarity in reactions, which in certain
times and places were fraught with obscurantism and
superstition.
But today we know that with good preventive
information, care and support for the ill, we can
achieve a degree of control over the illness while
awaiting a vaccine that will interrupt its spread. We

A/S-26/PV.7

also know the enormous strength of the solidarity of all
those groups of persons and organizations that have
fought, are fighting and will continue to fight so that
HIV/AIDS does not become a factor of discrimination
forcing the ill to hide their condition.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the
courage shown by thousands of ill people should be the
best lesson to enable us to face a future full of hope for
all those affected.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Sheikh Fazlul Karim Selim, Minister of
Health and Family Welfare of Bangladesh.
Sheikh Selim (Bangladesh): I am honoured to be
here today on this very important occasion. For the
first time, the General Assembly of the United Nations
has raised the important public health issue of HIV/
AIDS for discussion. We are all here today to share our
concerns, our progress and our challenges, and thus we
can learn from the global experience and find ways and
means to protect our future.
I am pleased to present some glimpses of
Bangladesh’s HIV/AIDS situation. I share the highest
commitment of my Government, and particularly that
of our Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina, to the prevention
of an HIV/AIDS epidemic in Bangladesh. This
commitment has been the source of our country’s
extremely proactive HIV/AIDS prevention programme.
Bangladesh started its HIV/AIDS prevention
programme very early, in 1985, through the formation
of a high-level National AIDS Committee, which I
chair.
Bangladesh has formulated a national policy on
HIV/AIDS and issues related to sexually transmitted
diseases. Moreover, we have in place an
implementation strategy and a behaviour change
communication strategy to counter the threat of the
disease to our population. Recently, we placed strong
emphasis on the prevention of this problem. We have
also expanded the national prevention programme to
cover the entire country.
Learning from our experience and success in
family planning, the prevention programme on
HIV/AIDS has been mobilized while taking into
consideration our religious practice, traditional family
values and cultural ethics. We have accordingly
involved our religious leaders, students, youth forces

and community leaders in advocacy of the HIV/AIDS
prevention programme in our country.
Due to the various positive steps we have taken,
the prevalence of HIV/AIDS in Bangladesh is very low.
We have only 157 reported cases of persons infected
with HIV, out of a population of 127 million. However,
given the wider perspective and magnitude of the
problem, we urgently require financial and technical
assistance from the United Nations special fund for
HIV/AIDS and from the international community to
safeguard our people from this devastating public
health problem.
Our Cabinet recently approved legislation on safe
blood transfusions and initiated a massive programme
to screen blood in 97 centres across the country. This
will be further expanded to cover the entire country
through the establishment of a full-fledged national
blood transfusion service, for which we also need
special support.
I would like to inform this special session that our
armed forces have a very effective HIV/AIDS
prevention programme. Though Bangladesh is now the
largest contributor of United Nations peacekeeping
troops in the world, since 1988 only 3 cases of seroconversion have been detected out of a total of 39,000
armed forces personnel so far deployed in United
Nations peacekeeping and other foreign missions.
In spite of these achievements, we believe that we
have a long way to go and that we cannot be
complacent. Our big challenges now are building
institutional capacity in order to be able to make
optimum use of the resources we have mobilized. We
require a range of assistance, from the technical to the
managerial, and in both Government and civil society,
in order to stay ahead of the epidemic.
On behalf of my Government and our country, I
would like to avail myself of this opportunity to share
our experience and renew our commitment to the
United Nations to face this challenge together. I would
like to draw the attention of this special session to the
rapid growth of the AIDS epidemic in the countries of
Asia, particularly in Bangladesh, which has put a large
number of our population at great risk.
Members are aware of the fact that this killer
disease is not limited by any geographical boundary.
Escalation of economic activities, urbanization and
globalization are all contributing to the rapid spread of

15

A/S-26/PV.7

HIV/AIDS amongst the younger generation of our
people. I therefore strongly urge the international
community to provide adequate funds for Bangladesh
with a view to addressing this emerging problem. We
feel also that countries such as Bangladesh and others
in Asia should have easy access to essential
antiretroviral drugs to reduce the cost of treatment for
HIV/AIDS patients. That would be a positive step
forward to keep alive the hopes and aspirations of
millions of our people.
The President: I call next on His Excellency Mr.
Bohumil Fišer, Minister of Health of the Czech
Republic.
Mr. Fišer (Czech Republic): I have the honour to
speak here today on behalf of the President of the
Czech Republic, Mr. Václav Havel.
Aware of the widespread HIV/AIDS epidemic,
which is now in its third decade, the Czech Republic
was one of the initiators of the open discussion of the
problem. At this point I would like to express our
appreciation to the facilitators of the preparatory
process, Ambassador Ibra Deguène Ka and especially
Ambassador Penny Wensley, for their tireless efforts
towards completing the draft declaration of
commitment.
There is no doubt that the HIV/AIDS epidemic is
now a global crisis or that it constitutes one of the most
serious destabilizing factors with respect to
development and social progress. From the very
beginning, the Czech Republic has taken part in the
activities of the Global Programme on AIDS and of its
successor, UNAIDS. Moreover, for many years we
have closely cooperated with neighbouring European
countries in the medical, social and economic areas.
Our country has so far been lucky, and it is not
affected by the spread of the disease. It still ranks
among the countries with the lowest HIV/AIDS
incidence in Europe and indeed in the world. As of
May 2001, there were a total of 514 HIV-infected
persons registered in the Czech Republic. Of that
number, 151 persons had already developed the clinical
stage of AIDS; 90 people have so far died of the
disease.
We are of the opinion that proper coordination at
the national level is very important. Our Government
closely collaborates with civil society actors, nongovernmental organizations, economic and research

16

institutions and people living with HIV/AIDS and their
families. Our programme against HIV/AIDS is based
on prevention. Both the governmental and the nongovernmental sector are paying special attention to
young people, and are enhancing sex and family
education in our schools. Clear and open dialogue with
all vulnerable groups is fundamental for further action.
Effective prevention is based on widely
accessible voluntary HIV testing and on pre-test and
post-test counseling. Each district of my country —
and there are more than 80 locations for a population of
10 million — provides access to that type of testing.
High priority is given to reduction of the risk of
mother-to-child HIV transmission. As of 1 January
2001, HIV tests were mandatory for all pregnant
women, with a view to administering free specific
antiretroviral prophylaxis to all HIV-positive women.
The first three cases of HIV-positive babies in the
Czech Republic were a sufficient warning signal and,
at the same time, provided a stimulus to give adequate
consideration to this issue.
We also pay close attention to the availability of
care and to quality of treatment in our clinical AIDS
centres for people living with HIV/AIDS. Therapy and
prophylaxis are covered by health insurance and by a
national HIV/AIDS subsidy.
We recognize that the dimensions of this
epidemic have grown beyond the control of individual
countries, however rich or large they may be. The only
possible way out of this situation is to mobilize all
reserves in the area of the international cooperation,
science and preventive activities that have proved
effective in various parts of the world. I fully agree
with the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, that we
cannot deal with AIDS by making moral judgements or
by refusing to face unpleasant facts, and still less by
stigmatizing those who are infected and making out
that it is all their fault.
Here, let me quote from a message from the
President of the Czech Republic, Mr. Václav Havel,
whom I have been authorized to represent in this
Assembly:
“Allow me to express the hope that this
session will contribute to closer cooperation
among all countries in their efforts to prevent and
eradicate this dangerous disease, which is a
scourge for the whole world, and especially for
African countries.”

A/S-26/PV.7

The President: I call next on The Honourable
Mr. Clement Leo, Minister of Health of Vanuatu.
Mr. Leo (Vanuatu): Mr. President, I bring you
greetings from the Government and the people of
Vanuatu, and herewith pledge our support for the
global effort in the fight against HIV/AIDS that is now
materializing in this Assembly under your able
leadership. Vanuatu associates itself with the statement
that will be made by the representative of Tuvalu on
behalf of the Pacific Island Forum countries.
Vanuatu, like Tuvalu, reports no confirmed cases
of HIV/AIDS. Despite that clear success story, we have
not been complacent. The Government of the Republic
of Vanuatu and its health care sector have responded to
the global HIV/AIDS challenge over the past decade.
The Government is deeply concerned about the
challenges and burdens that the epidemic has placed on
human development and global security.
Vanuatu, in several respects, is vulnerable to
becoming affected by this deadly disease. As a least
developed country, Vanuatu is already vulnerable in
many social, economic and environmental areas. Its
high population growth is particularly felt in urban
areas. It has a very young population, with 80 per cent
between the ages of 15 and 25 years, who are highly
vulnerable. High population mobility, increasing levels
of unemployment and the alarming magnitude of
traditional sexually transmitted infections are risk
indicators for the spread of HIV/AIDS. That scenario,
coupled with cultural factors and the lack of
sophisticated technology for screening and testing, may
well point to underreporting or to a lack of detection
capacity.
Vanuatu is deeply conscious of the ravages of
HIV/AIDS, which take their toll primarily in the
productive sector of the population. This pandemic cuts
to the very core of society and undermines all
development strides achieved to date. Social and
economic progress will be further hampered if the
pandemic is not reversed. Least developed countries
and small island States such as Vanuatu stand to lose
even more if we allow the pandemic to take hold
among our small populations, considering the many
constraints we face even before infection is reported.
Vanuatu is acutely aware of the fact that the
devastating effects of this pandemic are debilitating
already vulnerable members of our society: women,
children and young people.

It is in this regard that we endorse the
strengthening of human rights in our global fight
against HIV/AIDS, especially for the vulnerable
groups. Our prevailing cultural and religious prejudices
urgently need to be revisited with regard to the
obstacles as well as the potential on the global scale. In
this regard, Vanuatu is confident that the human rights
framework offers all of us the ideal scope within which
are appropriate linkages to help us find solutions in our
fight against HIV/AIDS.
Vanuatu hails the creation of the global fund for
health and its emphasis on prevention strategies which
are strongly aligned to the goals of many Governments.
We acknowledge the countries, sectors and agencies
contributing to the fund, and we look forward to
meeting the targets that have been set by the United
Nations. Only then can we begin to turn the tide in our
global search for solutions 20 years after the
HIV/AIDS infection was first detected.
In closing, we would be remiss to make no
mention of the leadership role that the SecretaryGeneral has rendered in this global struggle, which has
profiled HIV/AIDS to this unprecedented level of
United Nations action symbolized in this special
session of the General Assembly.
Vanuatu looks forward to the adoption at this
meeting of a bold, action-oriented, realistic and
achievable declaration of commitments that will
galvanize all international efforts and political will to
date.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
The Honourable Mr. Leslie Ramsammy, Minister of
Health of Guyana.
Mr. Ramsammy (Guyana): More than two
decades of the HIV/AIDS onslaught have already left
an indelible impact on the social, political and
economic fabric of our societies.
This special session of the General Assembly
devoted to HIV/AIDS is overdue, but it must now
propel us towards an international platform to forge the
much-needed political will to address this pandemic
and to identify clear goals and strategies to halt and
reduce the spread of this dreaded disease. Success will
depend to a large extent on our fight against prejudice,
fear, denial and stigmatization and on our commitment
to pursue a multisectoral approach with optimal

17

A/S-26/PV.7

involvement of civil society and people living with
HIV/AIDS.

improved maternal and infant mortality rates and
greater educational opportunities for our children.

My country, Guyana, is truly under siege and is
on the precipice of disaster. HIV/AIDS threatens to
decimate large numbers of our productive population.
Unprecedented numbers of our children are being
orphaned. The fabric of Guyanese society is being
relentlessly torn apart, and our social and economic
development is threatened with destruction. We hear
the cries — we feel the pain — of our brothers and
sisters in sub-Saharan Africa, where many nations are
desperately trying to avert complete destruction in the
face of the HIV/AIDS onslaught.

But HIV/AIDS has begun to erode the significant
social progress that Guyana has made in the last
decade. Unless my country can urgently access
additional funds, our capacity to introduce and sustain
programmes for surveillance, voluntary counselling,
testing, capacity-building, building of the health
infrastructure and providing treatment will continue to
be severely limited.

We join hands and raise our voices with our
brothers and sisters in the Caribbean as we bravely
fight back against the scourge of the HIV/AIDS
pandemic. We are painfully aware, however, that the
Caribbean is now ranked as the second-most-affected
region in the world.
Guyana ranks as one of the most affected
countries in the Caribbean, with a prevalence rate of
5.5 per cent. More than most, with great anxiety we
watch the enormity of the disaster in many of our sister
nations in Africa. The prevalence rates of 45 per cent
and 29 per cent among sex workers and persons with
sexually transmitted infections are not unlike rates seen
in many African countries.
Guyana’s strategic plan embraces partnerships
with civil society organizations and persons living with
HIV/AIDS. We endorse the UNAIDS ABC strategy.
We are committed to the reduction of mother-to-child
transmission and to addressing gender inequalities,
stigmatization, discrimination and human rights
violations. For us, treatment and care are inseparable
from prevention efforts. However, we do not have the
resources to implement this strategy effectively. This is
not just our business; it is the world’s fight. It is
ultimately a fight against poverty.
Guyana is uncomfortable and impatient with
more talk, nice-sounding rhetoric and declarations.
Guyana wants action. The hesitancy, slowness and
suffocating conditionalities in granting debt relief are
allies to the scourge of HIV/AIDS in the world. For
countries such as Guyana, debt relief must not merely
mean the reduction of the debt burden, but must mean
forgiveness of our debts. Debt relief received by
Guyana has resulted in substantial investment in the
social sector, leading to reduced malnutrition,

18

Pharmaceutical companies, too, must further
significantly reduce the price of antiretroviral drugs.
Reduction of prices to approximately $1,000 per person
per year is meaningless to us; they still exclude
countries like Guyana. The offer of reduced prices
should also be extended to the private sector so that
more individuals could privately obtain antiretroviral
drugs.
Using this crisis to profit is obscene. Guyana
therefore salutes countries like Brazil and India for
their efforts to produce drugs at more affordable prices.
Such actions are imperatives that poor countries cannot
ignore.
The
knowledge
and
experience
of
pharmaceutical companies in Brazil and India should
be fostered, particularly in the context of South-South
cooperation.
We would like to commend the international
donor agencies and technical agencies for their support
so far, but we urge that more be done.
For Guyana and poor countries, intensified efforts
by researchers to develop a vaccine appears to be our
tomorrow. We welcome the proposed global AIDS fund
and express the hope that the fund will not become
another window to place conditionalities on developing
countries. The global fight against HIV/AIDS should
not, and must not, be politicized. Too many lives are at
stake.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. José Francisco López Beltrán, Minister of Public
Health and Social Welfare of El Salvador.
Mr. López Beltrán (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to express, on behalf of the
Government of El Salvador, our sincere thanks for the
important work done in coordination with the
Secretary-General to organize this special session of
the General Assembly dedicated to examining the
problem of HIV/AIDS in all its aspects, a pandemic

A/S-26/PV.7

that has become one of the most formidable challenges
to life and human dignity in the new millennium.
El Salvador is one of the most densely populated
countries of Central America and one of those most
seriously affected by natural disasters in recent years,
such as hurricane Mitch and the two earthquakes in
January and February of this year. It is also vulnerable
to external economic conditions, such as the increase in
oil prices and the decline in international coffee prices.
All this has been within the framework of national
efforts to consolidate democratic progress and national
reconstruction following the civil war. This has
required enormous economic resources, but above all
educated, trained, healthy and participatory human
resources.
El Salvador recognizes that the HIV/AIDS
pandemic has the full potential to become a serious
limiting factor to our development since its rate of
incidence at the national level has been progressing
rapidly over the last few years.
Given its structural causality and its social roots,
this epidemic requires an effective and robust reply in
which all the social actors have a basic role to play. In
keeping with this reality, the Government of El
Salvador is carrying out a joint effort with the nongovernmental organizations that are a part of
PREVENSIDA — AIDS prevention — and with
international cooperation organizations, including
UNAIDS, in order to face this pandemic. These joint
efforts involving all these organizations are enabling us
to make a difference at local, national, regional and
subregional levels in Central America.
The Government of El Salvador has established
alliances with all interest groups on the subject and has
achieved important results through them, among which
I wish to highlight the following.
First is a strategic prevention and control plan for
sexually transmitted infections and HIV/AIDS, in
which, in addition to the strategies for dealing with the
problem, the specific role of each of the 23
participating organizations in the country is considered,
as well as the economic contributions of each of these
to strengthen and implement that plan.
Second is a draft national bill on HIV/AIDS
drawn up in a participatory way that will be submitted
shortly to the legislative assembly on the initiative of
the Ministry of Health. It is important to point out that

the provisions that emerge from this special session of
the General Assembly will, of course, be incorporated
into that law in order to make it relevant to our
international undertakings.
Third is the strengthening and broadening of our
response in the comprehensive management of infected
and ill persons. In this context, the Ministry of Health
has adopted new laboratory techniques for the proper
management and follow-up of patients. We screen 100
per cent of the blood collected in all of the country’s
blood collection centres. Health personnel has been
trained for pre- and post-test counselling, and shortly a
confidential national hotline will be opened that will be
managed by properly trained personnel.
Fourth is the updating of national standards for
managing sexually transmitted infections and HIV/
AIDS and treatment protocols with the wide
participation of interest groups, professional sectors
and academics, with the advice of international experts.
Fifthly, epidemiological monitoring is being
maintained at the national level; in this way we guide
our national monitoring and control policies and focus
treatment. In that regard, treatment of adults, children
and pregnant women with antiretroviral drugs has
already been started in order to reduce vertical
transmission of the disease.
Sixthly, with regard to programmes for the
promotion and fostering of health, the Government of
El Salvador promotes an intersectoral approach, which
includes the participation of other Government
agencies, such as the National Secretariat for the
Family, the ministries of governance, education, public
health, social assistance, the National Institute of
Sports, the Salvadoran Red Cross, the Salvadoran
Institute for the Protection of Minors, the Salvadoran
Institute of Social Security, the Office of the
Ombudsman for the Protection of Human Rights and
the national police force. These programmes place
special emphasis on young girls and boys in order to
promote values and healthy life practices.
El Salvador considers it important to mobilize a
subregional approach to the problem through bodies
such as RESSCAD, COMISCA and SICA. These are
ideal bodies for setting up common strategies for
fighting this disease. We also request firm support for
them, since we hope to achieve a greater impact
through our programmes in the Latin American

19

A/S-26/PV.7

context, given the enormous and dynamic exchange of
goods, services and citizens between our countries.
The Government of El Salvador firmly supports
the efforts of the General Assembly expressed in the
draft declaration of commitment on the fight against
HIV/AIDS, and particularly the creation of the global
fund for HIV/AIDS and health, which will contribute
to creating a barrier to contain this pandemic by
concentrating on promoting health, the prevention of
the disease and the appropriate treatment of affected
persons.
We think it is appropriate and important to stress
that Central America, and in particular El Salvador, has
benefited from the cooperation of the Republic of
China to develop health programmes, including those
related to the fight against HIV/AIDS. Other
developing
countries
and
non-governmental
organizations have also received that support in a spirit
of solidarity and medical and humanitarian support,
which we feel could be broader and more effective if
the more than 21 million Taiwanese were represented
in the World Health Organization, whose procedures
have enabled non-members of the United Nations to
participate as observers. This is an aspiration that we
support.
Mr. Filonov (Belarus), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Finally, El Salvador is convinced that this
pandemic has reached global dimensions, and that we
are all vulnerable. Due to the nature of the epidemic, it
requires a comprehensive, broad and coordinated
response from the international community, whose
members must strengthen their cooperation and share
their experience and technical knowledge in this area,
without exclusions of a political, ideological or any
other nature.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I now
give the floor to Mr. Martín Chiola Villagra, Minister
of Public Health and Social Welfare of Paraguay.
Mr. Chiola Villagra (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): In the framework of the twenty-sixth special
session of the General Assembly, Paraguay joins the
international effort to intensify action towards the
objectives of the fight against the AIDS epidemic.
The epidemic in Paraguay began in 1985 and then
grew. By May 2001, 665 cases of AIDS had been
reported. The prevalence of AIDS in Paraguay is low,

20

0.13 per cent of the population of about 5.4 million
persons. The infected are predominantly male, with a
greater incidence in urban areas and moderate
incidence among users of injecting drugs. It is
increasingly affecting women, heterosexuals and the
poor, especially poor women. It is also increasingly
spreading to cities in the interior.
In 1988 the Government of Paraguay established
the national AIDS control programme, an institution
reporting to the Ministry for Public Health and Social
Welfare, which initiated measures related to prevention
and assistance for the incipient epidemic.
It is worth underlining that the HIV/AIDS
problem has been made an issue of State policy within
the framework of academic reform, which permits
educational institutions to take preventive actions
targeting children and young people in schools. Actions
have also been taken to benefit other vulnerable
groups, among which we must mention measures
targeting prison inmates who use intravenous drugs.
Since 1996 the Ministry for Public Health and
Social Welfare has provided free, comprehensive
attention to infected persons, including laboratory
diagnosis, follow-up monitoring and the supply of
antiretroviral medication. This is done without the
existence of any legal provisions obliging the State to
provide these services without charge.
Paraguay has represented South America in the
coordinating body of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) for three years.
The Republic of Paraguay proposes the following
measures: to support the immediate implementation of
a common fund for the fight against AIDS, directed
towards prevention and assistance; to reduce inequality
in health investments between countries of low and
high prevalence; to increase international assistance for
prevention in low-prevalence countries; to mobilize
international lending agencies to provide non-repayable
resources in the fight against AIDS; to recognize AIDS
as a health problem that affects the economy and, in
turn, the security of countries; to accept that the
HIV/AIDS epidemic reinforces the vicious circle of
poverty; to take immediate action so that international
pharmaceutical companies reduce the cost of
medication, taking into account the rights of the 36
million infected persons; and to consider the reduction
of the foreign debt of poor countries affected by the
AIDS epidemic.

A/S-26/PV.7

As a Paraguayan, I bring this sincere message to
the representatives of all the countries here at this
international forum. Let us forget economic, racial,
political, cultural and religious differences. The
epidemic does not respect anything or anyone. It
affects us all, and only a joint effort will allow us to
win the fight against this terrible scourge.
Paraguay thanks the United Nations for this
opportunity to debate and consult, which has brought
us together. We hope that our next gathering will allow
us to speak of achievements and fulfilled goals.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I now
give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Andrei Gherman,
Minister of Health of the Republic of Moldova.
Mr. Gherman (Republic of Moldova) (spoke in
Russian): It is a great honour for me to speak on behalf
of the Government of the Republic of Moldova at this
special session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS.
I would like to express the hope that this forum will
provide an impetus for further progress in the
prevention of HIV/AIDS, as set out in the Millennium
Declaration, and will help to promote coordinated
international efforts in this area.
The Republic of Moldova shares the concern and
alarm of the world community over the danger of the
rapid spread of the HIV/AIDS epidemic throughout the
world, and over its catastrophic and devastating effects.
It is aware of the epidemic’s potential threat to the
well-being and safety of people throughout the world.
Under these circumstances, our Government is taking
energetic measures to counteract the disease. At the
same time, we are increasing our participation in
international cooperation on the issues of prevention,
diagnosis, cure and the epidemiological monitoring of
the spread of HIV/AIDS. We appreciate our
cooperation with the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and the work of other
organizations, aimed not only at prevention but also at
attention to infected persons, which greatly reduces the
danger of the further spread of this epidemic.
As a result of an analysis of the existing situation,
making broad use of international experience and the
support of UNAIDS, in the Republic of Moldova we
have developed a strategy for the years 2001 to 2005.
The national programme is designed to concentrate
efforts on improving the situation, and preventing the
spread of this and other infectious diseases that
especially affect young people, vulnerable groups and

high-risk sectors of the population. We are trying to
make blood transfusions safe. We are trying to deal
with intravenous drug-users. We are trying to provide
full psychological support to HIV-carriers and the
members of their families. The prevention of HIV
infection and infection from other sexually transmitted
diseases has been made a priority in the policy of the
State.
The Republic of Moldova was affected by the
HIV/AIDS epidemic starting in the mid-1990s, like
most countries in Eastern Europe. It attaches great
importance to prevention and the fight against this
virus. Thanks to the legislative organizational and
preventive measures taken, Moldova has a relatively
low level of HIV/AIDS infection. At present, we have
registered about 1,300 cases.
At the same time, the spread of the HIV/AIDS
epidemic is clearly being influenced by the socioeconomic situation — the worsening quality of life and
increasing levels of unemployment, migration,
prostitution and drug addiction. Approximately 83.4
per cent of all those infected with HIV are intravenous
drug users. As a result of the expansion of the sex
trade, the illegal export of young girls and women for
the provision of sexual services and the increasing
spread of sexually transmitted diseases, sexual
relations are increasingly responsible for HIV/AIDS
infection. As in other countries, in Moldova the HIV/
AIDS epidemic particularly affects youths, with
resulting negative consequences for the demographic
and socio-economic situation.
The Government authorities and civil society of
Moldova, recognizing the seriousness of the situation
— the unfavourable outlook and the consequences of
the epidemic — have confirmed their commitment to
taking action to prevent the spread of HIV, viewing this
as the most essential response to the epidemic. They
have also confirmed their readiness to focus the State’s
efforts on and to seek the necessary resources to
support the strategy that has been developed to combat
the epidemic, and to care for and support people
infected with and suffering from HIV/AIDS.
The Republic of Moldova is one of the sponsors
of the United Nations resolution on the convening of
this special session of the General Assembly. Moldova
fully supports the report of the Secretary-General that
was submitted to this special session and the
recommendations of all the members of the

21

A/S-26/PV.7

international community on how to combat HIV/AIDS.
We believe that the main approaches set forth by the
Secretary-General for waging this campaign provide
the basis for preventing and fighting this deadly
infection.

initiatives aimed at combating HIV/AIDS and to
express our confidence that this session of the General
Assembly will effectively stimulate the development of
coordinated measures to combat HIV/AIDS at the
national, regional and international levels.

In this connection, I would like to note that at the
national level more wide-ranging preventive measures
are being taken to contain the epidemic, in accordance
with the United Nations recommendations. In 1993 we
adopted a law on the prevention of AIDS in the
Republic of Moldova. This law establishes a national
programme for the prevention of HIV and sexually
transmitted diseases for the period 2001-2005, and
other measures are being taken as well. A broad range
of Government bodies and non-governmental
organizations are involved in this preventive work. A
campaign is under way to inform, educate and train the
population, in particular the young. The goal is to
promote healthy lifestyles and safe behaviour. With the
support of international organizations such as the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
the United Nations Children’s Fund and the United
Nations
Educational,
Scientific
and
Cultural
Organization, as well as the Soros Fund, we have
carried out a series of projects to prevent HIV infection
among vulnerable groups, first and foremost among
intravenous drug users.

The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I now
call on His Excellency Mr. Yacoub Bin Youssouf AlMasruwah, Deputy Minister of Health for Preventive
Medicine, Ministry of Health of Saudi Arabia.

Because of the exceptional severity of the HIV/
AIDS problem there needs to be vigorous international
cooperation in the fight against this dangerous disease.
The Republic of Moldova is prepared to work
vigorously with international organizations, the
Governments of other countries and non-governmental
organizations on concrete, broad-based actions to
combat this epidemic and implement the strategy for
combating HIV/AIDS.
We consider it extremely important to strengthen
the global coordination of the fight against HIV
infection within the framework of the United Nations.
The improved coordination should include technical
support from UNAIDS, the United Nations
Development Programme, the World Bank and the
World Health Organization and through many bilateral
and multilateral projects aimed at providing medical
assistance and social support to those infected with
HIV and those suffering from AIDS.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
Government’s full support for the United Nations

22

Mr. Bin Youssouf Al-Masruwah (Saudi Arabia)
(spoke in Arabic): This is the first time that a special
session of the General Assembly is being held to
discuss the important and vital health problem of
AIDS.
At a time when the world has become one village
through advances in transportation and communication,
and at a time when the rampant epidemic of AIDS and
the resulting life-threatening forms of a disease that
knows no borders have not been countered by an
effective vaccination or a successful remedy, humanity
should concentrate on fighting this health hazard
through the implementation of effective preventive
measures. Coordination, cooperation and exchange of
ideas and experiences among all countries are
particularly important in this regard.
In the year 2000 alone, 5.3 million new cases of
AIDS have been recorded, with an increasing
percentage of the afflicted being women and children.
This is enough to prove that there is a need for action
on the part of the international community through its
governmental, civic and private organizations.
The Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
realizes how dangerous this epidemic is and how
threatening it is to human society all over the world. It
shares with other Governments the responsibility of
facing up to the task of the prevention of this epidemic
and of stemming its spread. The Kingdom is committed
to those international recommendations and strategies
that are aimed at fighting this disease and that are in
conformity with the teachings of Islam. It endorses and
welcomes all the efforts of official and civic bodies at
the international, regional and local levels, and the
accompanying exchange of experience and the
meetings at all levels devoted to fighting the disease.
Within its jurisdiction, the Government of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia provides every preventive
and therapeutic service to its citizens and residents as

A/S-26/PV.7

part of its social and health services. It follows closely
international efforts, including those of the United
Nations, the World Health Organization and other
organizations of which the Kingdom is an active
member. It supports all their efforts to control this
disease.
To control the infiltrating of the malady into the
Kingdom, the Ministry of Health has established a plan
for carrying out a national programme at the central
and regional levels. At the central level, a national
programme to combat AIDS was established in
accordance with the strategy to combat the disease and
protect the country from the dangers of its spreading. A
scientific consulting committee was established to
assist the executive branch in dealing with the technical
aspects related to AIDS, such as selecting the
medications and laboratory and counselling activities
for health providers in clinics and coordinators in the
national programme and in the various regions, as well
as drawing up a strategy of awareness of the disease.
At the local level, coordinators were appointed
for the national programme to combat the disease
throughout the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, where a
follow-up of the cases is conducted and advanced
remedies, counselling and preventive measures are
offered for patients and their partners. These patients
are followed up by specialists in the field of infectious
diseases. The local centres conduct medical monitoring
and surveys of high-risk groups.
In conclusion, the number of patients infected
with AIDS in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is small,
not exceeding 440 cases since the start of the national
programme in 1985. The reason for this small number
of infections is adherence to the religion of Islam,
which prohibits sexual relations outside the confines of
marriage.
Nevertheless, an awareness campaign was
established by using the media to reach all groups,
especially the young, which is the highest risk group in
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The programme
emphasizes adherence to Islamic teachings and
explains the dangers of the disease, its causes, its
complications, the way it is spread and ways to avoid
it.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I give
the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Natsag Udval, Deputy
Minister of Health of Mongolia.

Ms. Udval (Mongolia): Differences in views and
passionate attachment to respective positions do not
come as a surprise given that HIV/AIDS, since it was
first reported, has exploded into a global threat and
humanitarian crisis on a scale never seen before. While
we differ in the extent to which we are affected, we are
all in the same boat and all at high risk for HIV/AIDS.
This is even true for Mongolia, which has only two
reported cases.
This conviction and our sense of solidarity and
compassion compel us during this session to put in
place a global response to this global crisis. Yesterday,
during the dialogue with people living with AIDS,
organized by the International Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement, it was made painfully clear once
again that the time for words is over, and that it is time
to do it right. Our vision and resolve will decide
whether millions of people throughout the world will
be left to die or their lives will be saved.
We believe that a response to this global crisis
requires a comprehensive, holistic approach. It needs to
take into account a wide range of issues, from good
governance and proactive policies to respect for human
and reproductive rights. Leadership, community
empowerment and building partnerships and coalitions
with civil society and private business are required.
Cooperation at the subregional and regional levels as
part of a cohesive global response and more assistance
for these efforts from international organizations,
especially the United Nations, are also needed.
This approach is gaining momentum worldwide,
and not least in the developing countries. However, this
momentum needs to be supported by more financial
assistance. The plight of developing countries —
especially those most affected, which are facing this
colossal crisis with such limited resources at their
disposal — cannot be turned around unless more
funding and assistance is made available. Thus, it is
gratifying that so many countries have made significant
pledges during this session in a show of solidarity and
compassion.
The Mongolian Government welcomes the
proposal for a new global fund on AIDS and health,
tuberculosis and malaria, and believes that it must
become operational and start its work early this year.
We believe that, as the fund becomes operational,
assistance must be provided to strengthen the health
systems of developing countries, especially the poorest.

23

A/S-26/PV.7

Risk-reduction interventions, preventive actions and
national capacity-building must be among its priorities.
This strategy needs to involve assistance for
efforts to make information about HIV/AIDS and its
prevention more available and for efforts to educate
populations, especially young people, particularly on
the topic of sexuality and safe sex practice. Safe
injection and harm-reduction activities must be
supported, and efforts to reduce vulnerabilities should
be encouraged.
As has been stressed during this session many
times, political will and commitment are of crucial
significance for the successful implementation of the
strategy. The Mongolian Government is committed at
the highest political level. Mongolia, with such a high
level of poverty, a struggling health-care system and
increasing numbers of cases reported in the bordering
areas, is extremely vulnerable.
To address the challenge and devise the national
response, the National HIV/AIDS Committee has been
set up with the Prime Minister as Chairman. A law on
HIV/AIDS was enacted in 1995, and the first stage of
the national sexually transmitted infection (STI)/HIV/
AIDS strategic plan is nearing completion, with a
second one starting soon. National funding for the plan
has been increased substantially this year. The national
information, education and communication strategy for
prevention of HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted
infections (STIs) was adopted, and is being
implemented. The Government is working closely with
a number of non-governmental organizations and
especially successfully in the outreach STI-HIV/AIDS
campaign targeting youth and vulnerable adolescents.
One example is the recent campaign that involved pop
stars, business leaders and non-governmental
organizations in educational and fund-raising events.
The Government is working to improve syndromic case
management of STIs and activities on STIs and
reproductive health are being combined.
The Government is cooperating successfully with
international organizations, especially United Nations
agencies, based on the relevant memorandum of
understanding. We are working to bring our
cooperation with regional countries, especially with
two neighbours, to a new stage.
I would like to take this opportunity to express
the gratitude of the Government and the people of
Mongolia to the Governments, non-governmental

24

organizations and United Nations agencies and their
staff that have supported our efforts for their selfless
dedication and commitment.
More remains to be done, especially in the area of
national capacity-building and education among young
people. The availability, accessibility and quality of
sexual, reproductive and diagnostic services and safe
blood products must be increased to support other
activities. To this end, the Government needs the
support of the international community and civil
society.
My delegation believes that the declaration will
and needs to play an important role in giving impetus
to the momentum in the global fight against HIV/
AIDS, and we pledge our full support for the
commitments it contains.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I now
give the floor to His Excellency The Honourable Dato’
Seri Suleiman Mohamad, Deputy Minister of Health of
Malaysia.
Dato’ Seri Suleiman (Malaysia): My delegation
congratulates the United Nations on convening this
special session on HIV/AIDS, which signifies the
urgent nature of this pandemic. Seventy per cent of
global adult HIV infections are due to heterosexual
intercourse. Approximately one third of them occur
through mother-to-child transmission, and a significant
percentage through the sharing of contaminated
equipment by injecting drug users.
Malaysia has not been spared. More than 40,000
cases of HIV/AIDS have been reported since 1986, and
of those almost 4,000 people have died. In recent years,
approximately 4,000 have become infected annually.
While most are injecting drug users, we are also seeing
an alarming rise in infections among women and
children and through heterosexual transmission. Thus,
Malaysia faces many challenges, not just in prevention
but also in the treatment, care and support of those
infected.
A multisectoral approach to prevention,
treatment, care and support is essential. For instance, in
the area of prevention the Government has limitations
in reaching vulnerable communities. In this regard, we
support the programmes undertaken by such nongovernmental organizations as the Malaysian AIDS
Council and other community-based groups, as well as
religious leaders, women, young people and people

A/S-26/PV.7

living with HIV/AIDS. We also encourage private
sector involvement, both in providing financial support
for prevention, treatment and care programmes as well
as in incorporating HIV/AIDS education in the
workplace. In addition, other Government agencies,
such as the Ministry of Human Resources, the Ministry
of Youth and Sport, the Ministry of Education, the
Immigration Department and the National Drug
Agency have ongoing programmes that address
HIV/AIDS issues in their own spheres of work.
The major barriers to prevention in Malaysia are
gender inequities, stigma and discrimination. As more
women are becoming infected, many by their own
husbands, the need to empower them to protect
themselves is urgent. Recognizing the risk of motherto-child transmission, since 1998 Malaysia has had a
voluntary prenatal screening programme and provided
Zidovudine to HIV-positive mothers and their babies.
Recently, the Government has also started to provide
free antiretroviral therapy to mothers as part of the
continuum of care.
The stigma and discrimination attached to
HIV/AIDS is, however, much more difficult to address,
but it needs to be confronted. We recognize that more
needs to be done to prevent discrimination against
vulnerable groups and people living with HIV/AIDS.
We support the efforts of non-governmental
organizations in these areas. We are also consistently
providing training to health-care and other relevant
personnel to minimize discrimination and enhance the
quality of care provided to HIV-infected individuals.
In terms of access to treatment, Malaysia is very
concerned about the disparities between North and
South that exist largely due to prohibitive prices. This
inequity is unjust and inhumane. We wish to reiterate
our disappointment at the existing barriers preventing
the majority of HIV-infected individuals from
obtaining equitable and affordable life-prolonging
drugs. Access to those drugs should not be restricted by
trade and patent-related issues. We very much hope
that the draft declaration of commitment will redress
this inequity so that deaths resulting from AIDS, and
its impact on families and societies, will be lessened if
not altogether prevented.
Although we are in agreement with much of the
draft declaration of commitment, Malaysia is
disappointed at the very low profile given to Asia and
the Pacific, where 60 per cent of the world’s population

lives. While recognizing the magnitude of the African
problem, the impending epidemic in Asia and the
Pacific will far surpass anything previously seen if
nothing is done today. It is our earnest hope that the
proposed global health and AIDS fund will be
appropriately apportioned to ensure that this future
disaster will be averted.
In South-East Asia, where there are nearly 2
million people living with HIV/AIDS, the 10 countries
of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN) are already taking steps to ward off that dark
future. Upon the initiative of Mahathir Mohamad,
Prime Minister of Malaysia, the ASEAN Heads of
Government will meet in Brunei Darussalam in
November this year to jointly address region-specific
HIV/AIDS issues. We hope that such commitment at
the highest political level will provide leadership
within our countries and in the region. This, we trust,
will illustrate what can be achieved when countries
work together to address an issue of mutual concern.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I now
give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Arnoldo Víctor
Castillo, National Secretary for Health Care, Ministry
of Health of Argentina.
Mr. Castillo (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
Argentine Republic is participating in this important
special session in the hope that the political will
expressed here and the commitments made will
improve the quality of life for people affected by HIV/
AIDS all over the world.
Argentina, like the majority of Latin American
countries, has seen rapid growth in the epidemic.
Although the epidemic in Latin America has not
reached the magnitude seen in other regions, we note
with concern and fear that if we do not adopt urgent
measures, in a few years the spread of the epidemic
might reach levels as high as those in the most affected
countries. We may also see a deterioration of
development indicators. It is for that reason that since
December 1999, when President Fernando de la Rúa
took office, the Government of my country has made
the fight against AIDS one of its priorities.
We believe it is essential to inform people of the
scale of the epidemic so that not only policy makers
but all of society will be aware of it. We are convinced
that the epidemic will be brought under control only if
all of society — both people and government — work
together to that end. It is inconceivable that

25

A/S-26/PV.7

Governments alone can respond successfully to the
epidemic; nor is it likely that individuals and organized
civil society groups will be able to do so either.
HIV/AIDS
compels
civil
organizations
and
Governments to find new ways to share activities and
work together. This is a way of strengthening and
consolidating democracy.
That is why the Government of Argentina is
working together with non-governmental organizations
to develop preventive efforts such as the campaign
aimed at vulnerable groups — intravenous drugs users
and their sexual partners, men who have sex with men,
and sex workers. In addition, both national and
provincial governments are providing financial support
to non-governmental organizations and groups
representing people living with HIV/AIDS so that they
can redouble their efforts for prevention.

is the central goal of Government action on HIV/AIDS.
The cost of this kind of care entails a significant — and
fully justified — economic effort by the Government.
Here, it has to be said that in the past year a reduction
of 72 per cent in the cost of antiretroviral drugs has
been achieved owing to increased competition among
manufacturers and to very active negotiations by the
Ministry of Health.
We are worried by the high vulnerability of young
women and by its consequences for mother-to-child
transmission. Better enforcement of existing legislation
led in 2001 to a significant reduction in incidence
among children born of mothers who received AZT
treatment. These first achievements strengthen our
commitment, because thousands of women, young men
and girls are being infected, and we must increase our
efforts to avoid this.

This year, the national Government has been
crafting a massive prevention campaign to provide
information and raise awareness among the whole
population. The first stage is directed at people under
25 years of age, since they are the most commonly
affected.

That is why Argentina hopes that the commitment
that we shall agree upon today will be a step forward in
this fight. If every country acts more effectively against
AIDS, within similar frameworks protecting human
rights and personal dignity, the outcome will be
effective.

Argentina considers that, for HIV/AIDS,
prevention cannot be separated from care, support and
treatment. That is why we believe that people living
with HIV/AIDS should be agents for the spread of
prevention and care. In that connection, the Ministry of
Health, acting jointly with other ministries such as the
Ministry of Labour, recently began to support projects
for people living with HIV/AIDS. Those activities will
aim to strengthen organizations representing people
living with HIV/AIDS and those affected by the
epidemic throughout the country.

Argentina is committed to supporting all nations,
and at the same time hopes for their support, so that
together we can overcome the epidemic. It is our
aspiration that this will lead to greater equality and
justice in the world, without discrimination among
people. A commitment by all countries will make this
possible; only thus can we give meaning to the
suffering of so many people all over the world.

Argentine legislation guarantees free access to
medication and comprehensive care for those who need
them — through the Ministry of Health for those who
have no medical insurance. There have been 15,000
such people this year, accounting for about 75 per cent
of those receiving antiretroviral treatment. Since 1995,
4,500 people have received this kind of care though
social security, and 500 through private insurance.
The Ministry of Health has been providing free
medication since 1993; thanks to the mobilization of
civil society, the number of beneficiaries has increased
since 1997. This has led to a 20 per cent reduction in
the number of AIDS deaths. The greater survival rate
has been accompanied by a better quality of life, which

26

The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I call
next on His Excellency Mr. Amraiya Naidu, Chairman
of the delegation of Fiji.
Mr. Naidu (Fiji): Fiji congratulates the President
of the General Assembly, along with Her Excellency
Ambassador Penny Wensley of Australia and His
Excellency Ambassador Ibra Ka of Senegal, the
facilitators, on having arrived at a draft declaration of
commitment and on having made such excellent
preparations for the special session. This session may
serve to turn the tide against the increasing impact of
HIV/AIDS 20 years after it was first detected. We hold
great hopes in that regard, for we know that HIV/AIDS
is preventable. We also commend the SecretaryGeneral for his personal leadership in our global
struggle against the ravages of HIV/AIDS.

A/S-26/PV.7

It is certainly true that poverty is the biggest
enemy of health, and a major factor in the spread of
HIV/AIDS in the developing world. We agree also with
the Secretary-General’s statement that we shall not
finally defeat AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria or any of the
other infectious diseases that plague the developing
world until we have also won the battle for safe
drinking water, sanitation and basic health care.
The HIV/AIDS pandemic is now a problem
beyond
comprehension.
It
destroys
social
infrastructure, causes economic disaster and threatens
global security, and it will continue to affect human
security if it is left unchecked. No one is immune to
this global scourge, including my own country, Fiji.
By global standards, the number of HIV cases
reported in Fiji may be insignificant, but it is alarming
given the small size of our population. Sixty-eight
HIV/AIDS cases were confirmed between 1989 and
2000. More alarming is the high number of traditional
sexually transmitted infections, which may indicate an
underestimate of unreported cases. Of the 68 reported
cases, more than 40 per cent are in people between the
ages of 20 and 29. The incidence of HIV/AIDS in Fiji
is displaying trends that have been seen in countries
that are now experiencing catastrophic problems. We
envisage, therefore, an aggravated impact in terms of
loss of lives and productivity, social dislocation, and
other related problems among a small population such
as ours in Fiji.
The guiding principle of Fiji’s strategic plan for
combating HIV/AIDS is primarily to prevent and
control the spread and impact of HIV/AIDS and other
sexually transmitted infections in the Fiji islands. The
plan was crafted to have a rights-based approach which
ensures, without making judgements, the right of
individuals to information and to free voluntary
screening, along with providing for appropriate full
community support and care for people living with
HIV/AIDS. In implementing the plan, the Government
of Fiji has endorsed and declared political support and
commitment to the fight against HIV/AIDS over the
next decade.
Most important, we can begin to win this battle if
we successfully reverse attitudes and behaviour, and if
we instil a stronger sense of belonging and community
values. Stigmatization continues to prevent our people
from accessing the prevention and care services they
need. It undermines confidentiality, especially in small

Pacific island countries such as ours; this leads also to
underreporting. Other cultural norms contribute in
similar fashion to marginalization and alienation. We
need to revisit them if we are serious about checking
the spread of HIV/AIDS. Uninformed societal,
religious and cultural intolerance and antagonism are
disincentives to public awareness and to voluntary
access to information on HIV/AIDS transmission and
prevention.
The Government of Fiji seeks to promote a
supportive and enabling environment for women,
children and other vulnerable groups, including sex
workers and men who have sex with men, by
addressing underlying prejudices and inequalities
through community and multisectoral dialogue.
Appropriate policy and legislative reforms are also in
order to strengthen privacy, confidentiality and nondiscrimination with respect to people living with
HIV/AIDS.
Programmes to prevent HIV/AIDS and other
sexually transmitted infections are being developed in
consultation with all stakeholders, in particular nongovernmental organizations and civil society. Inroads
will need to be made in the corporate and private
spheres, especially in developing research and in
resource mobilization.
We recognize that a comprehensive multisectoral
fight against HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and other
infectious diseases can succeed only with adequate
human and financial resources. We remain confident
that this Assembly will show that it is committed to
complementing the limited capacity of developing and
least developed countries to sustain their national
efforts against the pandemic. It is therefore important
that the strategies and resource mobilization plans that
emanate from this special session be attuned to their
special needs and their wider developmental goals.
The establishment of the global AIDS and health
fund provides the needed catalyst for our concerted
efforts to eradicate major infectious diseases, including
HIV/AIDS. We applaud the contributions to date by the
Governments of Japan, France, the United States of
America and other donor countries. We make a humble
plea to other developed partners to willingly boost the
fund further to arrest the spread of the HIV/AIDS
scourge. While the fund is earmarked for preventive
strategies, we equally urge recognition of the rights of
people living with HIV/AIDS to have appropriate care,

27

A/S-26/PV.7

treatment and support. For that purpose, Fiji longs to
see affordable drugs and medicines become accessible
in the immediate future for those in need, through
international and multisectoral partnerships and
collaboration.
To conclude, let me pledge my Government’s full
support for the declaration of commitment that will be
adopted this evening at this very special session.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I now
give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Alisher Vohidov,
Chairman of the delegation of Uzbekistan.
Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan) (spoke in Russian):
First of all, allow me to express our sincere gratitude to
the Ambassador of Australia, Ms. Penny Wensley, and
the Ambassador of Senegal, Mr. Ibra Ka, for preparing
the draft declaration of commitment and for their
considerable contribution to this session.
The convening of this special session of the
General Assembly on HIV/AIDS shows that the world
community has become aware of the global character
of the problem of this disease and the need to develop
general approaches to resolving it. The Republic of
Uzbekistan considers that acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome is a moral, economic and social problem, the
solution of which requires considerable efforts. Despite
the fact that we have a population of 24 million people
in our Republic and have registered only 230 HIVinfected persons, our Government attaches special
attention to solving the problem of HIV/AIDS.
Given the increasing rate of HIV infection, it is
now necessary to adopt an Uzbek national programme
with the purpose of stabilizing the epidemiological
situation on HIV/AIDS and preventing the mass spread
of the infection, above all among youth. The main tasks
of the national programme are to decrease the rate of
increase in HIV infections, to improve the
epidemiological monitoring of HIV/AIDS, to ensure
the safety of donor blood and any other biological
fluids and to provide social protection for HIV-infected
persons and their families.
In the Republic of Uzbekistan, we are carrying
out research and development in epidemiology,
diagnostics, treatment and prophylaxis in relation to
HIV infection. We are also strengthening medical
institutions in terms of materials, technology and
equipment.

28

Today we have created a national strategic
planning programme on measures to counter the
HIV/AIDS epidemic. The national strategic plan for the
years 2001 to 2005 is aimed at carrying out the
following tasks: creating favourable legislative
conditions for vulnerable groups of the population;
improving information and educational programmes
through the media; creating and implementing
programmes for vulnerable strata of the population;
ensuring medical help and social support for HIV
patients and those suffering from AIDS; and
implementing monitoring, control, assessment and
research and development work in the whole area of
HIV/AIDS.
One of the priorities today is to address the
problem of injecting drug users in the Republic. This
group shows a steady growth trend because of the
accessibility of drugs and social and economic factors.
Those who are using drugs are very much at risk of
infection, because of the closed nature of that
population, weak systems of information and the very
risky behaviour. Unfortunately, in our Republic we still
have limited possibilities for anonymous treatment, and
we also have a shortage of medication.
I should point out that in Uzbekistan, 64 per cent
of the population is young, between the ages of 15 and
29. Those in this age group who start using drugs and
taking part in the sex trade are most vulnerable to the
danger of infection by HIV.
In the Republic, we are doing what is necessary
in order to prevent in-hospital transmission of HIV
infections and to ensure the safety of donated blood. At
the same time, we are doing work on developing and
implementing
special
educational
programmes
addressed to the population as a whole, but to young
people in particular.
In Uzbekistan we have created a national
coordination committee on AIDS prophylaxis. Its work
is aimed at bringing in all progressive forces in our
society to protect our nation from this pandemic.
The Republic of Uzbekistan receives considerable
assistance and support from the United Nations system
for prophylactic measures in connection with HIV
infection. Technical and financial support is being
given for the timely prevention of heavy and difficult
medical, social and economic consequences. All of this
is of particular significance at the stage where we see
the beginning of the spread of HIV.

A/S-26/PV.7

In our Republic, we have reached the successful
conclusion of a programme implemented with the help
of the United Nations Population Fund and the World
Health Organization. We also have seminars, held in
cooperation with the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, providing
information, education and communication to teach our
young. We consider that the United Nations system
should consider prophylactic measures to address the
HIV epidemic and measures to strengthen the system in
those countries that are at the initial stage of this
pandemic. This should be considered a priority.
In Uzbekistan, we have the active functioning of
non-governmental organizations that bring together all
their efforts to work with risk groups. A great
contribution to the prevention of HIV is the moral
education of the population, particularly the youth, and
religious authorities of all denominations are working
in that area.
In conclusion, I would like to state that our
society has now entered into an epidemic and everyone
must share this responsibility. We know that only
contemporary scientific projects and medical and
education programmes can control this epidemiological
situation. We have a moral responsibility to adopt
urgent measures in conditions where we have a very
complex economy, and this should all be done at the
beginning of the epidemiological process itself.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I give
the floor to Her Excellency Mrs. Aksoltan Ataeva,
Chairman of the delegation of Turkmenistan.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian):
Let me congratulate the President on his election as
President of the special session and to wish him
success in his important work. I should like to express
gratitude to Secretary-General Mr. Kofi Annan for his
efforts in organizing this session and also to
ambassadors of Australia and Senegal, who have
rendered great assistance in the preparation of this
session and who will certainly play a positive role.
The problem of AIDS, which has been growing in
the last decades, has touched almost all countries of the
world and has become global. The world is concerned
with the rapid spread of this virus, the burden of the
illness and the lack of an effective cure. Especially
worrisome is the fact that the disease has spread to
children, rendering this very vulnerable group of

population the most wounded and helpless in the face
of this catastrophe of the twenty-first century.
World leaders, concerned with the security of the
peoples, have taken upon themselves a commitment to
stop the spread and do everything to reduce the scale of
the human immune deficiency virus by 2015.
Irrespective of how many cases of this disease are
found in each particular country, the danger of its
spread presents the same threat to everyone, since there
is no absolute barrier against penetration of the
infection into a country.
Taking the current situation into account, we
support the call for the necessity to join the efforts,
without delay, of all countries in implementing a
comprehensive programme for prevention of the
disease. This work should be headed at the highest
level. Leadership at the global and national levels and
mobilization of all means to fight this epidemic and
their coordination, are the only effective ways, and
they should be supported with adequate financing. We
realize the serious social and economic consequences
of the spread of HIV/AIDS, and we fully support the
initiative of the Secretary-General on the creation of
the global fund to fight AIDS.
Turkmenistan is among that group of countries
with a low level of HIV/AIDS. In 1995, the State
programme of the President of Turkmenistan, “Health”,
was adopted. One of its priorities is to carry out steps
to prevent diseases as a combination of social,
economic and medical measures.
The AIDS problem, which has a priority place in
the programme, has focused attention on preventing
disease among people that represent a risk group. The
implementation of the strategy of the State “Health”
programme must ensure that by the year 2008 95 per
cent of the general public and risk groups are provided
with information on HIV prevention.
In 1999 the Government of Turkmenistan adopted
a national programme on AIDS prevention which
envisages the definition of a national policy with
regard to AIDS, the prevention of HIV transmission
through blood, the prevention of prenatal HIV
transmission, and the provision of all kinds of
assistance and support to HIV/AIDS-infected persons
and the members of their families.
In the framework of a joint project a national
programme on AIDS prevention in Turkmenistan has

29

A/S-26/PV.7

been implemented for 1999-2003. An inter-agency
coordination committee has been established, and
measures have been taken to shift the prevention
activities from the centre to the periphery. The
integration of various State, civil and international
organizations has been increased with a view to
combining efforts for the practical realization of the
AIDS prevention strategy in the country, enlisting local
specialists such as members of Parliament, jurists,
journalists, doctors, civil society representatives and
others.
The health ministry and drug manufacturers have
prepared instructions for prevention clinics, an
information and communication network of prevention
services has been established, and training seminars for
specialists from Government and civil society
organizations and representatives of the mass media,
including young people, have been organized.
Participants in seminars on peer-group methods have
prepared to begin training for high school students on
prevention of AIDS, sexually transmitted diseases
(STDs) and drug abuse and on forming healthy
lifestyles. Extensive information campaigns are
promoted to encourage community education, drawing
on the mass media.
The main goal of all measures undertaken is to
form a correct attitude among all layers of the
population on the various aspects of AIDS and STDS, a
moral and healthy culture, and awareness of
epidemiological security in the medical facilities and
the public service sphere.
Together with the World Health Organization, we
are also dealing with treatment for women in risk
groups, the main purpose of which is to lower the
growth of STDS and drug abuse and prevent the spread
of HIV among young women. Continuous interpretive
work among all levels of the population has helped in
the comprehension of the danger of AIDS infection and
in reaching a turning point in formerly restricted views
on the sexual aspects of the problem. This makes it
possible for us to implement prevention measures that
essentially are aimed at personal prevention and the
responsibility of individuals to their family and society.
Implementation of the multifaceted HIV/AIDS
prevention programme gives real positive results in
maintaining the current low level of the epidemic
situation. However, we understand that the quickly
spreading drug abuse could seriously influence the

30

spread of AIDS in the country and the region, and we
count on the practical assistance of the United Nations
in this aspect.
Underlining the responsibility of Governments
and the importance of mobilizing forces and combining
efforts for joint actions against this human catastrophe,
we also assign to the United Nations and all its
agencies a leading role in coordinating up-to-date,
systematic assistance in introducing new ways of
prevention and cure, as well as attracting financial
resources for these goals. This would play a decisive
role in generating a global reaction to this anguishing
situation of the century.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I give
the floor on His Excellency Mr. Hussain Shihab,
Chairman of the delegation of the Maldives.
Mr. Shihab (Maldives): It is an honour for me to
represent my country at this important special session
of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS.
Two decades have passed since the first case of
HIV/AIDS was detected. During this span of 20 years,
it is estimated that nearly 56 million people have been
infected and over 22 million have already died. Out of
this, over 4 million were children. Rich or poor, weak
of strong, big or small, no continent, region or country
has been spared. This global epidemic, which knows no
boundaries, has become the number one health threat
and a major impediment to development for many
countries of the world.
Maldives, a small island developing country
situated in the middle of the vast Indian Ocean, with a
population of less than 300,000, is no exception.
The first case of HIV/AIDS in the country was
confirmed in 1991. Since then, a total of 11 cases have
been detected, of which six individuals are already
deceased. Although the number of cases may be
relatively small compared to that of many other
countries, the potential threat that looms over us cannot
be overemphasized. The rapid advances in economic
and social development in our country, which have
enabled our people to travel and interact frequently
with the rest of the world, have also exposed us to a
wide range of infectious diseases, including
HIV/AIDS. Moreover, the increased inflow of tourists
and the growing presence of a large expatriate
workforce in our country have also contributed to the
risk of exposure for local people. Another high-risk

A/S-26/PV.7

group includes local residents who work as seamen in
various parts of the world. However, a recent study
shows that sexual behaviour associated with drug abuse
in young people is the single greatest risk factor for
HIV/AIDS infection in our country.
Several measures have been taken by the
Government to prevent and control the spread of
HIV/AIDS. A National AIDS Council and a National
AIDS Control Programme were established in 1987
with the aim of facilitating full commitment in the
prevention and control of the disease. The National
AIDS Council, together with the National AIDS
Control Programme, creates awareness of HIV/AIDS
among the general population of the country. Steps
being taken include conducting awareness programmes
to prepare and enable health workers to generate
accurate and adequate information concerning HIV/
AIDS; training peer educators at schools; and
conducting
group
educational
activities
and
information education communication programmes,
mostly utilizing the mass media. In addition, sentinel
surveillance sites are being set up where laboratory
facilities are available. As a major preventive measure,
condoms are distributed or made available at all health
facilities and pharmacy outlets.
My country, being both a least developed country
and a small island State, encounters many difficulties
in carrying out an effective programme without the
help of the international community. For example,
transportation difficulties within the atolls and islands
of the country have made the cost of the delivery of
services extremely expensive. Thus, the Government is
now forced to redesign the existing surveillance
programme, which is necessary to explore and
understand social and behavioural changes, in order to
properly monitor the impact of the disease within
communities. The lack of human resources needed for
the effective implementation of the programme is
another important obstacle we face. Expertise, such as
epidemiological skills and specialized counselling, has
to be made available through training in order to
effectively implement the national control activities.
Training on clinical presentations on HIV/AIDS, the
prevention and treatment of opportunistic infections,
and symptomatic treatment are of immediate
importance. Resources must be allocated for training as
soon as possible so that the surveillance activities can
be revamped. While we all emphasize the urgency of
finding resources for treatment in order to tackle the

sad plight of millions of people suffering from AIDS,
we should pursue a stronger prevention and educational
policy, as well as effective measures to win the battle
against AIDS.
My country is confident that this special session
of the General Assembly will prove to be a milestone
in the fight against this deadly disease. The final
outcome of this session should be forward-looking,
action-oriented and realistic. It should be an outcome
that all peoples of the world, regardless of their social,
cultural, religious or political differences, can fully
subscribe to, while at the same time maintaining its
primary focus on rolling back and eventually halting
this global epidemic.
If we are to successfully implement the
commitments we make and the goals we will set at this
special session, it is absolutely essential that all
countries fully demonstrate their political will and
commit the financial resources required. The active and
dedicated contributions of civil society and other major
stakeholders, such as the pharmaceutical industry and
the large multinational corporations, are also vital.
Unless financial resources and technical assistance are
forthcoming, the developing countries, especially the
least developed among them, will not be able to sustain
the momentum that is undoubtedly necessary to fight
this deadly disease.
Before I conclude, allow me to welcome the
recent initiative of the Secretary-General to set up the
global AIDS and health fund. We sincerely hope that
the targets set for the fund will soon be achieved. We
join others in thanking those countries, organizations
and individuals that have so generously contributed to
the fund so far. We call upon all concerned to
contribute generously to the fund.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I now
call on His Excellency Mr. Jackeo Relang, Chairman of
the delegation of the Marshall Islands.
Mr. Relang (Marshall Islands): His Excellency
President Kessai Note asked me to convey his best
wishes and expressions of commitment to this special
session. Regrettably, his schedule prevented him from
being with us today. I am honoured to make a few
remarks on behalf of the delegation of the Republic of
the Marshall Islands.
At the outset, my delegation commends the
important role and dedication of Ambassador Wensley

31

A/S-26/PV.7

of Australia and Ambassador Ka of Senegal, which led
to this very important special session, and applauds the
leadership of Secretary-General Kofi Annan. His
personal commitment and the guidance contained in his
impressive report are greatly welcomed and
appreciated. My delegation associates itself with the
statement to be made later today by the Minister of
Health of Tuvalu on behalf of the members of the
Pacific Islands Forum.
Humanity is confronted with the grave challenge
of how to effectively respond to the spread of the
deadly disease HIV/AIDS. While we respect each
other’s diverse cultures, religious beliefs, traditions and
other concerns, the destructive force of HIV/AIDS
respects no national borders.
Given the limited resources of the Marshall
Islands, the lack of adequate infrastructure, the high
cost of drugs and a weak technical capacity to
effectively fight the spread of HIV/AIDS and other
infectious diseases, one confirmed case of a person
infected with HIV/AIDS is one case too many, and is a
heavy burden that places pressure on our already
heavily burdened health-care system. Just like any
other small island developing State, the Republic of the
Marshall Islands — with a population of 60,000
people, of which more than 42 per cent are between the
ages of 15 and 19 — is vulnerable to a situation which
will have a far-reaching negative impact on its
sustainable economic development plans.
The Republic of the Marshall Islands, along with
its neighbouring countries, is faced with these peculiar
situations which require revisiting our major groupings
within our Organization. The vulnerability of the
Marshall Islands to an escalation of HIV/AIDS is
intensified due to the high mobility within and across
borders, the risky lifestyle choices of youth and the
traditional and cultural barriers that make it difficult to
talk openly about sexual behaviours. However, the
Government of the Marshall Islands must be ready to
provide health and clinical services, as well as to
strengthen its public-health systems in order to engage
all levels of our society through education and provide
awareness and prevention programmes, care and access
to treatment.
The major thrust of our effort to prevent the
disease from establishing a foothold in the Marshall
Islands and to reduce the number of sexually
transmitted infections, and of other factors that put the

32

Republic at a high risk of HIV/AIDS transmission, is
focused on prevention, surveillance and management.
The high degree of mobility of populations
requires the development and implementation of
improved networks and technical resources, including
the exchange of basic and diagnostic information
across country borders.
The partnership between the Government of the
Marshall Islands and the specialized agencies of the
United Nations, the United States of America and
Japan to combat the spread of this infectious disease is
highly appreciated. I wish also to put on record our
gratitude to our European Union partners, as well as to
our friends in our region.
The establishment of the fund to combat
HIV/AIDS is most welcome, and I wish to applaud the
Secretary-General and the cooperation and partnership
of civil society, individuals and others for their
generosity. We have high hopes and confidence that the
fund will be effectively utilized through partnership
and effective cooperative efforts. I also wish to
encourage the Members of the United Nations to
further consider and welcome the generosity of
countries that are keen to share their knowledge and
technical capacity and are collaborating with our
Organization and its specialized agencies to improve
the life of peoples of the world. My Government
welcomes the interest of the Government of the
Republic of China on Taiwan and its generosity in
cooperating as a full partner of the World Health
Organization and this Organization.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I now
call on His Excellency Mr. Sélim Tadmoury, Chairman
of the delegation of Lebanon.
Mr. Tadmoury (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I
am pleased to speak at this special session of the
General Assembly devoted to HIV/AIDS because we in
Lebanon are fully aware of the magnitude and
seriousness of this epidemic, which is affecting the
lives of more than 36 million people in the world today.
Lebanon adds its voice to the calls contained in
the Millennium Declaration of September 2000, which
calls attention to the need to make coordinated
international efforts and to create mechanisms
commensurate with the scope and magnitude of this
disease.

A/S-26/PV.7

Our concern is heightened by the extremely
negative impact of the spread of this disease on the
process of economic and social development in
developing countries, in particular the sub-Saharan
countries. This phenomenon, of course, threatens the
stability and security of these countries. Therefore, it is
necessary for political leaders at the international level
to mobilize and coordinate efforts to address the
serious consequences of this disease and to deal with
its causes.
Lebanon, too, suffers from this disease, although
to a lesser degree. We have had 613 cases of AIDS to
date, 31 cases in the year 2000. The first case was
reported in 1984, and this drew the attention of the
Lebanese Government to the need to adopt a national
approach to the prevention of the disease and the
treatment of its victims. This approach led to the
establishment in 1989 of a national body to control
AIDS, and a modest budget was allocated to support its
work. The body’s primary tasks include prevention and
the provision of the means necessary for combating
this epidemic within the framework of cooperation
between relevant Government bodies and associations
of civil society, the private sector and specialized
international institutions. The main goal has been the
pursuit of preventive strategies such as education and
public-awareness campaigns.
I should note that the Lebanese Government
assumes all the costs of treating people living with
HIV/AIDS, despite the economic crisis that our country
is currently experiencing and despite our rather large
budget deficit, which exceeds 47 per cent of the
budget.
The problem that Lebanon is facing at present is
its inability to provide the necessary means and
resources to test the hundreds of thousands of migrant
workers for HIV/AIDS. As a result, Lebanon calls for
increased support from international specialized
agencies to help it address the lack of such means and
resources.
Lebanon appreciates the efforts made by the
Secretary-General to combat the HIV/AIDS epidemic
and attaches the utmost importance to the
establishment of an effective strategy that would not
only halt the spread of this disease, but would also
allow us to address its consequences, especially in
African countries, whose suffering and pain we share.

We also consider that the establishment of a
global fund, in order to secure between $7 and 10
billion, will be a great human achievement for
combating AIDS in poor countries that are in need of
support. This achievement must be accompanied by
measures enabling these countries to acquire
HIV/AIDS drugs at a modest cost. It is only through
coordinated cooperation between countries that have
the means and pharmaceutical companies, and through
the effective intervention of the United Nations, that
we can finally attain this goal.
Today we have an opportunity to prove our
solidarity as peoples and States in the fight against the
greatest tragedy that has affected modern humanity. We
are able to take up this challenge.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I call
on His Excellency Mr. Allieu Ibrahim Kanu, Chairman
of the delegation of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): It is indeed with great
humility and honour that I wish to convey sincerest and
warmest greetings from Alhaji Ahmad Tejan Kabbah,
President of the Republic of Sierra Leone, the
Government and the people of Sierra Leone to
members of this Assembly. May I also take this
opportunity to extend the congratulations of my
delegation to you, Mr. President, upon your election to
preside over this twenty-sixth special session,
specifically convened to address the quagmire of the
HIV/AIDS pandemic. It is Sierra Leone’s fervent hope
that over the course of our session, the Assembly will
produce concrete results that will herald a definitive
global consensus aimed at resolving this alarming issue
currently threatening international peace and security.
In the same vein, our President, Alhaji Ahmad
Tejan Kabbah, conveys his tribute to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kofi Annan, for the excellent way in
which he has made the fight against HIV/AIDS not
only a personal cause, but also a priority matter for the
entire United Nations system. The Government and the
people of Sierra Leone commend his leadership.
Because of the time constraint, I am going to
present only selected parts of my statement. However,
the full text will be distributed among delegations.
The first cases of HIV/AIDS in Sierra Leone were
reported in 1987, diagnosed in the southern and eastern
provinces of the country. Although the results of
numerous studies to determine the magnitude of the

33

A/S-26/PV.7

HIV/AIDS situation in Sierra Leone have sometimes
been inconclusive, there has definitely been a gradual
increase in the prevalence of the disease.
Indeed, many of the predisposing factors for this
already exist. These include the breakdown in civil
society as a result of the 10-year, profitless civil war;
massive population displacements, with attendant
losses in livelihoods and shelter; increases in
prostitution, homosexuality and intravenous drug
abuse; and the presence of troops from many countries
where the problem is much more pronounced from an
epidemiological and socio-economical point of view.
As in almost all other countries, HIV/AIDS was
initially considered to be principally a health problem
in Sierra Leone. Consequently, the solutions to the
problem were concentrated in the health sector. With
support from the World Health Organization and other
United Nations agencies and organizations, the
Ministry of Health established a National AIDS
Control Programme Secretariat in 1986, principally to
assess the situation through sero-surveillance and to
initiate countrywide health education programmes. The
first sero-prevalence survey conducted in the country,
in 1987, showed a total of only 10 HIV antibodypositive cases, two AIDS cases and one death from
AIDS-related complications. As of December 2000, a
cumulative total of 1,716 HIV-positive individuals had
been identified, out of which 608 AIDS cases have
been recorded; 386 of those individuals have since
died.
As the problem is escalating, other adverse
development-related consequences of the disease are
becoming more apparent. The realization is dawning
that if the scourge is to be contained, the determinants
that lie outside the health sector, especially the socioeconomic causes and effects, must be addressed. These
include economic and sociocultural characteristics such
as the extent and distribution of poverty, the
concentration of wealth, the position of women and
gender inequalities; and cultural and traditional
practices that involve both the use of skin-piercing
instruments and contact with blood, such as male and
female circumcision, ear-piercing, tribal marks, gumpiercing and tattooing. The roles of all of these factors
are being taken into consideration in our efforts to
control this scourge.
Currently, the World Bank, in partnership with
UNAIDS, other United Nations agencies and other

34

major stakeholders, is supporting the development of a
multisectoral response to the emerging HIV/AIDS
epidemic in Sierra Leone through the formulation of
the Sierra Leone HIV/AIDS Multisectoral Project. This
is to be a country programme within the context of the
$500 million Multi-country HIV/AIDS Programme for
the African Region. This project will help organize the
response against the emerging HIV/AIDS epidemic and
against sexually transmitted diseases and tuberculosis,
which are important risk co-factors in the early stages
of the epidemic. This is to be achieved through a
multisectoral approach by containing or reducing the
level of the epidemic; mitigating its effects; and
increasing access to prevention services and care and
support for those infected and affected by HIV/AIDS.
The emphasis will be placed on prevention
among young people and women of child-bearing age
groups, who are particularly vulnerable to HIV/AIDS
and represent a large segment of the Sierra Leonean
population. The intention is also to address the military
and ex-combatants.
It is now accepted that, if unchecked, the
continued spread of HIV/AIDS will dramatically alter
the country’s prospects for post-conflict recovery and
development. It will slow economic growth, act as a
further disincentive for foreign investment, further
weaken the already fragile human resource base,
intensify poverty and inequality, place an enormous
additional burden on the Government’s health budget,
reduce life expectancy even further and leave the next
generation of Sierra Leoneans more vulnerable to the
epidemic and with less hope for the future. We now
know that HIV/AIDS is not just a health problem, but
one that cuts across all sectors and is a major link in
the poverty cycle. This link, in conjunction with
numerous others, must be broken if Sierra Leone is to
survive and develop. This can be achieved only
through the formulation of a multisectoral policy, with
relevant
strategies
and
activities
effectively
coordinated and implemented. It is in this light that the
Ministry of Development and Economic Planning has
been assigned a coordinating role in the formulation of
a national HIV/AIDS prevention and control plan.
A major breakthrough is needed in the way
people who have HIV/AIDS are treated. Even if drug
cocktails were free and had no side effects, the cost of
their delivery and enforcing daily compliance in rural
Africa would be overwhelming. What is needed is an
easily administered treatment vaccine that would

A/S-26/PV.7

significantly reduce viral load, improve white blood
cell count and enable patients to feel dramatically
better, allowing them to return to a productive life and
be able to take care of their families. It is therefore
important and, indeed, imperative that all of us
promote clinical trials using treatment vaccines.

international levels. A global commitment is therefore
required to stem this disease. This special session is a
decisive turning point in the battle against HIV/AIDS
because it will allow us to galvanize, intensify and
accelerate international action and mobilize the
necessary resources.

Sierra Leone participated in the summit on HIV/
AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and related diseases held
in Abuja from 24 to 27 April 2001. One of the results
of the summit was the creation of a $7 to $10 billion
global fund for HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and
other related diseases. Although Sierra Leone is just
emerging from a 10-year war that has devastated its
economy, the Government hereby pledges to make a
contribution, even if of a symbolic nature, to this fund
as an indication of our determination to control these
diseases, which do so much to obstruct the health and
development of the people of the subregion.

In 1993, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
was one of the first African countries to recognize the
reality of HIV/AIDS among those hospitalized in the
primary hospitals of the country. My country thus
welcomed international scientific cooperation and was
able to benefit from the valuable support of eminent
American, Belgian and French researchers who, along
with their Congolese counterparts, have contributed to
improving knowledge about this new epidemic. This
early recognition, along with sensitization efforts, was
among the factors that helped us to slow the
progression of HIV/AIDS among the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I now
give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Atoki Ileka,
Chairman of the delegation of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): The Preamble of the United Nations
Charter speaks of protecting future generations from
the scourge of war. However, it is not only wars that
continue to rage in many parts of the world. Today
humanity faces another scourge even more daunting,
the scourge of HIV-AIDS. Indeed, HIV/AIDS has
caused a global epidemic much greater than what was
predicted a decade ago.
UNAIDS and the World Health Organization
(WHO) estimate the number of people living with HIV
or AIDS at the end of the year 2000 at 36 million. Over
80 per cent of infected persons live in Africa. This, it
should be recalled, represents 10 per cent of the
world’s population.
In his excellent report, the Secretary-General
states that the magnitude and devastating impact of
HIV/AIDS have caused a serious crisis in social and
economic development. It is for this reason that,
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 55/13, the
United Nations decided urgently to organize this
special session devoted to HIV/AIDS to study the
problem from all its perspectives in order to confront it
and ensure that the international community commit
itself to better coordinate and intensify its efforts to
eradicate the epidemic at the national, regional and

What is the current situation of HIV/AIDS
epidemic in my country?
The multifaceted socio-economic and political
crisis, which has been worsened by armed conflict, has
led to a deep-seated inertia in the national programme
to combat AIDS and sexually transmitted disease. It
has also led to a deterioration of HIV/AIDS indicators.
The average infection rate of HIV/AIDS is just over 5
per cent, with a considerable disparity between urban
and rural settings, as well as between provinces.
Between 1998 and 2000, the infection rate in Goma, in
the interior of the country, rose from 4 to 20 per cent. It
doubled in two years in the cities of Matadi and
Lubumbashi. As for the capital, Kinshasa, the infection
rate is 7 per cent among pregnant women and 38 per
cent among sex workers. An estimated 1,259,000
persons were living with HIV/AIDS in the year 2000.
Around 730,000 children under the age of 15 had lost
their mothers or both parents as a result of HIV/AIDS
by December of the same year.
In reality, the situation of HIV/AIDS in my
country is much more alarming than what I have just
described. It will continue to worsen as a consequence
of the prevailing state of war, the movement of people
such as refugees and internally displaced persons, the
chronic poverty of the population, food insecurity and
the rapes committed by men in uniform in territories
under occupation.

35

A/S-26/PV.7

The issue of the armed aggression that has beset
my country since August 1998 due to a coalition of
three neighbouring countries must continue to receive
particular attention from the international community. I
would like to draw the attention of the international
community to the heavy price being paid by women
and children — and in particular by young girls, who
are victims of systematic rape. This is especially true
as evidence of the use of HIV-positive soldiers as
weapons of war is abundantly clear, a state of affairs
has been condemned on many occasions.
In order to tackle the HIV/AIDS pandemic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the support of
its multilateral partners — namely, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), WHO and
UNAIDS — has been able to draft a national policy to
combat AIDS. The main guidelines of that policy are
coordination, decentralization, integration, partnership
and a multisectoral approach. My country has also
adopted a national strategic plan for a joint, effective,
broadened and lasting response to the HIV/AIDS
pandemic, as well as to identify main areas of activity,
such as access to essential medications and retroviral
drugs.
Within the framework of our international
partnership against HIV/AIDS, my Government would
like to identify and take advantage of every approach
and facilitate better care for persons suffering from this
disease. My Government also intends to step up
regional and subregional cooperation for a concerted
and swift response to the HIV/AIDS pandemic. The
fight against HIV/AIDS within the framework of
global action cannot be carried out without new,
substantial and sustained resources. We all have the
duty and obligation to mobilize more resources in order
to meet the challenges.
My delegation is pleased that the Abuja summit
on HIV/AIDS recommended a significant increase in
public health spending. We are particularly pleased
with the Secretary-General’s initiative to establish a
global fund to combat HIV/AIDS. We continue to hope
that the fund will, among other things, be able to
support the efforts being carried out by Africa in
conjunction with the private sector to significantly
reduce the cost of primary drugs. My delegation would
like to express its full appreciation to SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan for the efforts he has made to
mobilize the international community. We would like

36

to encourage him to keep the fight against HIV/AIDS
among the priorities of his second mandate.
In conclusion, I would like to thank UNAIDS and
its partners for the work they have done to organize
this session. I also welcome the participation of all
those involved in the fight against HIV/AIDS. I would
also like to recognize the diplomatic abilities and
know-how of our two facilitators, Ambassador Penny
Wensley of Australia and Ambassador Ibra Deguène
Ka of Senegal, and to thank them for the able way in
which they carried out the preparatory work.
At the start of a new millennium, and 20 years
after the discovery of this terrible disease, we must
together take up the challenge. This demands
generosity and courage to ensure that, once adopted,
the draft declaration of commitment — finalized after
difficult consultations — is earnestly implemented in a
spirit of sincerity, truth and transparency. My
Government affirms its unqualified support for the
draft declaration.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I call
next on His Excellency Archbishop Javier Lozano
Barragán, President of the Pontifical Council for
Pastoral Assistance to Health Care Workers of the
observer delegation of the Holy See.
Archbishop Barragán (Holy See) (spoke in
Spanish): In recognition of the importance of this
special session, His Holiness Pope John Paul II joins
with world leaders in their efforts to address the HIV/
AIDS pandemic. In response to the letter addressed to
him by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, His
Holiness has asked me to carry his personal message to
the Secretary-General and to the Assembly. The text of
that message, of which I shall read out a few
paragraphs, is available outside the General Assembly
Hall. In his message to the Secretary-General, His
Holiness writes:
“The convening in New York from 25 to 27
June of a special session of the General Assembly
to review the problem of HIV/AIDS in all its
aspects is very timely. I convey my best wishes to
you and to all delegations gathered there, in the
hope that your work will prove decisive in the
fight against this disease.
“The
HIV/AIDS
pandemic
is
unquestionably one of the greatest catastrophes of
our time, especially for Africa. It is not merely a

A/S-26/PV.7

health problem, because the infection has tragic
consequences for the social, economic and
political lives of people.
“I hail the national, regional and
international efforts now under way to face the
challenge through a programme of action focused
on prevention and treatment of the disease. Your
announcement of the forthcoming establishment
of a global AIDS and health fund gives us all
reason for hope. I wholeheartedly hope that the
initial positive response will be soon be reflected
in concrete support.
“...
“I cannot conclude this message without
thanking scientists and researchers the world over
for their efforts to find treatments for this terrible
illness. My gratitude goes also to health care
professionals and to volunteers for the love and
skill with which they provide humanitarian,
religious and medical assistance for their brothers
and sisters.
“I pray for almighty God’s blessing upon all
those who are engaged in the fight against
HIV/AIDS, and first and foremost upon sufferers
and their families, as well as upon the participants
in the special session.”
On a number of occasions, the Pope has affirmed
that those suffering from HIV/AIDS must have
complete care and must be shown full respect, that they
must be given every possible moral and spiritual
assistance, and indeed that they must be treated in a
way worthy of Christ himself. According to the Pope,
the merciful love of God needs to be shown especially
towards the orphaned children of parents who have
died of AIDS. In response to the Pope’s appeal, 12 per
cent of those providing care to HIV/AIDS patients
worldwide are agencies of the Catholic Church, and 13
per cent are Catholic non-governmental organizations.
The Catholic Church is thus carrying out 25 per cent of
the care given to HIV/AIDS victims, which makes the
Church the major supporter of States in the fight
against AIDS.
Two responses are required in the face of this evil
scourge: prevention and cure. Both are of crucial
importance, but prevention is preferable to cure.
Preventing the disease calls for an honest assessment of
its real nature as something that affects the whole

person. In many cases, HIV/AIDS also implies
problems of existential values; it is a true pathology of
the spirit which harms not only the body but the whole
person, interpersonal relationships and social life, and
is often accompanied by a crisis of moral values.
Regarding the sexual transmission of AIDS, the
best and most effective prevention is training in the
authentic values of life, love and sexuality, whose
proper appreciation will teach today’s men and women
how to attain full personal fulfilment through
emotional maturity and through the proper use of
sexuality, whereby couples remain faithful to each
other and behave in ways that keep them from
becoming infected by HIV/AIDS through sexual
transmission. No one can deny that sexual licence
increases the danger of contracting the disease. It is in
that context that we understand the values of
matrimonial fidelity and of chastity and abstinence.
Prevention, and the education which fosters it, must
take place with respect for human dignity and
transcendent human destiny. They must exclude
campaigns involving behavioural models that destroy
life and that promote the spread of the evil in question.
As many speakers have noted, a very important
factor contributing to the rapid spread of AIDS is the
extreme poverty experienced by a great part of
humanity. Twenty per cent of mankind owns 86 per
cent of the resources; the remaining 14 per cent is
shared among 80 per cent of mankind. A decisive
factor in combating AIDS is undoubtedly the
promotion of international social justice, in which
economic considerations would no longer be the sole
purpose of uncontrolled globalization. The Pope has
urged Governments and the scientific community to
continue HIV/AIDS research. Unfortunately, in many
countries it is impossible to care for HIV/AIDS
patients owing to the high cost of patented medicines.
The Pope reminds us that the Church has consistently
taught that there is a social mortgage on all private
property, and that that concept must be applied also to
intellectual property. The laws of profit alone cannot
apply to essential elements in the fight against hunger,
disease and poverty.
To secure greater effectiveness in the fight
against AIDS, the Holy See supports plans for global
coordination in combating the disease; it encourages all
Governments to make full use of the power and
authority of the State in responding to the epidemic; it
urges, in particular, sufficient funding for combating

37

A/S-26/PV.7

this scourge; it advocates increased classroom and
extracurricular education about the values of life, love
and sexuality; it insists on the equality of men and
women, and on the elimination of all forms of
discrimination against people suffering from HIV/
AIDS; and it encourages spiritual support for those
living with the disease.
It recommends an increased number of treatment
centres, better information and education about AIDS,
fuller participation by civil society in the fight against
AIDS, and greater involvement of people of good will
in combating the disease.
The Holy See also recommends inviting the
industrialized countries to assist countries which need
help in this campaign, while avoiding any semblance of
colonialism; eliminating sexual exploitation, especially
exploitation linked to tourism or migration; a
maximum reduction in the price of antiretroviral
medication for HIV/AIDS; an intensification of
campaigns to prevent the transmission of the disease
from mother to child; special attention in the treatment
of those suffering from HIV/AIDS and the protection
of AIDS orphans; and particular attention to the most
vulnerable groups.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I now
give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Nasser Al-Kidwa,
Chairman of the observer delegation of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): It is
an honour for me to address the Assembly on behalf of
my delegation during this important special session to
review the HIV/AIDS crisis and to adopt concrete
measures to combat it and prevent its spread.
The HIV/AIDS epidemic has developed into one
of the most devastating phenomena of the twenty-first
century. Its impact and the challenges it has presented
are global, affecting the entire international community
and going far beyond the health sector, as it has
undermined social and economic development
worldwide, affecting all strata of society.
By the end of the year 2000, more than 36 million
people were diagnosed with HIV/AIDS. Of these 36
million, 95 per cent live in the developing countries of
the world. The majority of those infected live in Africa,
particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. As the region most
severely impacted by this deadly disease, Africa must
receive urgent and concrete attention and assistance in

38

its struggle to combat HIV/AIDS, which has resulted in
the death of a vast number of people.
The provision of emergency and continuous
assistance is indispensable, both with regard to treating
infected persons and to halting the spread of this
deadly disease. We cannot continue the pattern of
ignoring this problem which faces so many States. In
this respect, we would like to express our solidarity
with our brothers and sisters in the States most
affected, and we call for an increase in support of the
efforts in all fields in this difficult battle against the
HIV/AIDS virus.
Poverty, discrimination, stigma, crises and
conflicts are among the most prominent factors that
contribute to the exacerbation of the HIV/AIDS
problem. They must be addressed in a serious and
thorough manner. It is clear in this context that full
respect for human rights and international humanitarian
law would contribute significantly to promoting
appropriate conditions for reducing vulnerability to
HIV/AIDS within different societies.
Furthermore, a strong commitment with
appropriate and urgent action is required to combat and
prevent the further spread of this lethal epidemic. The
development of effective preventive strategies and an
increase in the availability of resources, whether
human, medical, financial or technical, are urgently
needed. This should be coupled with strong
partnerships involving Governments, the United
Nations system, intergovernmental organizations, nongovernmental organizations and other relevant
institutions.
The Secretary-General’s call for action in which
he proposes the establishment of a global fund to fight
HIV/AIDS and other infectious diseases is a concrete
and effective initiative that would contribute to the
implementation of the goals and objectives of this
special session. It would help to mitigate the impact of
this deadly disease, particularly in Africa.
In Palestine, we have so far registered a relatively
small number of HIV infections. Nevertheless, we have
given the necessary attention to this serious disease.
The Palestinian Ministry of Health has instituted
policies and measures to combat and prevent the spread
of the HIV virus, including free treatment and full care
for the infected, given the small number of cases. In
regard to prevention measures, the Ministry of Health
has conducted health education and awareness

A/S-26/PV.7

campaigns in schools, universities, labs and dental
clinics, as well as for doctors working in both the
governmental and private sectors.
In conclusion, the delegation of Palestine wishes
to express its support for the convening of this special
session devoted to discussing such a serious and
critical issue that attracts the full attention of the entire
international community. We strongly hope that this
special session will be a pivotal turning point in the
international community’s fight against HIV/AIDS.

Furthermore, it is our hope that the immediate future
will bring increased cooperation and coordination
among developed and developing nations in order to
combat and ultimately eliminate this deadly disease.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): We
have heard the last speaker in our debate.
The final meeting of our special session will
begin promptly at 3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

39
