24

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

resolution 3067 (XXVIII) for the efficient and continuous servicing of the Conference in 1977 and of
subsequent activities as may be decided upon by the
Conference, as well as to take appropriate measures to
ensure stability and continuity for the secretariat personnel recruited for the Conference;
5. Recalls, in this connexion, that it noted in paragraph 4 of its resolution 3334 (XXIX) the decision of
the Conference to accept the invitation of the Government of Venezuela to meet at Caracas at an appropriate
date for the purpose of signing the Final Act and related instruments adopted by the Conference and authorized the Secretary-General to make the necessary
arrangements to that end.
96th plenary meeting
JO December 1975

Bearing in mind that Bolivar envisaged a Latin
American region of free and brotherly countries united
by common ideals, a dream which makes him the precur~or of the integration of that region,
Recognizing that the Treaty of Perpetual Union,
League and Confederation, signed in Panama on 15 July
1826, reflects a universalist spirit which is currently
embodied by the United Nations, in that it reaffirms
the sovereignty and independence of States and their
intention "to secure to themselves from this time forward the enjoyment of unalterable peace, and to promote in this behalf better harmony and good understanding as well between the countries, citizens and
rnbjects, respectively, as with the other Powers with
which they should maintain or enter into friendly relations" ,53

31/104.

Recalling that Simon Bolivar referred on several occasions to the need for a possible opening of a canal
in Panama, which "will shorten distances throughout
the world, strengthen commercial ties" 54 between the
continents and promote the exchange of projects "from
the four corners of the globe",M

Admission of the Independent State of
Western Samoa to membership in the
United NationR

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 1 December 1976 that the Independent State
of Western Samoa should be admitted to membership
in the United Nations, 50
Having considered the application for membership
of the Independent State of Western Samoa, 51
Decides to admit the Independent State of Western
Samoa to membership in the United Nations.
I 00th plenary meeting
15 December 1976
31/142. One hundred and fiftieth anniversary
of the Amphictyonic Conµ;ress of Panama

The General Assembly,
Having decided to hold a special commemorative
plenary meeting to pay a tribute to Simon Bolivar, the
Liberator, on the occasion of the one hundred and
fiftieth anniversary of the Amphictyonic Congress of
Panama, which met on 22 June 1826,
Considering that the main objective of that Congress
was to constitute an assembly of confederated countries
which should establish the legal foundations for the
relations between the American Republics and all the
nations of the world, and should serve as "a council
during periods of great conflicts, to be appealed to in
the event of common danger, and to be a faithful interpreter of public treaties when difficulties arise, in brief,
to conciliate all our differences" ,52 concepts which form
the basis of the international law of the American countries and are thus the direct predecessors of the Covenant of the League of Nations and the Charter of
the United Nations,
50 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 26, document A/31/369.
5 1 A/31 /364-S/ 12245. For the printed text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-first Year, Supp!ement
for October, November and December 1976.
52 Simon Bolivar, Lima, 7 December 1824. For the text,
see Selected Writings of Bolivar, vol. II, Vicente Lecuna,
comp., Harold A. Bierck, Jr., ed. (New York, The Colonial
Press Inc., 1951), p. 457.

1. Pays a tribute to Simon Bolivar, the Liberator,
as a promoter of Latin American integration and as a
builder of constructive plans for international organization on a continental and world-wide scale and, in
this connexion, decides to place a commemorative
plaque in the United Nations Headquarters building
as a permanent tribute to his memory;
2. Recognizes that the Amphictyonic Congress of
Panama represents the most outstanding and audacious
unionist experiment at the international level in the
nineteenth century, with oecumenical features which
anticipate and coincide with the objectives of the United
Nations system;
3. Expresses the hope that the ideal of Bolivar will
inspire the establishment of a more just international
order of respect for law, devoted to the maintenance of
peace, the preservation of democratic principles, the
promotion of economic and social progress, and the
freedom of all peoples;
4. Formulates the wish for a successful outcome of
the negotiations for the conclusion of a new treaty on
the Panama Canal, which will eliminate the causes of
conflict between the Republic of Panama and the United
States of America, in accordance with the Declaration
of Principles, signed by the parties concerned on 7 February 197 4, where it is stated that the Panamanian
territory of which the Panama Canal is a part shall be
returned promptly to the jurisdiction of the Republic
of Panama and that the Republic of Panama "will assume total responsibility for the operation of the Canal
upon the termination of the treaty";" 5
5 :1 Article 2 of the Treaty of Perpetual Union, League and
Confederation, Panama, 15 July 1826. For the text, see
International Conferences of American States, 1889-1928,
James Brown, ed. (New York, Oxford University Press, 1931),
p. XXV.
54 Simon Bolivar, "Reply of a South American to a gentleman of this Island [Jamaica]", Kingston, 6 September 1815.
For the text, see Selected Writings of Bolivar, vol. I, Vicente
Lecuna, comp., Harold A. Bierck, Jr., ed. (New York, The
Colonial Press Inc., 1951), p. 119.
5 :; Eight-point agreement signed in Panama City on 7 February 1974 by Mr. Juan Antonio Tack, Minister for External
Relations of the Republic of Panama, and by Mr. Henry
Kissinger, Secretary of State of the United States of America.
For the text, see United States Department of State Bulletin,
vol. LXV, No. 1809, 25 February 1974, pp. 184 and 185.
