A/77/608-S/2022/883

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
28 November 2022
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-seventh session
Agenda items 59 and 68 (c)

Security Council
Seventy-seventh year

The situation in the temporarily occupied territories of
Ukraine
Promotion and protection of human rights: human rights
situations and reports of special rapporteurs and
representatives

Letter dated 28 November 2022 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of
the Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to enclose herewith the comment of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine on the so-called “sentences” issued to the Ukrainian citizen
journalists Arifmemetov, Suleimanov and Sheykhaliyev and activists Muedinov and
Ametov of 25 November 2022 (see annex).
I would appreciate your kind assistance in having the present letter and its annex
distributed as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda items 59 and 68 (c),
and of the Security Council.
(Signed) Khrystyna Hayovyshyn
Chargé d’affaires a.i.

22-26985 (E)

021222

*2226985*

A/77/608
S/2022/883

Annex to the letter dated 28 November 2022 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
Comment of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine on the
so-called “sentences” issued to the Ukrainian citizen journalists
Arifmemetov, Suleimanov and Sheykhaliyev and activists
Muedinov and Ametov
25 November 2022 13:03
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine strongly condemns the shameful
sentences of the occupation authorities in Crimea, issued to Ukrainian citizen
journalists Osman Arifmemetov, Ruslan Suleymanov and Rustem Sheykhaliyev, as
well as to activists Yashar Muedinov and Enver Ametov.
Osman Arifmemetov, Ruslan Suleymanov and Rustem Sheikhaliyev were
sentenced to 14 years in prison. Yashar Muedinov and Enver Ametov were sentenced
to 13 years in prison.
The total term of imprisonment of Crimean political pri soners is approaching
1300 years.
In March 2019, citizen journalists were illegally detained on trumped -up
charges of organizing and participating in the alleged activities of a terrorist
organization and preparing for a violent seizure of power. All thes e years, they were
under severe pressure from the judicial system of the Russian Federation, the methods
of which are torture and psychological pressure. Their imprisonment became a
traditional revenge for the pro-Ukrainian position and opposition to the Russian
occupation of Crimea.
These shameful sentences are a show of strength where there is none, and yet
another manifestation of the disregard for basic human rights.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine calls on the international community
and our partners on the International Crimea Platform to continue exerting political,
diplomatic, sanctions and economic pressure on Russia in order to immediately
release all Ukrainian citizens illegally imprisoned by the Putin regime.
Ukrainian diplomats will continue to fight for the release of each and every
illegally imprisoned citizen of Ukraine, including by drawing maximum attention to
the fate of political prisoners through the initiative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of Ukraine of public advocacy mentoring citizen journalists illegally imprisoned by
the Russian Federation.

2/2

22-26985
