S/2015/144

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 February 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2144
(2014) of 14 March 2014. It covers major political and security developments,
provides an overview of the humanitarian and human rights situation, and outlines
the activities of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) since my
report of 5 September 2014 (S/2014/653).

II. Political and security-related developments
2.
As United Nations and international efforts to facilitate a peaceful resolution
to the political and institutional crisis in Libya accelerated during the reporting
period, the overall security in the country continued to deteriorate sharply. Armed
hostilities spread to the country’s north-west, the eastern oil crescent area and the
southern region. In the east, fighting intensified in Benghazi, causing the breakdown
of much of the city’s public services, resulting in severe shortages in the supply of
food and medicine. The continued indiscriminate shelling and use of air assets
against targets in heavily populated areas and strategic installations across the
country underscores the growing plight of the civilian population and the systematic
destruction of much of the country’s vital infrastructure.
3.
The closure of much of Libyan airspace to commercial flights, combined with
an escalation in fighting across different parts of the country and diminished State
capacity to provide basic services, aggravated the humanitarian crisis triggered over
the summer months by the outbreak of violence in July 2014 and the gradual
breakdown of law and order across the country. A video released by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) showing the mass beheading of 21 men in
February, reportedly near Sirte, preceded by a spate of terrorist attacks targeting
public buildings and foreign embassies, including those of Algeria, Egypt and the
United Arab Emirates, underscored the consolidation of power by extremist and
terror-linked groups in the east and their increased visibility in other areas.
Institutional crisis and uncertainty
4.
On 6 November 2014, the Constitutional Circuit of the Libyan Supreme Court
declared the unconstitutionality of paragraph 11 of article 30 of the Constitutional
15-02365 (E)

270215

*1502365*

S/2015/144

Declaration. The General National Congress had in March 2014 amended the
paragraph in question as part of a set of legislative reforms aimed at addressing
growing public concern regarding the tenure of the General National Congress. It
was viewed as having paved the way for the June 2014 general elections for the
House of Representatives.
5.
Reactions by the main political actors to the Supreme Court’s ruling appeared
to strengthen anxieties regarding parallel legislative and executive bodies. The
General National Congress, whose leadership had by then publicly reconvened the
parliamentary body in direct challenge to the authority of the House of
Representatives, viewed the Court’s decision as an endorsement of its continued
role in public life. For its part, the House of Representatives rejected the Court’s
ruling, arguing that it had been made under duress, while also noting that its own
legitimacy was not in question given that it was derived from a credible and
transparent electoral process which the Libyan High National Elections Commission
had overseen and which the international community at large had recognized.
6.
The Supreme Court’s ruling and its aftermath continued to fuel much of the
political crisis during the reporting period. That was clearly reflected in the attempts
by both the House of Representatives and the General National Congress to assert
control over State institutions and financial resources through legislation and by
making key appointments to the Central Bank, the Libyan Investment Authority, the
National Oil Corporation and the military.
Situation in the west
7.
Following the Libya Dawn coalition’s declaration of victory in Tripoli and its
environs and the subsequent move by the General National Congress to reassert
itself on the political scene, the coalition’s leadership announced the appointment of
a “government of national salvation”. International reactions to the announcement
remained largely muted, as Prime Minister Abdallah al-Thinni continued to be
regarded as the legitimate Head of Government. In late September 2014, the House
of Representatives reconfirmed Mr. Al-Thinni as caretaker Prime Minister, who by
then had effectively relocated the seat of Government to the east in view of political
and security developments in the capital.
8.
Having established control over Tripoli, the Libya Dawn coalition commenced
a major military operation in the Warshafana tribal belt area aimed at consolidating
its control over the city’s outskirts. Weeks of heavy shelling of the Azizya and
Suwani areas between late August and early October triggered a severe
humanitarian crisis, with at least 120,000 people estimated to have been displaced
and acute shortages reported of food and medical supplies. The fighting also
resulted in extensive damage to property and civilian infrastructure, including
schools, hospitals and clinics.
9.
A military counter-offensive by Zintani forces against Kikla and al-Qal‘a areas
in the Nafusa Mountains, ostensibly launched to thwart a possible advance by the
Libya Dawn coalition on Zintan, left more than 170 people dead by the end of
November, with hundreds injured and some 5,700 families displaced. Repeated calls
by UNSMIL for all parties to cease fighting and allow for the delivery of
humanitarian aid went largely unheeded.

2/16

15-02365

S/2015/144

10. The reporting period witnessed for the first time the use of air assets against
Mitiga International Airport in Tripoli, targets in Misrata and the Ras Jdair border
area with Tunisia.
11. Combat operations witnessed a major escalation on 13 December when
Misratan armed groups attacked al-Sidra, the country’s biggest oil load port. The
move signalled the launch of Operation Sunrise, its primary objective being to wrest
control of the oil crescent area from the Petroleum Facilities Guard. Both sides have
since engaged in deadly clashes, focusing on the Ben Jawwad village area west of
al-Sidra. The fighting in the oil crescent area resulted in the closure of al-Sidra and
Ras Lanuf oil load ports and the destruction of 7 crude oil storage tanks out of a
total of 19, considerably reducing the country’s capacity to export crude oil.
12. Attacks on Libyan cultural and religious sites increased during the second half
of 2014. The majority of the attacks occurred in Tripoli and its environs. In that
regard, the United Nations has repeatedly called for all necessary measures to be put
in place to ensure the protection of designated cultural sites, particularly during
military operations.
The situation in the east
13. In eastern Libya, fighting intensified between Operation Dignity, whose ranks
largely comprise elements of the Libyan army and other forces loyal to General
Khalifa Haftar, and the Benghazi Revolutionaries Shura Council, a coalition of
Islamist revolutionary brigades, which includes Ansar al-Sharia. The latter had
brought large swathes of Benghazi under its control by mid-September 2014, but
proved unable to take over Benina Airport to the east of the city. On 15 October,
General Haftar’s forces launched a new offensive and asserted control over a
number of eastern and central neighbourhoods of the city.
14. In the absence of clear front lines, the fighting in Benghazi relied heavily on
snipers, mortar fire, skirmishes and ambushes. Civilians increasingly joined the
fighting on both sides, sparking cycles of revenge between families. Despite their
systematic resort to airstrikes, artillery fire and tanks, forces operating under the
banner of Operation Dignity were unable to take full control of the city, in large part
owing to stiff resistance by the Benghazi Revolutionaries Shura Council. The latter
had also made use of suicide attacks, including twin car bombs targeting Benina
Airport on 2 October, which killed 24 people. In a separate incident, a car bomb
detonated by unknown perpetrators opposite the Tibesti hotel in Benghazi on
10 October reportedly killed four people.
15. Efforts to negotiate a ceasefire in Benghazi have met with little success. On
19 November, my Special Representative for Libya announced that the different
parties to the conflict in the city had agreed to a 12-hour unconditional truce to
facilitate passage of humanitarian assistance. It was only partially implemented and
both parties blamed each other for breaching the truce. Despite its announcement of
a ceasefire on 18 January 2015, the Libyan National Army made it clear that the
measure did not apply to operations targeting “terrorists” in Benghazi, where
fighting continued unabated.
16. In Derna, the Shura Council of Islamic Youth pledged allegiance on 3 October
2014 to ISIL. On 4 and 5 October, it reportedly conducted military parades in the
city in which it displayed the ISIL flag. It also declared support for the

15-02365

3/16

S/2015/144

establishment of an Islamic caliphate state. While not all Islamist brigades in Derna
have publicly subscribed to that goal, the Shura Council of Islamic Youth has since
taken steps to assert full control over the city, including through the establishment
of sharia courts and religious police patrols.
17. Bombings, assassinations and other killings believed to be associated with
Islamist extremists in the east increased during the reporting period. In November,
Libyan army positions and governmental installations in Marj, al-Mekhili, Tobruk
and al-Abraq Airport were bombed in separate attacks. On 11 November, three
Libyan human rights activists and an Operation Dignity soldier were reported
beheaded by suspected Islamists in Derna. On 30 December, a car bomb detonated
in front of the Dar al-Salam hotel in Tobruk, where the House of Representatives
was in session. There were no fatalities, although three parliamentarians were
reportedly wounded in the attack.
18. Fighting between Libyan National Army units and Islamist militants in and
around Derna also increased during the reporting period. On 4 January 2015, a
Libyan National Army airstrike hit a Greek-owned, Liberian-flagged oil tanker,
which was anchored off the coast, after its crew reportedly refused to heed orders
for a stop and search operation. Two crewmen, a Greek and a Romanian, were
killed. Greece condemned the attack and vowed to hold those responsible for the
deaths accountable. For its part, the shipping company rejected Libyan military
accusations that its movements had aroused suspicion, insisting that the ship was
delivering fuel to industrial facilities in Derna and that the authorities had been kept
informed. On 10 January, fighting west of Derna reportedly killed five Libyan
National Army troops and four members of the recently formed Derna Shura
Mujahideen Council.
19. The mass beheading of 21 people by ISIL, 20 of whom were Egyptian Coptic
Christians, triggered a military response from Egypt. On 16 February, a day after
ISIL released the video showing the brutal killings, Egyptian fighter jets launched a
wave of airstrikes against targets associated with Islamist groups. The Egyptian
military stated it had targeted ISIL camps, training sites and weapons storage areas.
A number of civilians were reportedly killed in the attacks.
Southern Libya
20. The military conflict between the Libya Dawn coalition and Operation Dignity
forces continued to have a spillover effect in southern Libya, particularly by fuelling
tribal tensions between the Tabu and Tuareg communities. That culminated in the
struggle by armed groups on both sides for control of a number of key oilfields in
the southern region.
21. In Awbari, intermittent clashes took place between Tuar and Tabu armed
groups following attempts by Tuareg militias to take control of a number of
strategic facilities in the area, including the city’s airport and the nearby Sharara
oilfield. The fighting resulted in the displacement of some 24,500 people, most of
whom were subsequently hosted by communities in Brak al-Shati, Ghat, Murzuq
and Sabha. There has also been increasing evidence of growing mobilization by
both Tabu and Tuareg armed groups in the area.
22. Incidents of random kidnapping, murder and robbery remained prevalent in
Sabha, as tensions escalated between various tribal groups, namely Awlad Suleiman,

4/16

15-02365

S/2015/144

Qadhadhifa and Tabu. Attempts by the Libyan authorities to reconcile the
communities proved unsuccessful.
23. An attack by a group of armed men on a military checkpoint in the Jufra area
on 2 January 2015 left at least 17 guards dead. The Fazzan branch of ISIL was
blamed for the attack, as well as for an assault on a military headquarters in the area
the same day.
Humanitarian impact
24. The humanitarian situation in Libya deteriorated markedly during the
reporting period. Approximately 400,000 people are estimated to be internally
displaced, of whom 360,000 were displaced as a result of the fighting that began in
July 2014. Many have been displaced more than once as they moved from one
location to another to escape the widening scope of the conflict. In addition, Libya
continues to host some 37,000 refugees and asylum seekers of different
nationalities, many of whom are living in precarious conditions.
25. In western Libya, UNSMIL estimates that armed hostilities in the Warshafana
tribal belt area left approximately 100 dead, 500 injured and 120,000 displaced. The
siege by Zintani forces of the towns of Kikla and al-Qal‘a in the Nafusa Mountains
reportedly left more than 170 dead and displaced more than 5,700 families. In the
south, some 140 were reportedly killed in intertribal clashes in Awbari.
26. In the east, more than half of Benghazi’s population is estimated to have left to
escape the fighting. An estimated 450 people were killed in fighting between
October and December. Much of the city’s basic infrastructure is believed to have
sustained considerable damage. Access to medical care remains a major problem in
many areas of the city. A number of hospitals were shelled during the fighting,
including the Benghazi Medical Centre and the Jumhuriya Hospital. Armed groups
also occupied a number of other medical facilities, among them the Hawari General
Hospital. The failure by the warring parties to respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law to protect civilians and allow and facilitate
humanitarian access, including through the establishment of secure corridors for the
delivery of urgent humanitarian assistance, has contributed directly to the
aggravation of the humanitarian crisis.
27. The escalation in fighting has had a disproportionate impact on children across
Libya. While some schools sustained serious damage as a result of shelling, others
were reportedly used as bases by parties to the conflict during combat operations in
the Warshafana tribal belt area and the Nafusa Mountains. A number of schools in
Benghazi, Tobruk, Tripoli and elsewhere were converted into makeshift shelters for
internally displaced persons. Explosive remnants of war remain a major hazard for
children.
28. Deteriorating security conditions in Awbari, Benghazi, Ghat, a number of areas
in the Nafusa Mountains and other areas of conflict rendered them largely
inaccessible to the humanitarian community, including United Nations staff,
consequently limiting options for a comprehensive needs assessment and the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. Efforts to respond to the humanitarian crisis in
Libya are also seriously impeded by the lack of structural capacity on the part of
national authorities to provide assistance or financial contributions, as well as by
recent moves by neighbouring countries to close or restrict border crossings.

15-02365

5/16

S/2015/144

Good offices of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
29. Throughout the reporting period, my Special Representative remained actively
engaged in efforts to facilitate a peaceful resolution to the country’s political and
institutional crisis, and to bring an end to the armed conflict. While those efforts
were initially focused on addressing political disagreements within the House of
Representatives regarding procedural issues and the handover of power from the
General National Congress, the Supreme Court’s ruling of 6 November 2014
necessitated an adjustment of the Mission’s good offices approach so as to take into
account growing concern regarding the possibility of parallel legislative and
executive bodies becoming entrenched in the Libyan political landscape.
30. In a symbolic breakthrough, on 29 September, parliamentarians from both
sides of the divide within the House of Representatives, including a number of
members who had boycotted parliamentary sessions in Tobruk, attended direct faceto-face talks in Ghadames. The meeting, which was presided over by my Special
Representative, concluded with a public commitment to convene a second round of
talks to address all outstanding differences between the two parliamentary camps.
Both sides committed themselves to seek a solution within the framework of a
political process and called for an immediate nationwide ceasefire.
31. By way of confidence-building measures, participants in the Ghadames talks
agreed to work together to address urgent humanitarian needs, in particular those
related to people wounded in the conflict. They also pledged to facilitate, with
United Nations assistance, the resumption of the normal functioning of all the
country’s major airports.
32. In an unannounced visit to Tripoli on 11 October, I addressed the second round
of talks between both camps within the House of Representatives. The event marked
the first time in which parliamentary members sitting in Tobruk had come to the
capital in a formal capacity. Underlining the commitment of the United Nations and
the international community to the democratic transition of Libya, I stressed that
military means could not solve the country’s political and institutional crisis, and
that a viable solution should be sought through peaceful dialogue.
33. In the wake of the Supreme Court’s ruling on 6 November and the deepening
political and institutional crisis resulting from it, my Special Representative
proceeded to undertake new rounds of extensive consultations with all the different
stakeholders in Libya, and with relevant regional and international actors, with the
aim of encouraging a return to the negotiating table and consensus on a framework
for moving the dialogue process forward.
34. A two-day UNSMIL-facilitated Libyan dialogue session, which commenced at
the United Nations Office at Geneva on 14 January 2015, marked a major
breakthrough and paved the way towards a series of talks held during January and
February that encompassed several tracks. Among them was a political track
focused primarily on reaching agreement on stabilizing the security situation in the
country, appointing a national unity government and operationalizing confidencebuilding measures intended to create a more conducive environment for dialogue
and to alleviate the suffering of the population. In particular, participants
emphasized the need to address urgent human rights issues and humanitarian needs
as well as to facilitate the movement of people and goods, including through the
opening of airports.

6/16

15-02365

S/2015/144

35. In a positive development following the first round of talks in Geneva, the
Libya Dawn and Sunrise military commands announced a unilateral ceasefire.
Similarly, two days later, the Army Chief of General Staff issued a statement
committing Operation Dignity forces to a ceasefire. It is expected that the
announcements will form the basis for a more comprehensive and formal cessation
of hostilities between the two sides in due course.
36. Representatives of municipal and local councils convened on 28 and
29 January, and additional tracks are envisioned to involve leaders of armed groups,
representatives from the main political parties and social and tribal leaders.
37. In a significant gesture of goodwill announced at the conclusion of municipal
and local council talks in Geneva on 29 January, representatives from Misrata and
Tawergha agreed to establish a mechanism that would allow the Tawergha
community improved access to Tawerghan detainees held by Misrata. The
agreement also underscored the Tawerghan community’s right of return to their
hometown following their displacement during the armed conflict of 2011.
Constitution drafting process
38. Throughout the reporting period, the Constitution Drafting Assembly
continued to push forward with its work relatively insulated from the country’s
ongoing political and military crises. The current political impasse has, however,
placed the Assembly under considerable pressure to produce a draft text to put to a
referendum quickly.
39. On 24 December 2014, the Constitution Drafting Assembly publicly released
draft texts prepared by each of its eight substantive committees. The drafts appeared
intended to serve as the basis for a new round of discussions with the Libyan public,
which could then inform further development and revision of the text.
40. The timeline for the approval of a final draft constitutional text and the
conduct of the constitutional referendum remains unclear. As yet there has been no
formal discussion of a comprehensive draft.
41. Members of the Constitution Drafting Assembly appeared increasingly aware
of the difficulty of their mandate and the limitations on their capacity. At the
Assembly’s request, UNSMIL and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) organized workshops on multilevel governance and financial systems in
November. In response to requests for additional support, UNSMIL, UNDP and the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) organized a workshop to bring together women civil society
representatives, members of the House of Representatives and Constitution Drafting
Assembly members. While other international partners have provided training
programmes and assistance, UNSMIL continues to serve as the coordinating body
and primary liaison for the international community to the Constitution Drafting
Assembly.

15-02365

7/16

S/2015/144

III. Other activities of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya
A.

Electoral support
42. The precarious political and security situation during the reporting period
prevented Libyan electoral actors from moving forward with preparations for the
constitutional referendum in a meaningful way. As such, efforts shifted to
strengthening Libyan legislation, policies, processes and institutional capacity to
facilitate a rapid response should an election be called.
43. UNSMIL and UNDP continued to support the High National Election
Commission and other electoral actors during the reporting period through technical
assistance, professional development opportunities and facilitating dialogue
between Libyan electoral stakeholders. UNSMIL and UNDP organized eight events
on electoral topics during the reporting period. They also facilitated observation of
the Tunisian presidential elections by 30 members of the Commission.
44. The increasingly polarized political environment has rendered it difficult for
electoral actors in Libya to maintain their impartiality and operating capacity. In
particular, the High National Election Commission has come under increasing
pressure to demonstrate loyalty to the two opposing political camps led by the
House of Representatives and the General National Congress. Members of the
international community have continued to underscore and support the impartiality
and independence of all electoral institutions.

B.

Human rights, transitional justice and rule of law
45. The human rights environment in Libya deteriorated sharply during the
reporting period. Fighting between armed groups resulted in violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law and serious abuses of human
rights, including the reported indiscriminate shelling of civilian areas, the abduction
of civilians, unlawful killings, arbitrary executions, torture and other ill-treatment
and the deliberate destruction of property. The lack of training and discipline among
many of the fighters, coupled with the unreliability of their weapons, has
contributed to the indiscriminate nature of the fighting.
46. During the Libya Dawn offensive into the Warshafana tribal belt area during
September 2014, the warring sides were reported to have engaged in abductions,
detentions and the torture of civilians, as well as indiscriminate shelling that
damaged schools, hospitals and other facilities. Operation Libya Dawn also
extensively targeted homes, farms and shops.
47. UNSMIL also received numerous reports of indiscriminate shelling by both
sides during the fighting in Benghazi, as well as of the deliberate destruction of
homes and other property by armed elements aligned with Operation Dignity.
48. The outbreak of violence in Tripoli and Benghazi resulted in the displacement
on multiple occasions of many members of the Tawerghan community, who had
already been displaced from their hometown during the conflict in 2011. By the end
of December 2014, approximately 1,144 Tawerghan families were displaced from

8/16

15-02365

S/2015/144

five camps in Benghazi. Many are currently housed in schools, rented homes or
other public facilities in Benghazi, Ajdabiya and other places.
49. The situation of migrants, refugees and asylum seekers, which was already of
serious concern before the outbreak of violence in July, deteriorated further during
the reporting period as a result of the fighting. Many faced arbitrary detention and
abusive detention conditions, particularly those from sub-Saharan Africa. The
number of sea crossings towards Europe from Libya during 2014 has far exceeded
those of any other year. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) estimates that, out of the 170,100 persons who arrived in Italy
between January and December 2014, approximately 141,000 departed from Libya,
while some 3,300 are known to have drowned at sea and an unknown number have
gone missing. Of those who arrived in Italy between September and December,
some 48,800 departed from Libya.
50. Attacks on women activists increased during the reporting period, with many
having to flee Libya after threats against them or their children. One activist
reported that she had received several telephone calls from armed groups warning
that if she continued writing on women’s rights, she and her children would be
killed. She and her family have since left the country. Another who had taken part in
a public debate on women's rights received anonymous telephone calls and text
messages warning that she would be abducted and killed.
51. Freedom of expression and assembly came under intense attack during the
reporting period. Deepening political polarization generated a climate of fear in
which people have become increasingly reluctant to discuss violations and abuses.
Media professionals and facilities have also been targeted, with several journalists
abducted or killed, including Al-Tayeb Issa and Mutassim al-Warfali in October.
Scores of human rights defenders have fled the country.
52. In mid-October, the National Council for Civil Liberties and Human Rights
received a number of threats from individuals claiming to be affiliated with the
Libya Dawn coalition. In late November, the Council’s premises in Tripoli were
forcibly shut down.
53. The reporting period witnessed a number of attacks targeting Egyptian Copts.
On 23 December, a couple was killed at their home in Sirte, allegedly by Ansar
al-Sharia elements. Their 13-year-old daughter was abducted and found dead the
following day. On 29 December, seven others were reportedly abducted while en
route to the Egyptian border. On 3 January 2015, armed militants abducted 16 Copts
in Sirte. They were among the 21 people seen beheaded in a video clip released by
ISIL on 15 February. The fate of seven other Egyptian Coptic Christians abducted
by armed groups in separate incidents from the vicinities of Sirte and Misrata
between August and September 2014 remains unknown.
54. Attacks against religious sites were also reported, with several in Tripoli
reportedly vandalized by armed elements. They include the Othman Pasha madrasa
and the Karamanli, Shaib al-‘Ain, al-Manara al-Jafariya and Shari‘ Mizran
mosques. A group reportedly attempted to attack the Darghouth mosque several
times, but were repelled by men from the area.

15-02365

9/16

S/2015/144

Abductions, torture and killings
55. Fighting in Libya was accompanied by reports of systematic abductions,
detentions, torture and executions by all sides to the conflict. In the west, armed
groups, whether affiliated with the Libya Dawn coalition, Warshafana or Zintan, all
committed abductions in the aftermath of the fighting in Tripoli as well as during
the Warshafana conflict. Many remained in captivity until exchanged for other
abductees. UNSMIL also received several reports of torture and deaths in custody
associated with the Warshafana conflict. In the east, armed groups affiliated with
Operation Dignity abducted dozens, some of whom were allegedly beaten with
sticks, hoses and rifle-butts while in detention.
56. UNSMIL also documented several cases of deaths in custody and extrajudicial
killings during the reporting period. Known activists Tawfik Bensaud, aged 18, and
Sami al-Kawafi, aged 17, were among 10 people killed in Benghazi on
19 September 2014. In Derna, lawyer Osama al-Mansuri was killed on 6 October, in
apparent retaliation for his criticism of a declaration by local armed groups in which
they pledged allegiance to ISIL. In mid-November, a source claiming to be
associated with the terrorist Ansar al-Sharia group posted an online video appearing
to show the beheading of an Operation Dignity fighter, Ahmed Muftah al-Nazihi.
Judiciary and penal system
57. The continued fighting across many parts of the country placed further
pressure on a judicial system already battered by a string of attacks targeting judges
and prosecutors. Official courts remain non-operational in Benghazi, Derna and
Sirte. In Derna, sharia courts have reportedly been established outside the scope of
State authority.
58. In a context involving rising numbers of conflict-related detainees and
detainees outside the control of the judicial police, reports of human rights
violations in Libyan prisons increased during the reporting period. UNSMIL
received reports of beatings, torture and other ill treatment in the Jawiya Institution
for Correction and Rehabilitation in Misrata, as well as in the Abu Salim and Mitiga
detention centres in Tripoli. In October 2014, UNSMIL visited the two facilities in
Tripoli and the Hadhba detention centre located in the city, but was prevented from
meeting with detainees in confidence. On 22 October, the Benghazi Revolutionaries
Shura Council reportedly moved more than 130 inmates from the Buhdeima military
prison to an unknown location and declared that they would be tried under sharia
law.
Trials of officials of the former regime
59. The trial of Saif al-Islam Qadhafi, Abdullah al-Senussi and 35 other former
regime officials before the Tripoli Court of Assize, which was suspended during the
fighting in Tripoli, resumed in October 2014. Mr. Qadhafi remained in detention in
Zintan, and had not participated in trial sessions via video link since their
resumption. Eight defendants previously held in Misrata were moved to Tripoli in
November.
60. The trial risks falling short of international standards in part because of the
accelerated pace at which it is proceeding. The prosecution presented its case in less
than one hour, without calling any witnesses. The court has asked defence lawyers

10/16

15-02365

S/2015/144

to present their case while apparently limiting them to two or three witnesses per
defendant. Despite obtaining copies of case materials after some delays, the lawyers
reported difficulties in meeting clients in private. Defence lawyers for both
Mr. Al-Senussi and Mr. Qadhafi have changed several times.
61. In December, the Pre-Trial Chamber of the International Criminal Court found
that Libya had failed to surrender Mr. Qadhafi to the Court, and referred the matter
to the United Nations Security Council. Both Mr. Qadhafi and Mr. Al-Senussi have
been unable to access legal counsel representing them before the International
Criminal Court.

C.

Security sector
Border security
62. The conflict in Libya has left its security institutions with little or no capacity
to secure the country’s borders, giving rise to increased opportunities for the
movement of extremist groups, transnational organized crime and illegal smuggling
of migrants. Fighting between Libyan factions has also sparked several incidents at
or close to border crossing points, most notably attacks on the Ras Jdair border area
between Libya and Tunisia.
Arms and ammunition management
63. The United Nations Mine Action Service maintained a presence in Libya until
the end of November 2014, but has since evacuated its international staff owing to
deteriorating security conditions. UNSMIL and the Mine Action Service continued
to convene monthly international coordination meetings throughout the reporting
period in order to facilitate international efforts to support arms and ammunition
management in Libya. UNSMIL and the Mine Action Service also supported
humanitarian mine action by the Libyan Mine Action Centre, as it oversaw the
removal and disposal of 20 tonnes of explosive remnants of war and unexploded
ordnance from Tripoli and the surrounding area. The Mine Action Service also
advised the Libyan Mine Action Centre on emergency risk education and the
creation of a hotline for civilians, which received more than 700 calls in its first
20 days.
Defence sector reform
64. UNSMIL discontinued its defence sector reform support to the Ministry of
Defence and the Libyan Armed Forces in the light of political and security
developments, and has retasked staff and resources to support the political dialogue
process. The Mission’s defence sector reform staff are currently focused on
engaging national security forces and armed groups to encourage their participation
in the dialogue process, and in ongoing preparatory work on new security
arrangements, including ceasefire implementation, monitoring mechanisms and the
withdrawal of armed groups from towns and cities across Libya.
65. UNSMIL continues to convene regular international coordination meetings on
Libyan defence sector reform in Tunis, and has maintained a good working
relationship with Libyan counterparts in the national security forces and various
armed groups.

15-02365

11/16

S/2015/144

Police reform
66. UNSMIL has similarly retasked its remaining police reform staff and resources
to support the political dialogue process, largely focusing on engaging the Ministry
of Interior, police and armed groups.

D.

Coordination of international assistance
67. During the reporting period, UNSMIL continued to coordinate international
assistance to Libya, including by chairing a number of international coordination
groups in the areas of security, human rights, elections, the constitution and
women’s empowerment.

E.

Humanitarian situation
68. Notwithstanding security considerations, the United Nations country team
continued to provide humanitarian assistance wherever possible, working in close
coordination with the Libyan Red Crescent Society, Libyan non-governmental
organizations and other national partners, including the Libyan Crisis Committees.
During the reporting period, the World Food Programme delivered more than
500 metric tons of food and the International Organization for Migration, along with
UNHCR, provided non-food items to the internally displaced, migrants and
refugees. The United Nations country team organized a number of capacitydevelopment activities outside Libya focused on national data collection and
analysis.
69. On 19 September 2014, the humanitarian country team launched the Libya
Humanitarian Appeal, with its main focus on food, health and protection. Although
some Member States initially expressed interest in providing funding, the response
to date has fallen considerably short of the $35,250,000 requested. The lack of
adequate funding is likely to have an adverse impact on the ability of United
Nations funds, programmes and agencies to deliver on growing humanitarian
demands, as well as on efforts under way towards the implementation of
confidence-building measures. Separately, the decision by the Central Emergency
Response Fund to allocate $4,861,508 constituted an important step towards
addressing immediate humanitarian needs.

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
70. As at January 2015, a total of 238 UNSMIL international and national staff
members and Government-provided personnel were deployed. Of those, 80 national
staff members remain in Tripoli, while among the international component 59 were
relocated to Tunis, 45 to Zarzis and 36 to Brindisi. In addition, UNSMIL has three
staff members at Headquarters and 15 at the Global Service Centre in Brindisi.
71. Pursuant to my request to the Secretariat to conduct a review of the United
Nations presence in Libya, the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat, in
coordination with the inter-agency task force for Libya, conducted a strategic
assessment aimed at providing the Security Council with recommendations for the
realignment of the United Nations presence in the country for the next 12 to

12/16

15-02365

S/2015/144

24 months. As part of that process, a strategic assessment mission deployed to Tunis
from 7 to 13 January 2015, and met with a range of Libyan actors as well as
international partners, UNSMIL and Country Team leadership. On 13 February, I
submitted a special report to the Security Council outlining the key findings and
recommendations of the strategic assessment.

V. Safety and security
72. The overall security situation in Libya remains highly volatile and
unpredictable, and there has been a sharp military escalation across different parts
of the country. Major security challenges include consistent and serious security
incidents involving acts of armed conflict and terrorism throughout the country.
73. A spate of security incidents targeting the international community during the
reporting period prompted the closure of almost all embassies in Tripoli. Attacks
and threats against the diplomatic community and different United Nations premises
included the detonation of car bombs near the embassies of Egypt and the United
Arab Emirates on 13 November 2014, followed by another attack on the Algerian
embassy on 17 January 2015. The headquarters of the Libyan Diplomatic Police
Department, responsible for protecting foreign missions, was targeted by a car bomb
on 27 December. An attack by unidentified gunmen on members of the Diplomatic
Police stationed outside the UNDP office in Tripoli on 23 January resulted in the
death of one police officer.
74. A terrorist attack on the Corinthia hotel in Tripoli on 28 January left at least
eight people dead, including five foreign citizens. Militants claiming allegiance to
ISIL claimed responsibility for the attack, reportedly in retaliation for the death of
Nazih al-Regaei, also known as Abu Anas al-Liby, who was abducted from Libya by
commandos from the United States of America in October 2013 and died in United
States custody on 2 January 2015. The hotel attack marks the first operation
targeting a location known to be frequently used by foreign diplomats and
companies, Government officials and United Nations staff.
75. On 9 November 2014, two car bombs detonated in al-Baida, near where my
Special Representative was meeting with Prime Minister Al-Thinni. On
24 November, a group of approximately 150 demonstrators gathered outside the
UNSMIL compound in Tripoli, demanding my Special Representative’s departure
from Libya. The demonstration quickly developed into a potentially threatening
situation, but was eventually defused without serious incident. Later that day, forces
associated with Operation Dignity launched an airstrike on Mitiga Airport in Tripoli,
prompting the United Nations to evacuate all remaining international staff from
Tripoli to Tunisia on 25 November.

VI. Financial aspects
76. Pending clarity on UNSMIL operations in Libya owing to the deteriorating
political and security situation in the country, interim funding in the amount of
$31,430,300, representing a technical rollover of 50 per cent of the level of the
projected expenditures during 2014, was approved for the period from 1 January to
30 June 2015 by the General Assembly in its resolution 69/262. A detailed budget

15-02365

13/16

S/2015/144

proposal for 2015, incorporating fully any decisions taken by the Security Council,
will be prepared for consideration by the Assembly during the second resumed part
of the sixty-ninth session.

VII. Observations and recommendations
77. Four years since the start of the revolution on 17 February 2011, the country’s
faltering political process has brought Libya dangerously close to the brink of allout civil war. The continued presence and consolidation of parallel executive and
legislative bodies has contributed to the further weakening of the Libyan State and
its social fabric.
78. Notwithstanding the grim realities that now confront the Libyan people in their
daily lives, the start of the Libyan political dialogue process facilitated by my
Special Representative is a reassuring sign that the country’s leaders are showing
commitment to finding a peaceful resolution to their country’s political crisis and
military conflict. In view of the heavy legacy bequeathed to the country following
decades of authoritarian rule, the deep sense of mistrust among the parties and the
myriad of challenges confronting the transition, it is likely that a meaningful and
genuine dialogue process will be complex and fraught with difficulty.
79. Nonetheless, the country’s leaders must be mindful that the alternative to
political dialogue is protracted violence and political upheaval that will only serve
to undermine their country’s national unity and territorial integrity. I take this
opportunity to remind them that the crisis in Libya is primarily political in nature,
and that the solution can only be attained through dialogue and compromise.
80. The Libyan parties must also understand and accept that engaging in the
dialogue process entails a commitment to uphold its outcomes and to return to the
political process and the path of democratic transition. I therefore urge all parties
and stakeholders in Libya to approach the dialogue process in good faith and in the
spirit of compromise that will spare the Libyan people further bloodshed and strife.
The Libyan people will accept nothing less.
81. The United Nations and its international partners remain committed to assist
the democratic transition of Libya. I take this opportunity to express appreciation to
Member States that have committed resources in support of the Libyan political
dialogue and to call on all regional and international actors to lend their unequivocal
support to the process under way. None can afford to see Libya descend into further
chaos and violence; Libyan stability remains integral to that of its neighbours, and
the wider region.
82. While underscoring the need for a political solution to the country’s problems,
it must be recognized that the objective cannot be attained without finding durable
solutions to the long-standing issues regarding the proliferation of arms outside
State control, and of armed groups that now wield considerable influence over the
political process. Progress on those fronts will require major security sector reform
that meets international standards, and the integration of combatants into the police
and armed forces or reintegration into civilian life.
83. Against the backdrop of continued political and military upheaval, I am deeply
alarmed by the growing influence of terrorist groups in Libya, particularly that of
ISIL. As appalling as they may be, the terrorist attacks and other acts of savagery

14/16

15-02365

S/2015/144

witnessed in Tripoli and other parts of the country are only a forewarning of what
those groups are capable of wreaking, and of the imminent danger they pose to
Libyan society and people.
84. Political divisions and disagreements should not be allowed to distract from or
undermine the collective responsibility which Libyan leaders from across the
political and military spectrum share in addressing the growing threat of terrorism
and of radical jihadist groups that have sworn allegiance to groups that have come
to symbolize brutality and barbarity at their worst. The continued failure to stem the
military conflict and bring an end to the political turmoil provides a breeding
ground for those movements to flourish and consolidate their presence and
operations. None of the parties in Libya should be under any illusion as to what
those extremist groups ultimately strive for: the systematic destruction of all
symbols of the modern State and its institutions, the abandonment of any notion of
democratic transition or State-building and the creation of a political system that
breeds violence and fear.
85. In that regard, I urge all stakeholders in Libya to exert every effort towards
overcoming their political differences and disagreements and to find a way out of
the political crisis that has engulfed the country over much of the past year. I also
remind all parties that the fight against terrorism is a collective responsibility, and
that it must be led by the State on the basis of a broad national consensus. For its
part, the United Nations and the international community stand ready and
committed to assist the Libyan State and people in combating groups that are intent
on spreading a culture of chaos, violence and extremism across Libya and beyond.
86. The humanitarian situation resulting from the conflict in Libya and the
increasing inability of the State to meet the basic needs of the population is adding
further to the hardship being endured by the Libyan people. Of equal concern is the
burgeoning crisis of governance at all levels of the State, evident also in the
difficulties and challenges confronting municipal and local councils as they strive to
meet the needs of their constituents, including those displaced by the conflict and
who have sought refuge in host communities. I also take the present opportunity to
reiterate earlier calls for Member States to redouble their efforts towards mobilizing
additional resources in support of the Libya Humanitarian Appeal. That will be key
to enabling the United Nations to urgently address the humanitarian needs of the
Libyan people.
87. The dramatic escalation in fighting and related abuses of international human
rights and humanitarian law during the reporting period is a cause for deep concern.
The Libyan authorities must hold accountable, in accordance with international
standards, all parties responsible for serious violations and abuses of international
human rights and humanitarian law regardless of affiliation. Leaders should declare
publicly that such violations will not be tolerated and that those committing them
will be removed from active duty and held accountable. Detained persons should be
treated humanely and released or handed over to the justice system. All hostages
should be released immediately. Armed groups must also account for the fate of
those detained and under their control who are presumed missing.
88. I am encouraged by the continued progress in the work of the Constitution
Drafting Assembly despite the difficult political and security circumstances under
which it is operating. In view of the key role that the Constitution will have as the
linchpin of a modern democratic Libyan state, I call on all the parties in Libya not

15-02365

15/16

S/2015/144

to take any action that could jeopardize the constitution drafting process. While the
United Nations and the international community will spare no effort in providing
the necessary technical assistance, it is vital that the Constitution Drafting Assembly
expedite its efforts to complete its work within clear timelines.
89. In February, I submitted to the Security Council a report on the future of the
United Nations presence in Libya (S/2015/113). The report covers the main findings
of a review led by the Secretariat and recommendations for the reconfiguration of
the United Nations presence in Libya to adjust to the new realities on the ground. I
identified five priorities for United Nations engagement in Libya: support to the
political process, protection, support to key institutions, support for the provision of
essential services and coordination. While I recommended against the full return of
the United Nations to Libya, I noted the need for a limited but continuous footprint
in the country of about 15 to 20 substantive staff from across the United Nations
family. I trust my report was useful to the Security Council in crafting a new
mandate for UNSMIL focused on the priorities listed above.
90. Finally, I wish to extend my sincere appreciation to the staff of UNSMIL and
the United Nations system for their efforts to support the transition of Libya, and I
commend my Special Representative, Bernardino León, for his strong leadership
and tireless efforts to bring Libyan political leaders to the table.

16/16

15-02365
