S/PV.5940 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5940th meeting
Tuesday, 22 July 2008, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bui The Giang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Kenes
Mr. Zongo
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mr. Weisleder
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Kassianides
Mr. Mulyana
Mr. Trambajolo
Mr. Mubarak
Mr. De Vengoechea
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Laher
Mr. Bayley
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-43361 (E)

*0843361*

S/PV.5940 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.40 p.m.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached among Council members, I
should like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Speakers with lengthy statements are kindly requested
to circulate their texts in the Chamber and to deliver a
condensed version when speaking.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Jordan.
Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to sincerely congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month and to offer your predecessor our gratitude
for his wise conduct of the work of the Council last
month.
Jordan aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representative of Qatar on behalf of the Arab
Group and by the representative of Cuba on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
Today, Jordan would like to be the voice of logic
and moderation before this august Council, as it always
has been. After 60 years of conflict, it is neither
possible nor acceptable to continue trading accusations,
and it is neither possible nor acceptable for any party
to claim a monopoly on the truth or to cast aspersions
on the pivotal historic role that the Security Council
has played regarding the Arab-Israeli conflict. Millions
of people in the Middle East still look to the Council
with hope. They still believe in its ability to exercise
its basic function, the maintenance of international
peace and security, on the basis of objectivity,
neutrality and justice. Once our people stop thinking in
such terms, our ability to keep events under control
will be seriously compromised.
Jordan, under the leadership of His Majesty King
Abdullah Bin Al Hussein, only accepts positive
dealings between and within the parties with a view to
attaining peace in the region in a manner that will
preserve the historical rights of the Palestinians to
establish a viable, contiguous, independent State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in conformity with
resolutions of international legitimacy adopted by the
Council and at the same time, preserving the security
of Israel. That positive option is not an impossible
dream, but a strategic vision that can be implemented.

2

The Annapolis Conference touched on that issue when
it formulated a time frame for realizing that objective
by the end of 2008. Only five months remain for that.
The real challenge that today faces us all is how to
make use of the remaining months of this year to attain
that objective.
Jordan believes that reaching and implementing a
peace agreement between the Palestinians and Israelis
will dramatically change current trends in the Middle
East and will give an important opportunity to change
the strategic situation in the region for years to come.
Failure to reach an agreement will only strengthen the
positions of the forces opposed to peace in the region.
The realization of a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the Palestinian question, the core of the
conflict in the Middle East, is the key to solving other
conflicts and will guarantee security and stability in the
region. Consequently, the Israeli occupation must come
to an end. There must be a just solution that realizes
the aspirations of the Palestinian people to preserve
their national identity through the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, while also ensuring
security for the people of Israel.
Achieving the desired peace requires that all
concerned parties go seriously to the negotiating table
on a clear basis. That should be accompanied by
sincere efforts by the international Powers and forces
to encourage both parties, Palestinians and Israelis, to
fulfil their commitments and to reach comprehensive
solutions to all problems to be addressed in a final
settlement. In that context, Jordan, under the leadership
of His Majesty King Abdullah II, pursues efforts in all
areas to mobilize international support to lend impetus
to the negotiations between the Palestinians and the
Israelis and to reach a peace agreement that will make
possible the establishment of a Palestinian State before
the end of this year, in accordance with what was
agreed on at the Annapolis Conference and with the
resolutions of international legitimacy, the Road Map
and the Arab Peace Initiative, which constitutes the
basis for dealing with every aspect of the Arab-Israeli
conflict.
Success in the peace process requires that bridges
of confidence and understanding be rebuilt and that
there be real progress on the ground. Unilateral
policies and the imposition of a de facto situation have
failed in the past, and there is no reason to believe that
such policies will enjoy any success in the future.
Israeli plans to build new settlements in the occupied

08-43361

S/PV.5940 (Resumption 1)

Palestinian territories, especially in East Jerusalem, in
addition to the expansion of existing settlements, are
totally unacceptable and have been rejected. Those
attempts to build a de facto situation constitute flagrant
violations of international law and of Israel’s
obligations under the Road Map. They will also
jeopardize the peace process and the future of the
Palestinian State. The international community should
intensify its efforts to urge Israel to put an immediate
end to all settlement activities, including their natural
growth. All people in the Middle East should look to
the Security Council to assume its responsibility in
putting an end to those plans.
The situation in Gaza is at its worst ever. We
remain worried about the deteriorating humanitarian
and living situation of our Palestinian brothers there.
Jordan will pursue all possible efforts and contacts
with all international and regional parties to urge them
to work towards putting an end to the suffering of the
Palestinian people in Gaza and to provide the
assistance that will help to improve their living
conditions and put an end to the deterioration of the
situation. The political negotiations required at this
stage should result in immediate steps by Israel to
alleviate the daily suffering of the Palestinian people,
including by lifting the blockade and the closures,
which have a devastating political, economic, social
and psychological impact on the Palestinian people.
Jordan reiterates its full and constant support to
the legitimate Palestinian leadership, represented by
the Palestinian Authority and its President,
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas. We stress the need for the
international community to provide the support and
assistance that Mr. Abbas and the Palestinians need in
their efforts to establish a democratic political regime,
strengthen the work of the Palestinian national
institutions and build responsible, transparent
institutions, including security institutions. The
international community must contribute by supporting
Mr. Abbas in reviving the Palestinian economy,
improving the living conditions and the environment
for investments and developing a free and prosperous
economy. Palestinians are currently in a difficult
situation and need support to establish an independent
Palestinian State on their national soil.
In conclusion, putting an end to violence and
achieving peace is not the responsibility of one party
and not the other. In that respect, we totally reject the
targeting and killing of innocent civilians on both

08-43361

sides, whether Palestinian or Israeli. Such acts are
obstacles to the success of the peace process. They also
foment violence, which leads to more hatred, killing,
destruction and extremism. In that respect, we reiterate
Jordan’s support for the efforts of the regional and
international parties to help the Palestinians and
Israelis resume the negotiation process. We also
recognize the importance of the role of the Quartet and
its representative, Mr. Tony Blair, in crystallizing and
implementing the message of peace that the peoples of
the region expect from this Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Following the Annapolis summit of last November, the
peace process between Israel and the Palestine
Authority gained new impetus in defining the final
goal of the peace process and the path that the parties
should follow to reach it.
However, the expansion of Israeli settlements in
the occupied territories, the policy of restriction on
movement of Palestinians in the West Bank, the
ongoing building of the wall of separation within the
boundaries of the Green Line, the closure of the border
crossings to Gaza, which has created an alarming
humanitarian situation, and continuous Palestinian
terrorist attacks in Jerusalem are impeding the trust
that is necessary between the parties to reach a peace
agreement.
The resolve of Israeli and Palestine Authority
leaders to reach a possible peace agreement, which was
demonstrated this month in Paris during the Union for
the Mediterranean summit, gives us hope for the
future. We remain convinced that a lasting peace
cannot be achieved without negotiations between
Israel, Syria and Lebanon. That is why we welcome the
beginning of proximity peace talks between Syria and
Israel under the auspices of Turkey.
At the same time, we welcome the
re-establishment of diplomatic relations between Syria
and Lebanon. We also believe that another step forward
is the Doha agreement, which facilitated the election of
the Lebanese President and the establishment of a unity
cabinet. All of that is necessary to ensure the authority
of the Lebanese State over all its territory. That is why
we stress compliance by all States of the region with
the provisions of 1701 (2006), which establishes an

3

S/PV.5940 (Resumption 1)

arms embargo on and the disarming of Lebanese
militias.
The Argentine Republic will not tolerate the
activities of terrorists or those who harbour them. We
therefore call on the Special Tribunal for Lebanon to
begin its work as soon as possible so as to ensure that
the perpetrators of the assassination of former Prime
Minister Hariri do not go unpunished, because we
believe that there can be no lasting peace without a
foundation of justice.
We reiterate the commitment of the Argentine
Government to a fair and lasting peace in the Middle
East on the basis of Security Council resolutions, the
reactivation of the regional dimension of the peace
process, the elements of the road map and the new
dynamism generated by the Annapolis Conference.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this
timely open debate on the situation in the Middle East.
We appreciate the fact that non-members of the
Security Council are regularly afforded an opportunity
to address that issue. My appreciation goes also to
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
comprehensive and informative briefing this morning.
Over the past few months, there have been
positive developments in the Middle East. We welcome
the continuing efforts to advance the Annapolis track.
The international community should continue to
support the efforts of the parties concerned to reach an
agreement by the end of this year.
We highly appreciate the active diplomatic efforts
that countries in the region have been making. As a
result of such efforts, indirect peace talks between
Israel and Syria have resumed under the auspices of
Turkey, the Doha agreement was reached in May with
the mediation of the relevant Arab countries, and a new
cabinet was formed in Lebanon.
At the Hokkaido Toyako Summit, the leaders of
the Group of Eight reiterated their commitment to
realizing a comprehensive peace in the region. The
Paris Summit for the Mediterranean also provided
valuable support for the parties concerned.
The situation in the Middle East, however,
remains fragile and much still needs to be done. We

4

believe that progress on the Palestinian track, which is
the core issue in the Middle East peace process, will
lead to peace between Israel and its neighbours and
eventually to a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
in the Middle East as a whole.
A peace agreement between the Israelis and the
Palestinians should be achieved as soon as possible.
We hope that peaceful coexistence and prosperity for
the Israeli and the Palestinian people will thereby be
realized. We call on all parties to make every effort to
that end by showing maximum restraint and good faith
in the bilateral negotiations, to refrain from any action
that would undermine the negotiations and the
momentum for peace, and to implement their road map
obligations such as ending all acts of violence,
terrorism and incitement. We reiterate the call on Israel
to freeze all settlement activities and the construction
of houses in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Japan welcomes the truce that took effect in Gaza
recently through the mediation of Egypt and calls for it
to be observed. At the same time, we remain concerned
about the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
Gaza. The integrity of the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip should soon be restored under the leadership of
President Abbas. We support the reform efforts of the
Palestinian Authority, including the training of the
security forces. In that connection, we call on Israel to
take further steps to ensure movement and access.
On 2 July, Foreign Minister Koumura of Japan
hosted the third round of the ministerial meeting of the
Four-Party Consultative Unit for the “Corridor for
Peace and Prosperity” initiative, with the participation
of Israel, the Palestinian Authority, Jordan and Japan.
The four parties then issued a press statement
welcoming the developments made so far and stating
how they were looking forward to future progress.
The feasibility study on the agro-industrial park
in Jericho will be completed in November and projects
to develop basic infrastructure will move into the
implementation stage as early as next year. We strongly
believe that this initiative will help build confidence
between the two sides by contributing to the creation of
a viable Palestinian economy and will ultimately give
Palestinian youth hope for a productive future.
Japan welcomes the formation of the new cabinet
headed by Prime Minister Siniora. We hope that, under
the leadership of President Sleiman, all parties
concerned in Lebanon will continue to engage in

08-43361

S/PV.5940 (Resumption 1)

dialogue with a view to enhancing the stability and
political independence of the country.
To achieve stability in Lebanon, it is essential
that Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) be fully
implemented. We therefore welcome the recent
exchange of prisoners by Israel and Hizbollah as a step
towards reducing tensions and building confidence,
and extend our sincere condolences to the families of
the deceased.
However, much remains to be done by parties in
the region, including all Lebanese parties concerned
and Israel, in order to achieve a permanent ceasefire
and a long-term solution. They must vigorously
continue to disarm and disband all remaining militias,
to delineate the borders of Lebanon, including the
Shaba’a Farms, and to ensure that there is no illegal
trafficking of weapons. We welcome the recent
comment of President Assad that Syria is ready for the
reciprocal establishment of embassies in Syria and
Lebanon.
Japan decided recently to extend financial
support to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. We hope
that it will assist in the efforts to fulfil its intended
goal.
In conclusion, Japan remains fully committed to
providing all possible support in the hope of achieving
progress in the peace process.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Paul
Badji, Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
I express to you, Sir, my most heartfelt
congratulations on your outstanding presidency of the
Security Council for this month of July 2008. I would
also like to express my deep gratitude to all Council
members for having allowed me to participate, on
behalf of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, in this
public debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.
Almost eight months after the Annapolis
Conference, the holding and outcome of which were
welcomed by our Committee, the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, still remains grim. However, the Committee
did not hesitate to give its full support to that initiative,
which was aimed at obtaining agreement by the parties
on final status by the end of this year. Accordingly, the

08-43361

Committee’s programme of work for the current year,
2008, is geared towards supporting the creation of a
climate conducive to the advancement of permanent
status negotiations between the parties, including,
particularly, the complete cessation of all acts of
violence.
That positive dynamic was echoed by the
participants in the three international meetings that our
Committee has organized in recent months: the
Seminar on Assistance to the Palestinian People, held
in February in Amman, Jordan; the United Nations
International Conference on Palestine Refugees, held
in April at UNESCO headquarters in Paris; and the
United Nations International Meeting on the Question
of Palestine, held in June in Malta.
As a prerequisite for successful negotiations
between Israel and Palestine, tangible changes must
occur on the ground in accordance with the parties’
obligations under the first phase of the Quartet’s Road
Map. Our Committee is seriously concerned over
Israel’s ongoing settlement policy, which contradicts
all of the obligations set forth in the Road Map. The
very presence of Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories is a violation of international
law. The expansion and consolidation of large
settlements in and around Jerusalem, especially in the
E-1 area, raises serious doubts about Israel’s good faith
in these negotiations.
In fact, since the Annapolis Conference, the
Israeli authorities have announced plans to build more
than 3,000 apartments in and around Jerusalem, and the
construction of some 300 new buildings has already
begun, according to reports of the Israeli
non-governmental organization Peace Now. These
settlement blocks, together with the wall being built by
Israel, sever Jerusalem from the rest of the West Bank,
which it cuts into two parts, thus forming an enormous
challenge to the permanent status negotiations.
The Committee calls upon Israel to immediately
cease all settlement activity and to dismantle
settlement outposts. Four years after the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice declaring
the separation wall illegal under international law and
insisting on its removal, Israel stubbornly continues
construction of the wall on Palestinian land. The
Committee calls upon the international community, and
the Council in particular, to take more serious action to

5

S/PV.5940 (Resumption 1)

challenge the presence of the wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.

With regard to Jerusalem, it is the Committee’s
position that a negotiated solution based on
international law is critical for resolving the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and for establishing lasting peace
in the entire region. No agreement that does not
include East Jerusalem as the capital of a future
Palestinian State can help bring about a sustained
settlement to the conflict.

Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Mr. President, my delegation
wishes to express its appreciation to you for having
convened this meeting, which gives the opportunity for
many of us not represented on this body to address the
Council on an issue of grave importance which affects
the state of international peace and security. In this
regard, my delegation aligns itself with the statement
made earlier by the representative of Cuba on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

Israel’s ongoing settlement activity in Jerusalem
and the discriminatory measures taken against
Palestinian residents of the city are in clear violation of
resolution 252 (1968), which stated that
“all legislative and administrative measures and
actions taken by Israel, including expropriation of
land and properties thereon, which tend to change
to change the legal status of Jerusalem are invalid
and cannot change that status”. (para. 2)
Our Committee welcomes the ceasefire
agreement between Israel and Hamas, which went into
effect last month. The parties must do their utmost to
respect the ceasefire and it should be extended to the
West Bank without delay.
The humanitarian situation remains critical. The
crossings into Gaza are not opened frequently enough
to provide the minimum basic necessities to the
population. The Committee reiterates that Israel, as the
occupying Power, is obligated under the Fourth Geneva
Convention to protect civilians under its occupation
and is responsible for providing basic services such as
food and medical care and for ensuring the overall
welfare of the population. The applicability of the
Convention to the occupied Palestinian territory has
been repeatedly confirmed by the Conference of High
Contracting Parties, the General Assembly and the
Security Council.
The Gaza Strip is no exception, with Israel fully
controlling every aspect of the daily life of the
population. Through me, the Committee again urges
the Council to take robust, urgent action to settle the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and to meet its
responsibilities as guardian of international peace and
security by upholding its own resolutions, which
continue to be flouted by Israel: resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003).

6

We should recall that June this year marked the
sixtieth year of the dispossession of Palestine refugees.
Last year was the commemoration of the fortieth year
of the occupation of the Palestinian territories, which is
on record as the longest occupation in modern history.
In view of that background, there is an unmistakable
and pervasive view among many developing countries
that certain members of the Council have been
selective in their approach in tackling issues relating to
international peace and security. The Security Council
has adopted various resolutions on the situation in the
Middle East, particularly resolutions 242 (1967) 338
(1973). The lack of action on the part of the Council to
enforce those resolutions bears negatively on the
credibility of this body.
My delegation recognizes the significance of
recent developments, including the Gaza truce and last
week’s prisoner exchange. We hope that those
developments will contribute to the Middle East peace
process, in which the Palestine-Israel conflict
represents the core issue. Last November, Malaysia
was among those present in Annapolis that shared a
sense of optimism that some progress was possible
towards a solution to the conflict. Developments since
then, however, have dashed that optimism. It is indeed
difficult to maintain the hope that we are nearer to
realizing the vision of a viable, territorially contiguous,
sovereign and independent Palestinian State living side
by side in peace and security with Israel.
In particular, my delegation wishes to highlight
the fact that the ongoing expansion of illegal Israeli
settlements in the occupied territories, despite the
undertakings that Israel has made, including in
Annapolis, is a major impediment to the peace process.
The Council simply cannot stand by idle, for doing so
would amount to condoning and abetting the Israeli
confiscation of Palestinian territories. To prod the

08-43361

S/PV.5940 (Resumption 1)

Middle East peace process in the right direction, the
Security Council must ensure that Israel complies with
the Council’s resolutions.
It is not possible to equate the responsibilities of
Palestinians and Israelis for achieving a solution to the
problem. Israel is the occupier. Israel bears
responsibility as the occupying Power under
international law, particularly the Fourth Geneva
Convention. The time is long overdue for Israel to
cease its policy of imposing collective punishment on
the population of Gaza. Israel should halt all its human
rights violations and illegal actions and respect
international law. In that connection, I wish to recall
the words contained in Israel’s Declaration of
Independence, which lays out the moral foundation of
the State:
“We extend our hand to all neighbouring States
and their peoples in an offer of peace and goodneighborliness, and appeal to them to establish
bonds of cooperation and mutual help with the
sovereign Jewish people settled in its own land.
The State of Israel is prepared to do its share in a
common effort for the advancement of the entire
Middle East.”
In 2002, the Arab countries, through the Arab
League’s peace proposal, offered peace and normal
relations with Israel in exchange for Israel’s
withdrawal from all Arab territories occupied since
1967, its acceptance of an independent Palestinian
State with East Jerusalem as its capital, and its
agreement to a just solution of the Palestinian refugee
problem. That is in line with Security Council
resolution 242 (1967), yet Israel has not grasped that
offer for peace.
This time, the international community must
ensure that the present peace efforts do not fail. The
consequences of an unravelling of the peace process
would be devastating, the prospects for peacemaking in
the future would dim, and the region would sink into
further turmoil.
Ultimately, the current peace efforts should bring
an end to the occupation of all the Arab territories
occupied by Israel since 1967 — the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, and
the occupied Syrian Golan — and lead to the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine with
East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as a just solution
to the question of the refugees on the basis of General

08-43361

Assembly resolution 194 (III). That will be possible
only if the Security Council implements its resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Sadeghi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to join other speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on
your able stewardship of the Council’s work this month
and in thanking you for having convened this open
debate in order to address the grave situation in the
Middle East and the unspeakable plight of the
Palestinian people. I also avail myself of this
opportunity to thank Mr. Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for briefing the Security
Council on the subject matter before us today.
In the period under review, as on every other day
in the past six decades, the Palestinian people were
subjected to the daily brutalities of the Israeli regime,
which has continued to systematically violate the
Palestinians’ most basic, legitimate and inalienable
rights. While the Israeli regime hypocritically speaks
of peace, in practice it has persisted in and even
increased its abhorrent crimes against the innocent
Palestinians and others in the region. As realities on the
ground abundantly suggest, its systematic pattern of
human rights violations and massive breaches of
international law and international humanitarian law
have continued unabated.
The continuation of military operations against
Palestinian civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territories, particularly the most recent inhumane and
criminal Israeli acts against schools, medical centres
and other civilian institutions in the West Bank, and the
imposition of a humanitarian crisis on the entire
population of the Gaza Strip through closures and
restrictions on movement and access of persons and
goods, even humanitarian and medical necessities,
have once again highlighted the gross violation of the
most basic human rights and the fundamental
principles of international law by the Israeli regime.
During the period under review and as a consequence
of the Israeli military campaign, the human and
material losses inflicted on the Palestinian people
continued to rise. A case in point is the continuation of
the brutal blockade of the Gaza Strip that has made the
lives of the innocent Palestinians living there
unbearable.
Four years have passed since the International
Court of Justice rendered its Advisory Opinion on the

7

S/PV.5940 (Resumption 1)

legal consequences of the construction of the illegal
separation wall in the Palestinian territories. The
construction of the unlawful separation wall is not only
an illegal act with dire consequences for the Palestinian
people, but is also a clear indication of the aggressive,
racist and expansionist policies adopted and pursued by
the Israeli regime. Despite the unambiguous opposition
of the international community to the construction of
the illegal wall, the Israeli regime has continued and
even expanded the construction of the wall with full
impunity. It has indeed added to the suffering and
difficult plight of the Palestinian people, who, at the
same time, have been suffering and continue to suffer
from other Israeli atrocities, such as appalling
massacres, extrajudicial killings, home demolitions and
other atrocious crimes.
Instead of heeding the international community’s
calls to terminate such illegal acts, the said regime has
continued the construction of the wall, entailing, inter
alia, violations of the freedom of movement of the
Palestinian people and of their rights to work, worship,
health care, education and adequate living standards. It
has also forced the eviction of Palestinian civilians
from their homes and lands, which has in turn shattered
many families.
The international community must hold the
Israeli regime accountable for its illegal and criminal
actions in the occupied Palestinian territories. As the
International Court of Justice also demanded in its
Advisory Opinion, that regime must terminate its
breaches of international law, cease forthwith the
construction of the wall, immediately dismantle the
structure, repeal and render ineffective forthwith all
legislative and regulatory acts relating thereto, and
make reparations for all the damages that the apartheid
wall has caused.
In violation of numerous United Nations
resolutions and despite repeated calls made by various
United Nations organs and agencies, the construction
of illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories has continued and expanded. That serves as
yet another indication that the Israeli regime’s words
about peace with the Palestinians are deceitful and of
no validity. It was unfortunate that certain members
permanently seated in the Security Council, by
threatening to use their veto, did not allow to proceed
the initiative of the Arab Group to submit a draft
resolution to the Council condemning that illegal act.
The Council should fulfil its Charter-based mandate by

8

taking action against the Israeli regime to compel it
immediately to cease all its settlement activities and to
dismantle the settlement outposts.
We commend the people of Lebanon for their
efforts to bring about national unity and reconciliation.
We welcome the election of Mr. Michel Sleiman as
President of Lebanon and the formation of a national
unity Government. Together with others in the region,
we have spared no efforts to encourage all the
Lebanese and to help them make these remarkable
achievements possible.
While the Israeli war machine is relentlessly at
work shattering the lives and livelihoods of
Palestinians, the Israeli regime persists in its
aggressive policies towards Lebanon — and against
others in the region too. It continues to occupy the
Syrian Golan Heights and parts of Lebanese territory.
That regime is also violating Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006), particularly through violations
of Lebanese airspace. According to paragraph 10 of the
most recent report of the Secretary General on the
implementation
of
resolution
1701
(2006)
(S/2008/425), Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace
have increased to an “unprecedented” level. This is
another example of the Israeli regime’s contempt for
the Security Council and for its decisions.
The Security Council, as the organ of the United
Nations with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, should
live up to its responsibilities by preventing the Israeli
regime from continuing to commit these atrocities and
flout the will of the international community, as
embodied in numerous United Nations resolutions.
Regrettably, the Council has thus far failed to take any
serious and tangible action in this regard due to the
unconditional support extended to the Israeli regime by
a permanent member of the Council. That support
cannot but be regarded as explicit support for the war
crimes and unlawful activities persistently pursued by
the Israeli regime.
The representative of the Israeli regime made
some baseless and unworthy allegations and distortions
against my country during today’s meeting. I wish to
place on record that my delegation rejects those absurd
allegations and distortions. No one needs to be
reminded that these are tired and well-known practices
by that regime and its representatives, intended to
distract the international community’s attention from

08-43361

S/PV.5940 (Resumption 1)

the horrendous crimes committed by the Israeli regime
on a daily basis against the people under its
occupation. Nor does anyone need to be reminded —
including, let there be no illusion, the representative of
the Israeli regime as well — that that regime has
inflicted upon mankind only bloodshed, State
terrorism, aggression, occupation and crimes against
humanity. There is no doubt that the regime’s wicked
behaviour and policies, coupled with its clandestine
nuclear arsenal, have made it the most serious and
immediate threat that the civilized world is facing
today.

the Islamic Republic of Iran in west Beirut. There are
various news reports and numerous signs indicating
clearly that those Iranian officials were immediately
handed over to the Israeli military forces after their
abduction, as Beirut was occupied by the Israeli forces
at the time. The reports further indicate that the
abducted Iranian officials were subsequently taken to
Israeli prisons and since then have been held in
captivity by the Israeli regime. This illegal and
inhumane act runs against the most fundamental
international rules and principles, and also contravenes
numerous United Nations resolutions.

Before concluding, I wish to draw attention to the
issue of the Iranian diplomats and the Iranian journalist
who were abducted 26 years ago this month by an
Israeli-sponsored paramilitary group in Lebanon during
the Israeli occupation of that country. As we have
already communicated through the Secretary-General,
on 5 July 1982, during the invasion of Lebanon and the
occupation of Beirut by the Israeli regime, three
members of the staff of the embassy of the Islamic
Republic of Iran in Beirut, as well as an Iranian
journalist, were abducted in Lebanon while returning
in a diplomatic vehicle from Syria to the embassy of

The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
is of the strong view that the Israeli regime is
responsible for those abductions and for the fate of the
Iranian diplomats and the journalist. We call on the
Security Council to take appropriate action to help
secure their release and their safe return home many
years after their illegal abduction and detention.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

08-43361

9
