14,

General Assembly -

Taking into consideration the subst~nti_al interest_ of
the economically less developed countries m developmg
their own industries as one of the main ways of diversifying their economic structures and developing their
national economies generally,
Being convinced that the activities of the United
Nations in the field of industrial development should
be widened and accelerated,
1. Recommends that the Committee for Industrial
Development should consider in drawing up ~ts programme of work, in conjunction with the functions set
forth in Economic ancl Social Council JT.~olution 751
( XXIX), the following:
(a) To review the methods and techniques of programming general industrial development which have
been evolved by different countrit's and regions, and to
contribute to international co-operation in this field ;
( b) To work out general conclusions 011 the basis. of
the experience of industrial development in all cou~tnes
with a view to promoting the exchange of expenence
in the field of industrial development between countries
of different regions and having differing economic
systems;
( c) To encourage the preparation of long-term economic projections in the field of industrial development,
takin<Y into account social aspects of industrialization in
the e~onomically less developed countries as well as its
influence on international economic relations and trade;
( d) To follow developments in the field of the financing of new industries in the economically less developed
countries and to make appropriate recommendations
thereon;
2. Recommends that the Economic ancl Social Council at its resumed thirtieth session enlarge the membership of the Committee for Industrial Development to
thirty members in order to ensure a more balanced
representation of Member States in that Committee, in
accordance with the principles enunciated in paragraph
4 of the Committee's terms of reference as set forth in
Economic and Social Council resolution 751 (XXIX)
and taking into account, in particular, the countrit's of
Africa;
3. Appeals to the Governments of the States members
of the Committee for Industrial Development to designate
their representatives to the Committee in the near
future and in accordance with the principle set forth
in paragraph 6 of its terms of reference ;
4. Decides to include in the General Assembly's
provisional agenda, beginning with the sixteenth session,
at item entitled "Industrial development and activities
of the organs of the United Nations in the field of
industrialization".
948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.

1526 (XV). Land Reform
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that land reform is frequently one
of the main prerequisites for the general improvement
of agricultural productivity, that the needs foreseen and
the difficulties encountered still constitute a serious
obstacle to the economic development of many under7 See Land Reform: Defects in Agrarian Structure as Obstacles to Economic Development 1 Un(ted Nat\~ publication,
Sales No.: 51.II.B.3).

Fifteenth Session

developed countries' and that the necessary remedies
tn this end have not been set forth,

Convinced that thc> reports submitted by the Secretaryc;eneral for the consideration of the Economic and
Social Council and the General Assembly, in accordance
\\ith J\ssemblv resolutions 401 (V) of 20 November
l'lSO. 524 (V.I) of 12 January 1952, 625 A (VII) of
:?I l krnnber 1952 and 826 (IX) of 11 December 1954,
ancl ('ouncil resolutions 370 (XIII) of 7 September
1951, 512 C (XVTl) of 30 April 1954 and 649 B
( XX ITT) of 2 May 1957, have provided valuable information on land reform but bv no means indicate that
the subject of land reform ha; been exhausted either
from the standpoint of economic development and social
well-being or that of the rnaximnrn utilization of re~onrres,
R rrognizing the usefulness of studies concerning
nhstacles which impede or render difficult the imple111entation of land reform,
l. R.rrommrnds that the Secretary-General, in conperation with the Director-General of the Food and
Agrirulture Organization of the United Nations and
the executive heads of the other specialized agencies
concerned, should continue to study the progress
achieved by countries which have carried out or are
,:arrying out programmes for the transformation of
their af,Tarian structure, at their request, and should
snhmit for the consideration of the Economic and Social
Cnnncil a comprehensive analytical survev everv three
vears~the first of which would be presented in 1962
in accordance with General Assemblv resolution 1426
(XlV) of 5 December 1959 and Economic and Social
Council resolution 712 (XXVII) of 17 April 1959clevoting particular attention to a detailed and critical
examination of the basic problems of land reform in
um!Pr-cleveloped countries, as mentioned in paragraph
SS of the 1959 report of the Secretary-General ;8

2. Further recommends that the Secretarv-General,
prior to submitting his 1Q62 report, should ;;form the
General Assembly at its sixteenth session of the progress
achieved in implementation of Assemblv resolution 1426
(XTV) and Fconomic ancl Social Conndl resolution 712
(XXVII);
3. Invites the Secretary-General, in complying with
the terms of the present resolution and after appropriate
consultations with, and at the request of, the CJOvernments concerned in the carrying out of land reform
programmes, as well as with the Director-General of
the Food and Agrirnlture Organization and the executive
heads of the other interested specialized agencies, to
rnnsider the possibility of:
(a) Undertaking studies with a view to ascertaining
the demographic, legal, social, economic or other
principal factors which may impede or expedite strnctura l changes in the system of lane\ tenure and consequently influence tht' application of the recommendations made in Economic and Social Council resolution
370 (XIII);
( b) Carrying out country studies in order to determine how tax, financial ancl budgetary factors, as well
as the present utilization of land, can impede or expedite
the execution of national land reform programmes in
the under-developed countries ;
8 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council.
Twenty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 5, document
E/3208.

Re~olntions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

( c) Evaluating the role of co-operatives and credit
agencies in facilitating programmes for the transformation of the agrarian structure ;
4. Deems it convenient that the question of land
reform, in view of its importanrc ior the economic
development of the under-developed countries, should
continue to be considerC'd hv the Economic and Social
Council in collaboration witli the Food and Agriculture
Organization and the other specialized agencies concerned;
5. Renews thr hope, expressed in its resolution
1426 (XIV), tha1 existing United Nations organs for
technical and financial assistance all(! any new organs
which may l,e set up by the U11iterl Nations give as
much ;:ssistanre as possible and the necessary high
priority to projects ccmnected with tlw exen1tion of
:1grarian reform prograrnmes.
948th p[enan.• meeting,
15 nrcrinbrr 1960.

1527 (XV). A~sist:mct' to former Trust Tnritories and other newly independf'n! State1s
The GenernJ /lssemhh:.
Recalling its rC'solutions 1414 (XIV I and 14 I 5
(XIV) of 5 Deremhcr 1959.
Considering that the great increase in the mernhership of the United Nations of countries belonging to the
under-developed S('rtor of the world economy underlines the urgency of substantially expanding the flow
of technical and capital assdancr to kss drvelopC'd
countries,
Bearing in mind the estimate made in the SecretaryGeneral's report of 3 June 1960 entitled "Opportunities
for international ro-operation on behalf of newlv independent countrie'.;''ll that the present level of technical
assistance to the newly independent States is wholly
inadequate on the basis of population and of needs, and
that their share of surh aid will need to be more than
doubled and perhaps tripkcl if it is to be brought
roughly into line with that of other Member States
of the United Nations at comparable stages of development,
Recogni:::iny the urgent necessity of taking measures
to strengthen and rnnsolidate the ec<,nomic imlepf'ndenre
of the new and emerging States.
Notiny the findings m1cl estimates contained in the
Secretary-General's report of 22 November 1960, 10
which includes an up-to-date assessment of the sitintion in the newly independent States in Africa and is
based partly on the work of a recent mission to a
number of these States,
Considcring further that diversification and industrialization are crucially important for the economic
advancement of tlwse new States,
Notiny Economic Commission for Africa resolutions
10 (II) and 11 (II) of 5 February 1960, contained in
the Commission's annual report to the Economic and
Social Council, 11 and Council rcsnlution 7(,8 (XXX)
of 21 July 1960.
O 0t]icial Records nf the Economic and Social Council, Thirtieth Session, Annexes. agenda items 2 and 4, document E/3387
:and And.1.
lO Official Records of the Gl'nera/ Assembly, Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda items 28, 30, 31 and 32, document A/4585.
11 O(ficial Records of the Ewnomic and Social Council, Tl:irtieth Session, Supplement No. JO (E/3320).

15

11' rlcoining the results of the recent United Nat ions
Pledging Conference, which indicate a substantial
inrrease in the resources of the Expanded Programme
of Tcrhnical Assistance and the Special Fund for the
year 1961, and the decision of the Techniral Assistance
(ommittee to increase substantially the assistanrc to thl'
newly indqwndent and emnging States.
1. Decides, within the context of an all-rmmrl c:,;
pa1i,;ion of aid, to increase technical assistance to ncwlv
independent and emerging States to a level c,m1111cn
surak with their pressing nerds and so ensure cquitalik
distribution of United N"ations aid, in such a wav that
no under-drveloped country suffers any curtailrn~nt in
th<' :issistance it was receiving or is altogether deprived
t1f the cvcnt11al increasl' of that assistance as a consl'
qtwnce of increased contrihutions to the prograrn111e,
<1f tPrhnical assistance;
' Notes with satisfaction the proposals of t lw
~,ecn·tan· General, co11tained in the report of 22 Nov
,·111lwr I lifiO. for increased assistanre tn tl1es,· State,
from the regular budget 0f the UPiterl Nations;
3. Urycs the economically advanred c:mntries tu
rontim1t· to render, and increase, effective financial and
terhnical assistance to those States through multilateral
:1nd bilateral rhannels with no conditions attached
prejudicial to their political and economic sovcreigntv;
4. lm•ites the Econo1,1ic and Soria] Council to
enc onrage and facilit'atc the provision throug-h the appropriate international organs~including the United
Nations programmes of technical co-operation. the
J,:xpancled Programme of Technical J\ssist;i11rc :111d the
Special Fund~-in co-operation with and, wltcrcver apprnpriate. through the Economic Commission for Africa
and other regional economic commissions. of assistance
requested by Governments for:
(a) Surveys of mineral, hyclroelect ric, fuel and ot hn
natural resources of their countries;
( b) Specific inquiries and rC'ports, where eronomic
development programmes exist or ar<' lieirn2, prqiarcd.
on the needs for equipment and machinery for specific
industries and for other sectors of the eronomy :
( c) The establishment, where economic development
prog-rammes do not yet exist, ef aclvisorv groups of
experts to assist in the preparation of eronomic ckvelop111ent programmes and thc cletcrrnination of investment
requirements and priorities. and to render other :1dvison
.,en-iccs as may he required;
( d) A reel crated programmes for training in practical
methods and techniques of economic development prog;ramming and related subjects, inrluding fisral policy
and lllanagement, public finance and puhlic adniinistra1inn through·
( i) The use of apprnpriate existing institutions in
individual couJ1tries;
, ii) The crC'ation of regional and sub-regional training institutes or courses serving several eo1111tries;
(iii) The organi7ation of seminars on specific subjects
of imriiediatc and prartical valut> to tlw rr 11mtrics
concernt>d;
(iv) The granting of increased fellowships and scholarships and urgent provision of facilities fnr
in-service training;
5. Requests the Economic and Social Council t"
review at its thirtv-second session in the light infer
alia of the reports' of the United Nations openitional
