323 (IV). Social advancement in Trust
Territories

324 (IV). Educational advancement in
Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Having • taken note of the conclusions 3 and
recommendations of the Trusteeship Council on
the social advancement of the following Trust
Territories: the Cameroons and Togoland under
British administration, the Cameroons and Togoland under French administration, Western Samoa, New Guinea and Nauru, and of the conclusions and observations of its Visiting Mission
to East Africa, incorporated in the report4 of the
Trusteeship Council,

The General Assenibly,
Considering the desirability of including in the
school curricula in the Trust Territories instruction on the United Nations, the International
Trusteeship System and the special status of
Trust Territories,
Having examined the conclusions 5 and recommendations of the Trusteeship Council with respect to educational advancement in the Trust
Territories of the Cameroons and Togoland under
British administration, the Cameroons and Togoland under French administration, Western Samoa, New Guinea and Nauru,
Considering resolutions 36 (III) 6 of 8 July
1948, 83 (IV) 7 of 9 February 1949 and 110
(V) 8 of 19 July 1949 adopted by the Trusteeship
Council, concerning the implementation of which
the Assembly desires more detailed information,

Recalling that one of the basic objectives of
the International Trusteeship System is to encourage respect for and observance of human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Resolves:
1. To express its satisfaction at the recommendations of the Trusteeship Council concerning
the absolute prohibition of such uncivilized practices as child marriage in the Trust Territories
where such practices exist ;
2. To recommend the adoption of strong and
effective measures to abolish immediately the corporal punishment of whipping in Ruandi-Urundi,
o.1nd to give full support to the recommendation of
the Trusteeship Council that corporal punishment should be abolished immediately in the
Cameroons and Togoland under British administration and that corporal punishment should be
formally abolished in New Guinea ;
3. To recommend to the Trusteeship Council
the adoption of suitable measures for solving in
a broad and humanitarian spirit such important
social problems as migrant labour and penal sanctions for breach of labour contracts by indigenous
inhabitants ;
4. To recommend the abolition of discriminatory laws and practices contrary to the principles
of the Charter and the Trusteeship Agreements,
in all Trust Territories in which such laws and
practices sti 11 exist ;

5. To recommend that the Trusteeship Council
should examine all laws, statutes and ordinances,
as well as their application, in the Trust Territories and make positive recommendations to thr
Administering Authorities concerned with a view
to the abolition of all discriminatorv prnvisions
or practices ;
"
6. To ask the Trusteeship Council to inclmk
in its annual reports to the General Assembly a
special section dealing with the implementation
by the Administering Authorities of its r<'rotnmendations concerning the irnprovc·nwnt of social
conditions in Trust Territories, the abc,litinn of
corporal punishment and, in particnbr, !lie action
taken in pursuance of the recon1menrbtm11 ccr>tained in paragraph 5 above.

2. To draw the attention of the Trusteeship
Council to the necessity of requesting the Administering Authorities to study the possibility of
including in the curricula of schools in the Trust
Territories instruction on the United Nations, the
International Trusteeship System and the special
status of Trust Territories, and to this end to
make use, if they so desire, of the co-operation
that may be furnished uy the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
3. To express its hope that, in the spirit of
the Trusteeship Council's recommendations for
an increase in the budgetary provisi, · ;s for education in the Trust Territories, the Administering
Authorities will give, in preparing their budgets,
special prominence to improving and increasing
educational facilities;
4. To express the opinion that the wider expansion and more rapid development of the
present facilities for the higher education of indigenous students in the Trust Territories constitute an essential contribution to the progress
towards autonomy or independence of the inhabitants of these Territories;

5. To congratulate the Administering Authorities which have adopted measures for the establishment in Africa of eclncational institutions of
university standard and systems of scholarships
allowing indigenous stndents to complete their
university training in othtr countries, and to
recommend to the Trusteeship Council tk1t it
call npun those Admin, ,1er1l!,; Authorities tG inlensify such rneasun·s ;ml! that it ml! upon the
Administering .\11tl,orities whicl1 111, t,; the mesent time have not applied anv of tlwi,c ,nea~ures
tn adopt them as soon as pos~ihle ;

240th ;~lenary meetin,1,
15 N,,vrm/1, r f<)f()
3

Resolves:
1. To recommend to the Trusteeship Council
to continue its programme for developing and promoting in the Trust Territories the diffusion of
information on the United Nations and on the
International Trusteeship System and to make the
necessarv recommendations to the Administering
Authorities;

See Official Records of the fourth cession of 1 .':r Gen•

eral Assembly, Supplement No. 4.
• Ibid.
5 Ibid.
8
See Resolutions adopted hy the Trusteeship Council
during its third session, pag~ 1.

'Se~ Official Ruords d the fourth sessiori ,;/ thr
Trusteeship Council, Resolutions, page 26.
8
See Official Records of the fifth session of the Trus1.,c,hip Council, Htcollltiunc,, page 16.

39
