V.

127

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

purposes set out in the Charter, in particular in Article 55,
to create conditions of stability, well-being and economic
and social progress, and to promote the development of
developing countries,
Recognizing that the increasing complexity of the interrelated issues of money, finance, externa! debt, trade, commodities and development calls for a universal, more comprehensive and continuing dialogue to address these issues
on the basis of common interest, equality, nondiscrimination and collective responsibility and to the
mutual benefit of ali countries,
A ware that both national and international policies
should be growth-oriented and mutually reinforcing in order to make interdependence, in contrast to the experience
of the recent past, a vehicle for transmitting and cumulating positive impulses and benefits for ali countries, with
special emphasis on the development needs of developing
countries,
Reiterating that the alleviation of the most urgent economic problems of developing countries is a major factor
in ensuring international economic stability and a better
political climate,
Calling for the reinforcement of multilateral cooperation in promoting a common understanding and determining practical approaches and measures to deal with
problems of growth, development, in particular of developing countries, and other international economic issues,
Recognizing that the strengthening of co-operation
within the United Nations system, including its operational activities, would help to create a more predictable
and more supportive international economic environment
and increase confidence in international economic relations designed to bring about a healthy, secure and equitable future for the world economy,
Reaffirming that regional and subregional economic integration could in appropriate cases serve as an essential
element in strengthening economic and technical cooperation, in particular in the sphere of science and technology for development, as it contributes to a more predictable international economic environment,
l. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
a concept of international economic security; 3
2. Emphasizes that the Charter of the United Nations
provides a basis for conducting relations among States in a
manner that would promote the shared objective of revitalizing development, growth and international trade in a
more predictable and supportive environment through
multilateral co-operation and thus also promote peace,
security and stability;
3. Expresses its conviction that the search for international economic security should be based on a constructive, universal, more comprehensive and continued dialogue within the United Nations and the United Nations
system aimed at developing practical approaches and
measures that contribute to improvements in the international economic system through reform and strengthening
of the framework of principies and rules governing trade,
monetary and financial relations within which countries
operate;
4. Recognizes that the United Nations should make a
greater contribution to the efforts of Governments to improve their capacity to manage the interrelationships
among different economies and the linkages between various sectors and issues;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in monitoring the
development of international and multilateral economic
co-operation, to continue his efforts to enhance the

capacity ofthe United Nations to focus on current and potential problem areas in the world economy in order to assist Governments in taking concerted measures, in particular to solve development problems of developing
countries;
6. A/so requests the Secretary-General to consult with
eminent persons representing ali regions on principies of
international economic security in the light of the present
resolution, keeping in mind the existing mandates on development and international economic co-operation, and
to submit the findings thereon to the General Assembly at
its forty-fourth session through the Economic and Social
Council.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987
42/166.

Assistance to the Palestinian people

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/ 181 of 8 December 1986,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1987/77 of 8 July 1987,
Recalling the Programme of Action for the Achievement of Palestinian Rights, adopted by the International
Conference on the Question of Palestine, 5
Aware of the need to provide economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people,
Noting the meeting on assistance to the Palestinian people, held at Geneva on 19 June 1987 in response to resolution 41/181,
l. Takes note with appreciation ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on assistance to the Palestinian people; 6
2. Welcomes the preparation of the programme of economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people set
out in the report of the Secretary-Genera1;7
3. Requests the Secretary-General to develop the programme and seek its early implementation in close cooperation with the Palestine Liberation Organization and
to co-ordinate the activities envisaged by various organizations of the United Nations system within the framework of the programme;
4. A/so requests the Secretary-General to mobilize resources for the programme in close co-operation with the
Palestine Liberation Organization;
5. Urges the international community, the United Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to disburse their aid or any
other forms of assistance to the occupied Palestinian territories solely for the benefit of the Palestinian people and
in a manner that will not serve to prolong the Israelí occupation;
6. Requests the international community, the United
Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to sustain and increase their
assistance to the Palestinian people in co-operation with
the Palestine Liberation Organization;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session, through the

5 Report of the lnternational Conference on the Question of Palestine,
Geneva, 29 August-7 September /983 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.83.1.21), chap. l, sect. B.
6 A/42/289-E/\987/86 and Add.l and 2 and Add.2/Corr.l.
7 A/42/289-E/1987/86, CJ.nnex.

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

128

Economic and Social Council, on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/167.

World Tourism Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/156 and 32/157 of
19 December 1977, 33/122 of 19 December 1978 and
34/134 of 14 December 1979 concerning the World Tourism Organization, and, in particular, resolution 40/172 of
17 December 1985 in which it requested the SecretaryGeneral of the World Tourism Organization to submit to
the General Assembly, through the Economic and Social
Council, a report on the progress made in the implementation of the Manila Declaration 8 and the Acapulco Document9 on World Tourism,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of the
World Tourism Organization, 10
Requests the Secretary-General of the World Tourism
Organization to submit to the General Assembly at its
forty-fourth session, through the Economic and Social
Council, a report on the further implementation of resolution 40/172.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/168.

Fortieth anniversary of the World Health Organization

The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1987 /76 of 8 July 1987,
Noting that the World Health Organization intends to
celebrate its fortieth anniversary during 1988 in accordance with World Health Assembly resolution
WHA40.36, of 15 May 1987, 11
Noting a/so that the World Health Organization will use
the occasion of its fortieth anniversary as a global opportunity to inform and mobilize all concerned with a view to
achieving the goal of health for all by the year 2000 in an
atmosphere of goodwill, consensus and mutual respect,
Expressing its appreciation for the important achievements of the World Health Organization in fulfilling its
constitutional mandate to direct and co-ordinate international health work,
Decides to observe, at its forty-third session, the fortieth
anniversary of the World Health Organization in a manner befitting its achievements and future role in international health.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

8 A/36/236, annex, appendix 1.
9 A/38/182-E/1983/66, annex, appendix.
10 A/42/227-E/1987 /65.
11 See World Health Organization, Fortieth

Geneva, 4-15 May 1987.
(WHA40/1987/REC/I\.

Resolutions

World Health Assembly.
and Decisions. Annexe.1

42/169.

International decade for natural disaster reduction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3345 (XXIX) of 17 December
1974, in which it requested the Secretary-General to take
appropriate measures to provide facilities for co-ordinated
multidisciplinary research also at the regional leve! aimed
at synthesizing, integrating and advancing existing knowledge on the interrelationships between population, resources, environment and development, in order to assist
Member States, particularly the developing countries, and
the organizations ofthe United Nations system in their efforts to cope with the complex and multidimensional
problems related to this field in the context of social and
economic development,
Noting with appreciation the important contribution
made by the World Commission on Environment and Development, as reflected in its report, 12 which calls for new
national and international approaches in dealing with the
various factors affecting the environment, including natural disasters,
Considering that natural disasters, such as earthquakes,
windstorms (cyclones, hurricanes, tornadoes, typhoons),
tsunamis, floods, landslides, volcanic eruptions, wildfires
and other calamities of natural origin, have claimed about
3 million lives worldwide in the past two decades, adversely affected the lives of at least 800 million more people and resulted in immediate damages exceeding $23 billion,
Considering also that, among disasters of natural origin,
drought and desertification are resulting in enormous
damage, particularly in Africa, where the recent drought
threatened the lives of more than 20 million people and
uprooted millions of others,
Recognizing that the effects of such disasters may damage very severely the fragile economic infrastructure of developing countries, especially the least developed, landlocked and island developing countries, and thus hamper
their development process,
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General on the
work of the Organization, particularly the section concerning natural disasters and the merits of proposals that
have been made to stimulate international study, planning
and preparations on this subject over the next decade under the auspices of the United Nations, 13
Also taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General concerning the existing mechanisms
and arrangements within the United Nations system for
disaster and emergency assistance and co-ordination, 14
Recognizing the responsibility ofthe United Nations system for promoting international co-operation in the study
of natural disasters of geophysical origin and in the development of techniques to mitigate risks arising therefrom,
as well as for co-ordinating disaster relief, preparedness
and prevention, including prediction and early warning,
Convinced that concerted international action for the reduction of natural disasters over the course of the 1990s
would give genuine ímpetus to a series of concrete measures at the national, regional and international levels,
Recognizing that the primary responsibility for defining
t he general goals and directions of efforts undertaken in

12 See A/42/427, annex.
1.l See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session.

Sup'flement No. J (A/42/1), sect. II.
t, A/42/657
