S/PV.9226

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9226th meeting

Tuesday, 20 December 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2022/892)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-75859 (E)
*2275859*

S/PV.9226

MONUSCO

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2022/892)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2022/960 and S/2022/964, which contain
the texts of two draft resolutions.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/892, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolutions before it. I shall first put to the vote
the draft resolution contained in document S/2022/960,
submitted by France.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, France, Gabon, Ghana,
India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, Russian
Federation, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2666 (2022).
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2022/964, submitted
by France.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, France, Gabon, Ghana,
India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, Russian
Federation, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
2/7

20/12/2022

of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2667 (2022).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): The United
States voted in favour of resolution 2666 (2022) so that
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
can continue its laudable efforts to protect civilians,
deliver humanitarian assistance and support the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
on its path towards peace and stability. As the largest
single-country financial contributor to the Mission, our
commitment to MONUSCO is undeniable.
Beyond that commitment, however, the United
States voted in favour of the resolution because it
clearly maintains human rights as a priority task for
MONUSCO. Human rights monitoring and reporting
are critical tasks for MONUSCO. The resolution will
ensure that MONUSCO can continue those important
functions, especially as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo moves into a pivotal election period.
The United States is also pleased to see the
mandate’s stronger focus on strategic communications
and countering misinformation and disinformation,
vital functions that MONUSCO and the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo should
undertake jointly.
Crucially, the resolution also urges regional
military actors and the East African Community
regional force to coordinate and deconflict operations
with MONUSCO. It also demands an end to State
support for armed groups, including Rwanda’s support
to the Mouvement du 23 mars. The United States urges
all regional actors to heed that call.
Just as important, the United States applauds the
mandate’s clear reiteration of MONUSCO’s obligation
to protect Goma and other population centres from
armed groups, either unilaterally or in support of
Congolese forces.
While we feel strongly that MONUSCO remains an
important element of the security infrastructure of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we recognize that it
22-75859

20/12/2022

MONUSCO

cannot remain in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
forever. As such, the United States appreciates the
resolution’s candid acknowledgment of MONUSCO’s
challenges. And we look forward to receiving options
for further adapting the Mission’s configuration. But
let me be clear: any further steps towards MONUSCO’s
eventual drawdown should be agreed upon jointly by
the United Nations and Democratic Republic of the
Congo officials, in liaison with civil society, and should
avoid exposing vulnerable populations to further harm.
A hasty withdrawal, or a withdrawal that is not linked
to meaningful improvements in political and security
conditions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
would only undermine the progress that the country
and MONUSCO have achieved together.
We applaud Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Keita and her team for continuing to implement
MONUSCO’s mandate in the face of great challenges,
and we look forward to continuing our strong support
to the Mission over the coming year.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Norway strongly
supports the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and views its role in protecting civilians
in the Democratic Republic of Congo as critical. We
therefore voted in favour of resolution 2666 (2022).
MONUSCO has for many years played an
important role in upholding respect for human rights
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Norway
fully supports the regional initiatives to bring peace
and development to the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We look to MONUSCO to play a key
role in coordinating and supporting the many efforts to
stabilize the region. And in order to do that effectively,
we trust that MONUSCO will continue to give strong
attention to promoting and protecting human rights on
the ground.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation supported
resolution 2666 (2022), submitted by our French
colleagues, on extending the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
We note the work done by the penholders on the file,
primarily to take into account the priorities of the
host country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We welcome the shortened text and its more correct
focus on current problems. At this crucial time for the

S/PV.9226

Democratic Republic of the Congo, when the situation
in the east of the country is very bad, we believe it is
important for the Security Council to unanimously
reaffirm its support for the efforts of both Kinshasa
and MONUSCO. Nonetheless, the resolution we
adopted today has a few shortcomings, which to a large
extent affect not only the Democratic Republic of the
Congo but also situations in other countries where
United Nations peacekeeping operations are deployed.
What we believe is chiefly at issue is the Council’s
regrettable practice of paying greater attention to
peacekeeping missions’ secondary tasks. In practice,
when various States are dealing with tragic escalations
of armed conflict, civilians are dying and the key
question should be about what the Security Council can
do to help resolve the situation, our main discussions
are focused on Blue Helmets’ duties in the areas of
human rights monitoring, gender analysis and other,
even less core issues. While such issues may well be
important in their own way, these discussions obscure
the Security Council’s main task, as envisaged by the
Charter of the United Nations, which is the maintenance
of international peace and security and making political
decisions aimed at settling conflicts. We call on our
colleagues to bear that in mind, including with regard
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where we
have been trying to find lasting solutions and protect
civilians from violence for the past 20 years.
The
Russian
Federation
also
supported
resolution 2667 (2022), which removes the notification
requirement for Kinshasa, and we congratulate our
colleagues of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
that important development. Russia’s position remains
the same with regard to the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and similar situations in other
countries. Security Council sanctions should always
reflect the situation on the ground and aim to stabilize it.
Restrictions should be regularly reviewed and modified
up to and including being fully lifted. In our estimation,
many of the Security Council’s sanctions regimes
currently in effect already fail to reflect the situations on
the ground. They impede national Governments’ plans
for State-building and establishing effective armed
forces and security structures, something that has also
affected the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
were ready to vote as long ago as June for modifying
the sanctions regime and lifting the notification
requirement so that the restrictions remained only on
armed groups. We welcome the fact that the Council

22-758593/7

S/PV.9226

MONUSCO

was able to adopt resolution 2667 (2022) and that despite
the reservations of some delegations, the Council has
not delayed its adoption further.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): Ireland voted in favour of
resolution 2667 (2022) today, on lifting the notification
requirement in the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We welcome the fact that
this element has ultimately been decoupled from
resolution 2666 (2022), which renewed the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
However, we would like to express our discomfort that the
issue was dealt with outside the scheduled negotiations
on the sanctions mandate renewal. In order to ensure
the coherence and clarity of sanctions regimes, it is our
strong preference that sanctions matters be dealt with
during the dedicated mandate-renewal process. While
there are pressing reasons to consider sanctions outside
that timeline, we believe that discussion should not be
mixed up with other issues.
We decided to support the lifting of the notification
requirement in the 1533 sanctions regime despite the
manner in which it came about. It is clear that views
on the notification requirement are complex and
divergent. Its existence has become so politicized that it
is impossible to consider it only on its merits. Insisting
on maintaining it risks undermining the entire 1533
sanctions regime. We consider that the regime is an
important tool in efforts to build peace, stability and
security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
we therefore voted today in a way that we consider best
protects the integrity of the regime overall. However,
we would still like to remind the Council of the value of
the notification requirement. It was introduced as part
of efforts for weapons management and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which are fundamental to
lasting and sustainable peace. The requirement assists
in monitoring the arms embargo, and lifting it may well
have negative repercussions for the ability of the 1533
Committee’s Group of Experts to monitor arms flows.
We welcome the inclusion in the resolution
requiring a report to the Council in advance of next
year’s 1533 sanctions regime mandate renewal. That will
help the Council decide on the best way to support the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in ensuring safe and effective weapons management
and in fighting arms trafficking, whether through the
4/7

20/12/2022

sanctions regime or otherwise. The Government has
made clear its request for the notification requirement
to be lifted. That has now been done. We hope the
Council’s decision today will support the delivery of
MONUSCO’s mandate and all efforts to bring peace
to the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Over the years, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) has been actively fulfilling
its mandate and has made important contributions to
the maintenance of regional peace and stability, which
China very much appreciates. The current security
situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains dire, with armed groups occupying
vast areas and posing serious threats to people’s lives
and property.
In the circumstances, the renewal of MONUSCO’S
mandate should foster regional peace and stability and
is consistent with the expectations of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is why
China voted in favour of resolution 2666 (2022). At the
same time, I would like to emphasize that there is still
room for improvement in United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa. The mandates of United Nations
missions in countries such as the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mali, South Sudan and the Central
African Republic are too broad and all-encompassing,
which means that their resources are spread too thin to
ensure their ability to deliver on their core mandates.
Some mandates have caused discontent among the
populations of the countries concerned and have
affected the safety of peacekeepers. China supports
conducting comprehensive reviews of the mandates
of peacekeeping operations in Africa and returning
tasks that are beyond their scope and capacity to the
Governments and United Nations country teams in the
countries concerned. MONUSCO’s core tasks consist of
supporting the peace process, protecting civilians and
maintaining security and stability. Tasks such as human
rights and sanctions monitoring are major distractions,
dilute MONUSCO’s resources and duplicate the work
of other United Nations monitoring mechanisms.
China hopes that in future the Security Council will
streamline and adjust the relevant mandates based on
how the situation in the country evolves.
Resolution 2667 (2022), which the Council just
adopted and which China welcomes, lifts the notification
22-75859

20/12/2022

MONUSCO

requirement on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with regard to arms shipments.
In recent years, China, together with African countries,
has called for various sanctions measures on African
countries to be lifted or modified. We are pleased to
see that at this critical juncture, when the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is fighting
armed groups and trying to maintain national security,
the Security Council has responded positively to the
country’s demands and adopted the resolution. It is
immediately relevant to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo’s ability to build the capacity of its security
forces and maintain regional peace and stability. We
expect the Council to remain united on sanctionsrelated issues and, based on the latest developments,
to adjust and remove in a timely manner arms embargo
measures against African countries, including the
Sudan, South Sudan and the Central African Republic,
so as to create the conditions their Governments need
to enhance their security capabilities.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): Gabon
voted in favour of the two resolutions adopted today
(resolutions 2666 (2022) and 2667 (2022)).
Our vote is a show of support for the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou
Keita. Above all, our vote is an expression of our
constant plea to ensure that the Council’s actions are
in line with the legitimate aspirations of the Congolese
people for security.

S/PV.9226

people, who find themselves at a particularly difficult
juncture in their history.
In conclusion, I would like to encourage Council
members to continue to overcome their differences
and interests in order to support the dynamic and the
peace process under way in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and, in particular, to preserve the country’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2666 (2022), extending the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
We hope that the resolution provides a solid basis for
constructive dialogue between the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO,
including on the review of the joint transition plan.
While the United Kingdom continued to see merit
in the notification requirement as an important tool
for monitoring the flow of weapons to armed groups
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we voted in
favour of resolution 2667 (2022) in acknowledgment
of the situation in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The United Kingdom does not consider
that notification processes inhibit Governments from
building the capabilities needed to provide security.
However, we recognize the request from our friends in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the light of
current security challenges.

We are confident that the lifting of the prior
notification requirement will dismantle all obstacles
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s ability
to provide a full and more effective response to the
armed groups responsible for plundering resources and
committing atrocities against the civilian population in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Those armed
groups are heavily equipped and have no constraints nor
respect for any embargo. Today’s adoptions constitute
real progress in allowing the Congolese authorities to
fulfill all of their responsibilities.

We hope that the decision of the Council today
contributes to enabling the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to restore State
authority in the eastern part of the country and to end
the cycles of violence. In that regard, we encourage the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
make progress in establishing professional, accountable
and sustainable security forces through comprehensive
security sector reform. We further encourage the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to capitalize on the support that MONUSCO, the wider
United Nations family and partners can provide in
that area.

The Council has come to understand that
restricting the room for manoeuvre of a Government
led by democratically elected authorities facing major
security challenges is not a good thing. That is why we
welcome today’s step in the right direction, which also
sends a strong message of solidarity to the Congolese

Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, the United Arab Emirates
welcomes today’s unanimous adoption by the Security
Council of two important resolutions relating to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (resolutions
2666 (2022) and 2667 (2022)). We appreciate the

22-758595/7

S/PV.9226

MONUSCO

20/12/2022

flexibility shown by Council members during the
negotiation process.

Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

The United Arab Emirates voted in favour
of renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) because we
believe that the Mission plays an important role in
ensuring the protection of civilians, facilitating the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and supporting the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
as it strives to build a peaceful and prosperous State.

Kenya voted in favour of resolution 2666 (2022)
because it lays emphasis on the protection of civilians.
It makes clear that the Mission’s mandate to protect
civilians entails taking all necessary measures to
prevent, deter and stop armed groups and local militias
from inflicting violence on civilians. By taking such
a robust posture, we believe that MONUSCO will
be able to gain the trust and confidence of the host
communities. That is critical if the peacekeepers
are to succeed in supporting the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to better perform its
primary responsibility to protect civilians.

With regard to the humanitarian crisis, my country
expresses its deep concern over the magnitude of
that crisis in the country. We support the efforts by
Congolese and international humanitarian actors to
reach those in need. Today’s mandate refers to the need
to facilitate the trade of essential commodities to meet
civilians’ basic needs, which requires every effort to
address the activities of armed groups and their impact
on the humanitarian situation.
Last week, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
experienced its worst flooding since 2019, causing
extensive loss and damage that added to the country’s
challenges. It is therefore imperative for the Council to
seriously consider how to deal with the negative effects
of climate change, including by receiving accurate data
and analysis that enable us to address that challenge
effectively. Consequently, my country has proposed
that the relevant reports of the Secretary-General
include information on climate security. Unfortunately,
that proposal was not included in today’s resolution on
MONUSCO (resolution 2666 (2022)).
Lastly, I reiterate the United Arab Emirates’
support for the resolution aimed at lifting the advance
notification requirement on military assistance to the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(resolution 2667 (2022)) in order to enable it to respond
effectively to the challenges it faces. We also stress the
importance of ensuring that weapons are prevented
from reaching armed groups.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates is
committed to supporting all efforts aimed at achieving
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): Kenya thanks France
for successfully coordinating the negotiations for
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
6/7

Alongside the protection of civilians are other
priority tasks in support of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and security sector reform. Those
are essential to the success of the ongoing peace
process, including the East African Community-led
inter-Congolese dialogue.
MONUSCO is an important partner to the
Government and people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We are confident that the renewed
mandate, if robustly implemented, will accelerate
the ongoing stabilization efforts. We encourage
strengthened collaboration between the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO
to sustain the current momentum of the peace efforts.
We welcome the incorporation in MONUSCO’s
mandate of an aspect of support for the East African
Community regional force. That dovetails with a recent
call by the three African members of the Security
Council — Gabon, Ghana and Kenya — for the setting
up of a joint coordination framework for all troops
deployed in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the direction of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on the protection of civilians,
communications and information-sharing, operational
support and training, and demobillization, disarmament,
community recovery and stabilization programmes.
As Kenya completes its two-year tenure as an
elected member of the Council, we will continue to
work closely with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to achieve its long-desired peace, stability
and socioeconomic progress. In particular, we will
continue to play an effective role as a MONUSCO
troop-contributing country, as a facilitator of the East
African Community-led process and as a key economic
22-75859

20/12/2022

MONUSCO

partner of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
the coming weeks and months, our decisions today
will enable greater cooperation between the Council,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and regional
mechanisms to deliver stability and the basis for a longterm peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
that supports its sovereignty, territorial integrity and
development aspirations.
Mr. Korbieh (Ghana): Ghana thanks France
for all the efforts made during the negotiation of the
resolutions we have just adopted (resolutions 2666
(2022) and 2667 (2022)).
The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is an important
action for maintaining the stability of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo amid the ongoing security
challenges in the eastern part of the country. Despite
the non-realization of some of our ambitions, especially
for a more integrated coordination and support for the
East African Community regional force, which was
inserted to stabilize the theatre, we nonetheless believe
that the resolution (resolution 2666 (2022)) provides
the scope for further engagement beyond the context of
the Security Council in order to positively change the
realities on the ground in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
We note the upcoming elections to be held in 2023
and advocate for the implementation of the MONUSCO
mandate for a positive role to be played in the
establishment of the conditions necessary to facilitate
the organization of peaceful elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We encourage the Council’s

S/PV.9226

unified support for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and hope that future reviews of the mandate will
reflect the collective wisdom of the Council.
With regard to the sanctions regime, we thank
all delegations for the consensus reached leading
to the lifting of the notification requirements on
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We have always made the case, together with
our colleagues, the other African members of the
Security Council, that in the present circumstances
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has to be freed of all fetters that mitigate the
development of its capabilities to deal with the various
obligations placed upon it by the Council, especially
with regard to the protection of civilians and the
prevention of human rights abuses by armed groups.
In the consensus adoption of the resolution
(resolution 2667 (2022)), we hope that the groups
wreaking havoc in the north-eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will understand the
unanimity of the international community opposing their
actions. We urge their full and effective participation
on the military track of the Nairobi process and call
for sustained international support for the processes
leading towards disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. We welcome the recent agreements
in Luanda, which have a very positive outlook and
continue to encourage the regionally led efforts to
resolve the political and security challenges of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Ghana therefore voted in favour of both resolutions
for the aforementioned reasons.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

22-758597/7
