S/PV.8555

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8555th meeting

Wednesday, 19 June 2019, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Ms. Batista Díaz
Mr. Sipaco Ribala
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Mabhongo
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2019/493)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-18345 (E)
*1918345*

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2019/493)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Australia, Canada, India, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan,
Tajikistan, Turkey and Uzbekistan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan; and Ms. Sima Samar,
Chairperson of the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/493, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yamamoto.
Mr. Yamamoto: One year ago, the people of
Afghanistan celebrated an unprecedented three-day
Eid ceasefire across the country. Those moments of
peaceful celebration gave them a glimpse of a life
without conflict and allowed them to direct their
gaze towards a more peaceful future. But the ensuing
12 months have also shown how arduous the path to
peace is.
2/37

19/06/2019

Unfortunately, the Eid ceasefire was not replicated
this year. Yet the foundations laid over the last year
have not been lost. Six weeks ago, thousands gathered
to exchange ideas on peace at the consultative peace
jirga. Grass-roots movements continued to march for
peace. But before I speak further about this progress,
allow me to first update the Council on preparations for
the presidential election.
The
presidential
elections
scheduled
for
28 September will be a key moment to reaffirm the
legitimacy of Afghanistan’s democratic political
structure. Afghan citizens have displayed an enduring
commitment to choosing their political leaders
through elections in the face of threats and adverse
security conditions. The electoral management bodies,
State institutions, political leaders, candidates and
international partners owe it to them to deliver credible
and timely elections and to accept the outcome of
this process.
The decision of the Independent Election
Commission to prioritize the holding of the presidential
elections on 28 September gave much-needed clarity
to the electoral calendar. However, timelines remain
very tight. Significant operational and technical
challenges need to be overcome in order to deliver
credible elections as scheduled. The Commission has
made important progress in the past few weeks: the
operational plan and the budget were finalized, and
top-up voter registration started across the country in
addition to full voter registration in Ghazni province.
However, after last year’s highly controversial
parliamentary elections and the subsequent dismissals
of all electoral commissioners, the most daunting
task for the new electoral management bodies is
regaining public confidence. The Commission needs
to demonstrate that it can address the problems that
marred the parliamentary elections and integrate the
lessons learned into preparations for the upcoming
vote. These preparations must include improved
procedures for publishing voter lists in good time,
the training of electoral staff, more robust outreach
and voter sensitization, and the timely rollout of
electoral technology.
The United Nations is working with the Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission on all aspects of the electoral preparations,
with more than 170 national and international staff. This
includes four international non-voting commissioners,
two for the Independent Election Commission and two
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

for the Electoral Complaints Commission, who directly
support the Commissions in their task.
The political stakes are high, and the competition
is intense. It is the responsibility of all political actors,
including presidential candidates, and of security and
Government agencies to ensure that the elections are
contested on a level playing field. I remind all candidates,
and their supporters, of the code of conduct they signed
when submitting their nomination papers. I also urge
all actors to exercise restraint, to show respect for State
institutions, most importantly for the Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission, and to refrain from taking any action that
could give any candidate an undue advantage.
As my predecessors in this forum have stressed
ahead of previous elections, all candidates must have
equal access to State resources. Similarly, Government
officials must respect the principle of non-interference
and refrain from using their position or resources to
support a particular candidate. This vital political
groundwork needs to be laid now in order to ensure
that the vote will be credible and the outcome accepted.
Afghanistan cannot afford a contentious and protracted
post-election crisis that could result in a presidency
with brittle domestic legitimacy. This would also
harm the new President’s ability to bring the Afghan
people together in a meaningful and representative
peace process.
Today the minds of the Afghan people and their
international partners are more focused than ever on the
need to reach a negotiated settlement. This momentum
must not be lost. Direct talks between the United States
and the Taliban continue, with broad international
support. Afghanistan and some of its international
partners, in particular Germany and Qatar, are
preparing for an intra-Afghan dialogue, which would
bring together the voices of people representing a wide
spectrum of society. Some prominent Afghan actors
have already had the opportunity to exchange views
with Taliban representatives in Moscow in late May. All
these efforts need to be directed towards one common
objective: to start formal negotiations between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban to reach a
peace agreement.
I am encouraged by signs of increasing consultations
between the countries leading these initiatives in
support of a political settlement. The common message
to the Taliban is clear: come to the table and negotiate

S/PV. 8555

directly with the Afghan Government. I call upon all
those countries with direct contacts with, or influence
over, the Taliban to intensify their efforts towards
that goal. But, ultimately, there is no substitute for the
Afghan people taking ownership and advancing their
inclusive dialogue towards a peace process. Government
and political leaders must foster consensus and create
structured arrangements to effectively represent the
interests of all Afghan people in their engagement with
the Taliban. Preparations for the presidential elections
should not distract from that necessary work.
The pursuit of peace is at the forefront of the
work of the United Nations in Afghanistan. We work
on a broad spectrum of initiatives to help create the
conditions for peace, ranging from support to Afghan
grass-roots organizations and dialogue with all parties
concerned, including the Taliban, to convening
discussions on behalf of the international community.
As we know from experience, even if an overall peace
agreement is reached, implementation can be derailed
by unaddressed local conflicts that have the potential
to escalate. UNAMA has been working with local
communities to support and strengthen their own
mediation mechanisms so that they themselves can
resolve their conflicts. As just one example, a 50-yearlong dispute over water resources between two tribes
in Nangarhar was resolved through local mediation
supported by UNAMA. Women played an important role
in building bridges across the communities. Initiatives
such as these are a vital counterpart to global and
regional efforts, where the United Nations comparative
advantage of impartiality is of particular relevance.
Only an inclusive peace process involving all those
affected by the conflict— including women, youth,
victims and business and religious leaders—can lead to
sustainable peace. Afghan society will need to confront
many difficult questions in a peace process, and much is
at stake, such as the preservation of gains over the past
18 years; the role of women; questions of accountability;
and how to reintegrate those who carried arms. The
United Nations stands ready to support Afghans as
they tackle those fundamental issues that run through
the very fabric of society. The United Nations is also
committed to giving priority to progress in the areas
of women and peace and security, which are very
important. We know from experience that this is the
best and the only way to secure a sustainable peace
agreement, and much needs to be done in that regard.

19-183453/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan’s people have the most to win from
an end to the conflict. But they are also the ones who
continue to lose most. Afghan civilians lose their
lives, children are kept from classrooms and people
are deprived from fulfilling their economic potential.
In the first quarter of this year alone, almost 1,800
Afghan civilians were killed or injured — less than in
previous quarters, but still far too many. I should like
to point out here the egregiousness of anti-Government
elements deliberately targeting civilians. It is a war
crime and must stop. I am also concerned about
increasing harm to civilians from search operations, as
well as related human-rights abuses. I reiterate the need
for more transparency and accountability surrounding
such operations.
The impact of the conflict on children is particularly
alarming. Attacks on schools almost tripled between
2017 and 2018. Additional schools were closed due
to insecurity, leaving almost half a million children
unable to exercise their right to education. Schools used
as voter registration sites and polling centres will be at
enhanced risk in the upcoming electoral period. I urge
all anti-Government elements to ensure that schools
and health facilities used during the election remain
protected from attacks, and the parties to the conflict
to take the necessary measures to reduce the impact of
the conflict on children and education.
We cannot forget that 80 per cent of the country’s
people live on less than $1.25 per day and in extremely
precarious conditions marked by climate change and
war. The impact of last year’s drought is still felt today,
with up to 10 million people food insecure. Internal
displacement remains high, with the single-largest
cause this year being the fighting between the Taliban
and the Islamic State-Khorasan Province. I am grateful
to all donors who have already generously contributed
funding for humanitarian programming this year.
However, the response remains underfunded at 23 per
cent, and I would ask again for the Council’s support to
boost funding.
Afghanistan has vast economic potential, yet it
remains untapped because of the conflict. The State
has made progress in anti-corruption and public-sector
reforms. Development partners have started to look
beyond immediate needs and are exploring modalities
for development assistance in a post-settlement
context. But that important work can bear fruit only
if a settlement is achieved. The road to peace is still
long, but with our united support for Afghanistan’s
4/37

19/06/2019

full ownership of the peace process, I am cautiously
optimistic that we are moving in the right direction.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Yamamoto for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ms. Samar.
Ms. Samar: It is a pleasure to brief the Security
Council again on Afghanistan. I would like to thank the
Council for supporting efforts towards peace, security
and human rights in Afghanistan. I also thank Germany
and the other members that facilitated the holding of
this briefing.
After 18 years of cooperation and support from
the international community, Afghanistan is entering a
very important point in its history. Hope and optimism
for promoting and protecting human rights and human
dignity has never been higher. At the same time, the
fear of going back to the time when Afghans, especially
women and minorities, were denied their rights and
freedoms has never been greater. The talks with the
Taliban have ignited a widespread and nationwide
debate over lasting peace. The popular demand is that
the outcome of talks should conform with human rights
and democratic and free-society norms and values. The
talks have generated concerns about the commitment
of the parties to preserving Afghan progress on human
rights, freedom, democracy and economic development.
This year the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission launched a national inquiry on
women, peace and security to give voice to the views
of women and their expectations of the potential peace
deal. The inquiry, which covered 30 provinces and
included public hearings, focus groups and surveys
of over 3,400 women, was an honest effort to engage
women in peace and security. The results from the
inquiry displayed the strong and clear understanding
of Afghan women, who desire a lasting peace in which
they play a role and are able to express their views and
put their demands on the table.
Women from all over the country stressed the
importance of preserving the bill of rights in our
Constitution and demanded that women’s rights,
human rights and democracy not be compromised or
put on the agenda as an item up for negotiation during
any political talks. Women also emphasized the need
for accountability, social justice and an end to the
culture of impunity. They have demanded that strong
will for peace be shown by all parties and that they
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

make commitments to democratic and human rights
norms and values. Afghan women were grateful for
the remarks made by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in support of the role of women in
peace and security at joint events that took place in
Helmand, Kandahar and Kunduz.
I would like to use this forum today to call for a
comprehensive, sustained commitment and strong
political will to make it possible for women to continue
to make progress and succeed. Women need to overcome
the challenges of a traditional and conservative society,
in addition to systematic and historic discrimination.
I would like to ask the international community to
provide long-term support for the promotion of gender
equality for sustainable peace and development.
Afghanistan is in conflict. Over 41 years, the
people experienced the extreme-left Government of
the People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan and the
extreme-right of the Taliban. The people witnessed the
disappearance and killing of their loved ones and the
destruction of their homes. They were forced to become
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees. And
their rights and freedoms were violated by the regimes,
without any accountability or justice for the victims.
Women and other vulnerable groups suffered the most.
The people had no role in choosing their Government.
After the fall of the Taliban regime, we witnessed some
progress on the promotion, protection and fulfilment
of human rights. That progress includes reform of
laws in accordance with international human rights
conventions, progress on the fight against torture, and
the realization of the political, civil, economic and
social rights of all the people.
Unfortunately, the continuation of conflict and
insecurity and the increased level of attacks on civilians,
civilian places, mosques and religious minority groups
have resulted in high numbers of civilian casualties and
IDPs. The number of civilian causalities last year stood
at 11,212, which was a 19 per cent increase. The Taliban
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
remain the main groups inflicting civilian causalities;
in some cases, the Afghan security forces and their
international partners are also involved.
There must be a mechanism in place to heal the
pain and wounds of victims. We need strong institutions
and measures in place to prevent the reoccurrence of
violence and gross human rights violations. Economic
development is key to facilitating and maintaining

S/PV. 8555

long-term peace. Economic opportunities must be
created and must benefit women, youth and the poor
without discrimination. The prosperity and well-being
of women and the poor are requirements for lasting
peace and stability.
Progress in Afghanistan towards the holding of free
and fair elections is also key to stability and security. The
presidential election is set to be held in September. The
commitment and cooperation of all candidates, political
parties and civil society on monitoring, observing and
facilitating a free and fair election is very important to
the legitimacy of the election. I would also like to call
on the Government and the international community
to support free and fair elections by refraining from
interference, safeguarding voter safety and security
and providing financial support for a civic awareness
programme. I am happy to say that the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission, with the
support of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, will monitor political rights through
the human rights framework. The Commission will
continue to verify rights to the freedoms of expression,
association and movement, as well as closely monitor
the four principles of impartiality, no interference, no
intimidation and no discrimination.
Torture is a serious human rights violation and
should not be allowed under any circumstance — against
anyone or by anyone. Afghan special forces recently
rescued several hundreds of prisoners held by the Taliban.
Reports show that the Taliban have systematically
tortured, mistreated or killed detainees and prisoners. I
condemn torture. The perpetrators of torture should be
held accountable. Despite the decrease in the number
of torture cases in the detention facilities run by the
Government, we still remain concerned about the
situation and a lack of accountability in that regard.
Civil society and human rights defenders play
important roles in the promotion and protection of
human rights, fostering democracy and holding the
State accountable. They face enormous challenges,
including with regard to security and shrinking space
for their activities and programmes. Support for civil
society and human rights defenders must be in place
and sustained.
I also would like to brief the Council on the
situation of justice, accountability, the rule of law and
anti-corruption efforts. Despite some improvements,
the situation still needs political will, investment,

19-183455/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

capacity-building and public awareness. Holding the
perpetrators of human rights violations, war crimes and
crimes against humanity accountable has been proving
hard for our national judiciary mechanisms. The
decision of the International Criminal Court to initiate
an investigation of the situation in Afghanistan created
some hope last year, although that hope faded away
when the Pre-Trial Chamber rejected the Prosecutor’s
request for an investigation. Ending the culture of
impunity is key for building confidence between people
and the State, which, in turn, is necessary to facilitate
the peace process. Access to justice is not a luxury; it is
a basic human right.
With regard to accountability for cases of corruption,
some progress has been made. Although many officials
were successfully prosecuted, the public perception
has remained sceptical regarding the progress; there
are concerns that prosecutions have been selective and
only against those who do not have a strong political
base. I hope further actions will be taken to improve the
administration of justice and change public perception.
Last year, the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission conducted research on racial
discrimination. More than 20 per cent of Afghans
felt they were discriminated against. It is important
to improve the sense of social justice and inclusion
so that everyone feels equal and no one is left
behind — politically, economically or socially.
The millions of children attending schools is a
critical sign of progress in the country. However, many
children continue to suffer from being forced out of
schools and from child labour and different kinds of
abuse. The Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission’s national inquiry on child labour shows
that little has been done to protect children from
child labour and that they are exposed to violence
and harassment. The Taliban and ISIS continue to use
children in conflict and to target girls’ schools.
Allow me to talk about the millions of people with
disabilities or addicted to drugs in Afghanistan. While
they constitute a large proportion of the population,
they suffer from neglect, a lack of support and social
security, and discrimination. We must work towards
the full realization of their rights. I would like to call
on the Government to allocate an adequate portion of
the budget to supporting people with disabilities and
addictions so as to rehabilitate and reintegrate them
into society.
6/37

19/06/2019

Finally, while all parties should agree on a
ceasefire to end civilian suffering, and while the war
must end, healing the wounds and giving attention to
the victims of the conflict must be priorities for the
Afghan Government and the international community
in order to avoid the continuation of revenge and
violence. Accountability and justice include not only
criminal justice but also the establishment of a realistic
mechanism to promote lasting reconciliation.
I would like to call on the Security Council and the
United Nations to step up efforts to safeguard lasting
peace and democratic and human rights norms in the
country. It is necessary to engage all ethnic, religious
and civil society groups — in particular women, youth
and victims in a meaningful way — in the planning,
negotiation and implementation of a peace plan for
Afghanistan. No one should feel threatened or left
outside of the process, and all realistic and legitimate
expectations and concerns must be effectively
addressed. Transparency in the peace process is needed
to increase the support of the public for the process and
reduce suspicion among the different ethnic groups.
We should learn lessons from the Afghan conflict
and peace deals over the past 40 years, as well as from
other peace processes around the world, including
the refusal to sacrifice accountability and justice for
a short-term political deal. We need to have patience
and a comprehensive strategy for peacebuilding. the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission
issued a report in 2004 entitled A Call for Justice,
based on the national consultation on transitional
justice. I would like to request that the United Nations
support the next stage of the transitional justice
process to address the people’s desire for peace, justice
and reconciliation. Peace, security and sustainable
development are not possible without the promotion
and protection of and respect for human rights,
which are a shared responsibility of Afghans and the
international community.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Samar
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, as the representative
of the brotherly nation of the State of Kuwait, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June. We are pleased that Ambassador
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

Yamamoto is here with us today and would like to
thank him for his dedicated efforts in Afghanistan as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. I
am glad to see Ms. Sima Samar briefing us today. She is
doing important work as the Chairperson of the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission.
Today’s meeting on the situation in Afghanistan
comes at a crucial moment, as we are engaged in
the delicate task of carefully steering two important
national processes, namely, the election and the peace
talks. We wish to end the decades-long conflict by
means of a comprehensive settlement, accepted by all
Afghans, and a presidential election to consolidate and
ensure the continuity of democracy, governance and
the rule of law in our society. At this critical juncture,
we are confident that both of those objectives can be
attained with adequate international support and with
patience and commitment.
First, on peace efforts, the National Unity
Government has long believed that the prospect of
peace can be achieved only through a process that
enjoys the support and consensus of all Afghans. The
momentum for peace has grown stronger as a result of
increased engagement and activities in Afghanistan and
abroad. Last month, a consultative loya jirga on peace
brought together 3,200 elected members from across
the country, including members of political parties,
tribal and religious figures, women, youth and civil
society, to build consensus and create a mandate for
peace talks with the Taliban. Women and young people
played a prominent role in the jirga, as women led 13 of
the 50 working committees and comprises 30 per cent
of all participants.
The outcome was the adoption of a declaration that
created the parameters and a road map for talks with
the Taliban. The declaration called for an immediate
and permanent ceasefire; respect for the values and
essence of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan; the
preservation of democratic gains and the constitutional
rights of people, especially women; the start of direct
peace talks between the Government of Afghanistan
and the Taliban; the preservation and strengthening
of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces;
the continuation of support from the international
community; and a realistic timetable for a responsible
withdrawal of international security forces.
Protecting the essence of our Constitution,
especially equal rights for men and women and human

S/PV. 8555

rights, is the core element of today’s Afghanistan and a
strong desire of the Afghan people. Therefore, we should
ensure that the outcome of any potential agreement will
only retain, expand and strengthen women’s right for
the purpose of a sustainable and durable peace.
For our part, we continue to stand ready to engage
in comprehensive talks that reflect the views and
overall position of the people of Afghanistan. We thank
all our international partners, from within the region
and beyond, for supporting our efforts for a durable,
dignified and lasting peace. In that regard, we highlight
the efforts of the United States and other partners in
support of peace, including the recent decision of the
Government of Germany to take a more proactive role
in peace efforts and in helping to facilitate direct talks,
which we sincerely hope will take place very soon.
The best measure of progress in advancing
peace negotiations is not only the extent to which the
Taliban reduces its violence, but rather that they cease
it entirely through a permanent ceasefire, and their
decision to engage in direct talks with the Government.
The intra-Afghan dialogue is a good start towards
direct discussions.
We also must not forget the important role that the
region can play in facilitating direct peace negotiations
for a successful agreement. Building a regional
consensus for peace has been vital to Afghanistan,
and to achieve that the Government has taken various
steps in reaching out to the region to build greater
engagement and establish the needed consensus.
The commitment of the Afghan Government to
peace is clear and genuine. That is demonstrated by the
Government’s decision to release nearly 900 Taliban
prisoners following the Eid religious holiday as part of
the demands from the participants in the peace jirga
and as a confidence-building measure.
Unfortunately, actions taken so far by the Taliban
fail to signify even the slightest degree of commitment
to peace. Not very long ago, the Taliban announced
their spring offensive campaign and started to attack
civilians while their representatives were engaged in
peace negotiations. That is further evidenced by new
attacks during the month of Ramadan against ordinary
Afghans, civilians and religious figures who were
denouncing violence and spreading the message of
peace in different parts of the country.

19-183457/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

19/06/2019

The Taliban has also attacked and killed many
humanitarian aid and medical workers. They have
restricted the movement and activities of many aid
organizations, including the World Health Organization
and the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
have vowed to continue their attacks on aid agencies.
During the three-day Eid holiday, at least 30 people
were killed in approximately 23 Taliban attacks in
Logar, Helmand, Baghlan and Kapisa provinces. These
attacks unfortunately reconfirm the group’s desire to
manipulate a genuine offer for a peaceful settlement to
the conflict.

Civilian protection remains a high priority at the
highest levels of our Government. We have taken
institutional measures to avoid collateral damage,
which include close coordination with the international
forces during security operations and accountability
for incidents resulting from actions that deviate from
standard rules of engagement. We continue to take
concrete steps to ensure the physical protection and
well-being of children, including preventing any
recruitment of child soldiers in our security forces,
through our revised penal code, which criminalizes
such activities.

We believe that only a dual-track approach of
pressure and incentives can ensure a conducive
environment for a successful outcome. The attacks
represent a violation of international humanitarian law,
and any degree of passivity from any of us can lead
to the misunderstanding of weakness and space for the
group to dictate the terms of the negotiations.

The emergence of a democratic political order
through a democratic process chosen by the people
of Afghanistan is among our most significant
achievements over the past 18 years. When using the
term “we,” I am not referring solely to the people of
Afghanistan, but rather I am speaking in the context
of the collective efforts and sacrifices that all of us
in the Council have made. Less than two months ago,
President Ghani inaugurated our new Parliament in
the presence of its members and representatives of the
international community. Looking ahead, our people’s
approach to the future includes the expectation that
nothing outside of the democratic order can determine
our political destiny.

Despite the continued attacks, our security forces
have repulsed the Taliban’s spring offensive and
prevented the group from capturing territory. According
to the latest joint Government committee report, from
85 to 90 per cent of productive territory, including
natural resources, highways and other infrastructures,
are under Government control.
To further deter the extremist elements, our security
forces were able to clear the Taliban presence in DehYak and Khwaja Omani districts of Ghazni province
over the past several weeks. That was achieved not
only due to the professionalism and bravery of our
forces but also in part due to the ongoing efforts to
reform the security sector to make it more streamlined
and effective.
Meanwhile, facing defeat in the battlefield, the
Taliban have sought to compensate setbacks with a
renewed focus on attacking soft targets, using civilian
compounds as shelters, leading to an increase in civilian
casualties and the waging of a psychological warfare
through terror and destruction. We are documenting
changing battle tactics by the Taliban in incorporating
a more heinous strategy by planting improvised
explosive devices and other explosives in civilian
spaces, including targeting schools. A recent example
is the ongoing fighting in the Baharak district in Takhar
province, where the Taliban have used civilian houses
as shields and have prevented people from even leaving
their houses.
8/37

Therefore, despite all the challenges, we will make
sure to hold presidential elections in September of this
year. We are fully aware that the task will not be an
easy one. At the same time, we are confident in being
able to fulfil it successfully, with support from the
international community and our friends and allies. We
have begun security and technical arrangements for the
elections and are in discussions with our international
partners on various aspects of the process. We welcome
the appointment of the United Nations advisers who will
serve as international commissioners in the Independent
Election Commission to provide technical support. We
will spare no effort whatsoever to ensure a credible,
transparent and inclusive electoral process to meet the
demands of our people and our political stability.
The gains of the past 18 years also include the
emergence of a dynamic and committed young
generation. This generation is increasingly taking
charge of the country’s future. The resilient role of
Afghan women as agents of change, progress and
transformation has been a fundamental part of that
new dynamic. Women’s contributions and leadership
have reached new heights, as public servants across the
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

Government and in the private sector. For the first time,
the heads of the Independent Election Commission and
the Electoral Complaints Commission are both women.
To consolidate those gains, promote and protect the
rights of women and incorporate women’s voices in the
peace and security agenda, we look forward to working
with a broad set of partners through the group of friends
of Women of Afghanistan here in New York, which we
will soon launch in partnership with the Permanent
Mission of the United Kingdom. I would like to
sincerely thank Ambassador Pierce for her commitment
to this cause. We look forward to benefiting from the
Council’s support for the group’s activities.
The new Afghanistan is also starting to emerge as
catalyst for economic and regional cooperation. That
is best demonstrated by the implementation of several
mega-regional projects, under our Afghan-led Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan
platform, which will yield economic dividends
beyond our immediate region, and the Heart of AsiaIstanbul Process. Through increased trade, investment,
infrastructure and development, we are moving in the
direction of sustainable growth.
To conclude, I would like to quote one of the
participants at the consultative peace jirga, who said
that “no one wins in war as no one loses in peace.”
Therefore, securing tangible and durable peace
that is acceptable to the people of Afghanistan is an
imperative to make sure that our country will move
forward, not backwards. Together with our friends
and allies, we stand at an important crossroads where
a collective and unified approach will enable us to
achieve our strategic objectives of a peaceful, stable
and prosperous Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to draw the attention of speakers to paragraph 22 of
presidential note S/2017/507, which encourages all
participants in Council meetings to deliver their
statements in five minutes or less, in line with the
Security Council’s commitment to making more
effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tadamichi
Yamamoto and Ms. Sima Samar for their insightful
briefings, as well as the Permanent Representative of

S/PV. 8555

Afghanistan for her statement. We also thank Special
Representative Yamamoto and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for
their ongoing efforts to promote peace and stability
in Afghanistan. We will continue to support those
efforts actively.
Special Representative Yamamoto’s briefing and
the Secretary-General’s recent report (S/2019/493)
illustrate the challenges but also the opportunities
that Afghanistan will face in the next few weeks and
months. As second-largest donor and troop contributor,
Germany remains firmly committed to Afghanistan.
Of course, we also look forward to providing UNAMA
with a strong and concise mandate in September.
As Special Representative Yamamoto said, the
road to peace is still a long one. However, at the same
time, the current momentum in the peace process to
find a negotiated settlement creates an opportunity
that must be seized. We applaud the courageous efforts
of the Afghan Government and the international
initiatives in that respect. It is now urgent to move
forward to intra-Afghan talks, which must include
the Afghan Government and the Taliban, as well as
other key Afghan stakeholders, including the sizeable
representation of women.
Germany stands ready to contribute to these
efforts. In close consultation with the United States
and other partners, over the past couple of weeks
Germany has explored the possibilities of holding an
intra-Afghan dialogue conference together with Qatar
in Doha. The aim of that dialogue would be to catalyse
a comprehensive intra-Afghan negotiation process. We
have received great support for our proposal from the
Afghan Government, as well as from other key political
actors and civil society representatives in Afghanistan.
Obstacles remain, but we will continue our efforts. We
are grateful for the support of Special Representatives
Yamamoto and the Member States around this table.
A political process in Afghanistan has a chance
of success only if the international community acts
in unison and sends the clear message to the Afghan
parties, including the Taliban, that it is time to talk about
a common future. In the end, only Afghans themselves
can forge a broad and sustainable agreement. That will
require a lot of work, time and compromise on all sides.
The meaningful inclusion of women will remain
essential during those talks. In that context, we
welcome the participation of women in the loya jirga

19-183459/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

and through their own consultative process. We
reiterate the importance of increasing the full and
effective participation and leadership of women in
decision-making, including overall peacebuilding
strategies at the national and sub-national levels.
A sustainable peace process must ensure the
continuity and stability of State institutions and the
Constitution, as well as the protection of human and
women’s rights and freedoms. The Security Council
can play an important role in clearly communicating its
expectations in that regard.
I would like to make some brief remarks about
the upcoming presidential elections. In order to avoid
a constitutional vacuum, it will be important that
presidential elections are held in a timely, fair and
democratic manner. It is crucial to draw the right lessons
from the parliamentary elections in that context.
I have two final comments on issues that were
raised in the earlier presentations and briefings.
First, the effects of climate change continue to
hit Afghanistan in a very severe way. Be it droughts
or flash floods, they are all symptoms of a larger
problem that affects all of us. But, in a country hit
by violent conflict and poverty, its consequences can
be even more devastating and further aggravate the
security situation. On 4 June, Afghan Deputy Foreign
Minister Zaman took part in the Berlin Climate and
Security Conference and underlined the importance
that Afghanistan attaches to the problem.
Finally, as mentioned by both the Special
Representative and the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan anti-corruption measures should be
expanded in line with the Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework and the post-Geneva process. The recent
UNAMA report on Afghanistan’s fight against
corruption outlined some welcome steps and remaining
challenges in terms of law enforcement in that regard.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Ambassador Tadamichi
Yamamoto, as well as Ms. Sima Samar, Chairperson of
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
for their briefings. Let me also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan and thank her for
her statement.
10/37

19/06/2019

We also commend the entire UNAMA team for its
indispensable work in supporting the Government and
the people of Afghanistan in their pursuit of progress
with regard to development, the rule of law, human
rights and the political, security and humanitarian
fronts. As UNAMA has shown, it is crucial that the
support of the United Nations and other partners be in
line with the aspirations of Afghan people. Indonesia
wishes to emphasize three main points in response to
the very important matters raised by the briefers.
First, a free and fair presidential election should be
held without further delay. The presidential election in
September will renew the hopes of the people, who must
determine their future freely and fairly in a moment of
unity. We are happy to note that the preparations for
the presidential electoral process are at the centre of
the priorities of the Government of Afghanistan and
UNAMA’s activities. Although there have been delays,
we are pleased that, for the first time since 2011, a new
Parliament was inaugurated. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/493) contains numerous encouraging
milestones, one of which is that both the Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission elected women as Heads. Indonesia
applauds the greater and more meaningful participation
of women in various nation-building processes
in Afghanistan.
Secondly, improving security and stability in
Afghanistan is imperative. Even though there was a
decrease in security-related incidents as compared with
the same period in 2018, the security situation remains
volatile. It is regrettable that the Taliban announced
their annual spring offensive in the midst of an ongoing
peace process. Indonesia has always believed that a
military solution is never an option for ending conflict,
as it only further victimizes innocent civilians and
disrupts sorely needed stabilization efforts from taking
root. It is therefore essential to hold safe elections and
ensure that all Afghans are involved in taking their
country forward. That would be in the interests of the
Taliban as well. We underline that Afghanistan must
not be used by violent extremist groups to jeopardize
regional stability.
Thirdly, everyone must work hard for the success of
the peace process. There has been a robust international
effort to support peace in Afghanistan, but in the end
peace will be possible only if all Afghans own those
efforts and exercise their political will for a democratic
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

and united Afghanistan. That will require an Afghan-led
and -owned peace process with intra-Afghan dialogue.
Indonesia stresses the need for the meaningful
involvement of all Afghans, including women and
youth. The more the different segments of Afghan
society can come together in nation-building, the
stronger their prospects for a united, prosperous and
peaceful future. In that connection, Indonesia will
continue to offer its concrete support to Afghanistan,
including through multifaceted capacity-building and
training programmes, as well as meetings of religious
scholars that disseminate how terrorism has no place
in religion. Indonesia has also reiterated its readiness
to host direct talks between the different Afghan
parties. We will continue to make efforts to spawn an
intra-Afghan peace dialogue.
Let me conclude by underlining the responsibility
of everyone to play their role responsibly and fully to
help Afghans carve out the promising future that they
so deserve.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): Please allow me to
begin by thanking Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and Ms. Sima Samar,
Chairperson of the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission, for their briefings. We also acknowledge
the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan.
South Africa expresses its full support for
Mr. Yamamoto and commends the efforts of the
men and women of UNAMA, who have been vital in
supporting efforts for achieving peace and security
in Afghanistan, particularly by strengthening the
capabilities, capacities and professionalism of
Afghanistan’s electoral and monitoring bodies. In that
regard, my delegation welcomes the recent inauguration
of the new Afghan Parliament.
During this meeting, I would like to address three
issues — first, the election process; secondly, national
and international initiatives; and, lastly, the increased
violence in Afghanistan.
We look forward to the presidential elections that
will take place in September and encourage all parties
to work together to ensure that the elections commence
as planned and mandated by the Afghan Constitution.
South Africa reiterates its support for the electoral

S/PV. 8555

reform process in Afghanistan, as that will ensure that
the upcoming elections are credible, timely, inclusive,
fair and free, and safe and transparent for all the people
of Afghanistan. The elections are an essential step
towards renewing the trust of the Afghan people and
towards a stable, peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan.
With regard to national and international initiatives,
my delegation welcomes the recent efforts towards
reconciliation and dialogue. The loya jirga, which
brought together politicians, tribal elders and other
prominent people with the unified goal of finding a path
towards peace talks with the Taliban, was encouraging.
We hope that the 23-point plan will deliver on the
aspirations of the people of Afghanistan.
The participation of civil society and women’s
groups is particularly useful in ensuring that all
sectors of Afghan society have a voice in an inclusive
peace process. We wish to reiterate that only with full
and inclusive participation can there be long-term
sustainable peace in Afghanistan and the region as a
whole. We hope that all-inclusive talks among all the
relevant national stakeholders will continue.
The third point I would like to raise is our concern
about the high level of violence and terrorist attacks in
parts of Afghanistan, in particular the indiscriminate
attacks against civilians, including the use of improvised
explosive devices, suicide attacks and assassinations.
Lingering violence could undermine the progress
already made in the security and political spheres,
especially following the loya jirga and in the run-up to
the presidential elections. The violence also aggravates
the already fragile humanitarian situation.
Restrictions to humanitarian access and attacks
against health and educational facilities are of
particular concern. That particularly affects the most
vulnerable in Afghan society — women, children and
people living with disabilities. In that regard, South
Africa also calls on all parties to ensure the protection
of women and children, particularly from sexual and
gender-based violence. My delegation continues to
condemn the unlawful recruitment and use of children
in armed forces and groups, and calls for their release
and reintegration into Afghan society. All parties
to the conflict must respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
In conclusion, South Africa welcomes all
international engagement in support of a long-lasting,

19-1834511/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

durable peace in Afghanistan. However, we believe that
all efforts in that regard should be well-coordinated
and complementary to the current Afghan processes in
order to find a lasting solution. We remain convinced
that the only long-term solution for the situation is a
comprehensive and inclusive Afghan-led and -owned
political process towards the peaceful resolution of the
conflict and an inclusive political settlement.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Yamamoto for his remarks today.
Under his leadership, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) continues to
provide vital support to Afghanistan. I also want to
thank Ms. Samar for her informative briefing today.
The United States is committed to sustainable
peace in Afghanistan that ensures that it will never
again be a platform for transnational terrorism.
Special Representative Khalilzad is working in close
coordination with President Ghani, Chief Executive
Abdullah and other Afghan leaders, as well as Special
Representative Yamamoto and Security Council
members. Special Representative Khalilzad looks
forward to briefing the Council soon. Today I would
like to update the Council on the progress that has been
made towards peace.
As the Council is aware, in January the United
States and the Taliban reached an agreement in principle
that any comprehensive peace agreement must address
four interconnected issues — counter-terrorism, the
presence of foreign troops, an intra-Afghan dialogue
leading to intra-Afghan negotiations, and a permanent
ceasefire. Regarding terrorism, we have made progress
and may soon be in a position to conclude a draft
text outlining the Taliban’s commitments to ensuring
that Afghan soil is never again used for international
terrorism. Of course, we have to be mindful of the
implementation and enforcement of those counterterrorism commitments.
In the light of the progress on ensuring that
Afghan soil is not used for international terrorism,
the time will soon come to begin discussions with the
Taliban on the issue of the foreign military presence,
which will continue to be based on conditions. The
United States has made it clear to the Taliban that it
is prepared to reduce its forces. However, we have not
agreed to numbers or a timeline with the Taliban. The
final disposition of foreign forces will be determined
with the post-peace Government. In parallel to our
12/37

19/06/2019

discussions with the Taliban, we are conducting detailed
discussions with the Afghan Government. We are fully
aligned in our approach, including on the importance
of the Taliban committing to a reduction in violence
leading to a permanent ceasefire. The Afghans demand
and deserve an end to the violence. Let me outline what
we see as a way forward.
First, all parties agree that finalizing a United
States-Taliban understanding on terrorism and the
foreign-troop presence will open the door for an
intra-Afghan dialogue and negotiations. To that end,
we welcome Germany’s commitment, together with
Qatar, to convene an intra-Afghan dialogue in Doha in
early July, which will be an opportunity for Afghans to
endorse the urgent need for intra-Afghan negotiations.
Simultaneously, the United States is laying the
groundwork for intra-Afghan negotiations to begin as
soon as possible. Their objective is for the Afghans to
agree on a timeline and a political road map for reaching
a comprehensive peace agreement. The United States
joins other countries in supporting Afghans’ desire
for a peace that sustains the social and human rights
gains of the past 18 years. We insist, and indeed we
should all insist, that women, minorities and other
groups be represented in those talks. Additionally, the
United States is consulting with the region on how it
can support peace. The trilateral consensus issued by
the United States, Russia and China and the principles
issued by the United States-Europe group are important
steps forward.
The United States claims no monopoly on the
diplomacy of peace. We thank Ambassador Djani
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011) for supporting a temporary travel-ban
exemption for select individuals, and a corresponding
limited asset-freeze exemption, in order to facilitate the
intra-Afghan talks. We encourage Member States to
fully implement their sanctions obligations in support
of peace in Afghanistan.
Peace remains our priority. At the same time, we
believe that election planning must go forward as we
pursue the peace that Afghans deserve. Afghanistan’s
Independent Election Commission has announced that
the presidential election will be held on 28 September.
We urge the Afghan Government, the Election
Commission and all political stakeholders to take the
necessary steps to ensure that the election is credible.
The preparations for it include completing voter
registration, refining the voter list, printing ballots and
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

recruiting and training poll workers. The United States
is providing financial and technical assistance through
the United Nations Development Programme and other
partners to the Election Commission and will continue
to do so.
Lastly, the United States views the United Nations
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board (JCMB) as
an important tool for coordination between the Afghan
Government and donors. We call on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
Afghan Government to ensure that the JCMB maintains
a robust performance and accountability component. We
also request that UNAMA and the Afghan Government
prepare a report on performance and accountability
ahead of the September Security Council meeting on
Afghanistan, which should include an overview of the
JCMB discussions on anti-corruption, Government
accountability and ongoing efforts to ensure fair and
credible elections.
I want to repeat once again that peace is our highest
priority. Thanks to the efforts of many Security Council
members, that goal is within reach. Nothing is agreed
until everything is agreed, and the peace process
will end only when Afghans reach a comprehensive
understanding on a political road map to end the war.
We are committed to providing future updates.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): I thank Special
Representative Yamamoto, Ms. Samar and Ambassador
Raz for their contributions.
Poland is of the view that the interests of all Afghans,
including women, young people and minorities, should
be taken into account in the cause of the peace process.
We also strongly believe that peace should not come
at the cost of the progress that has been made in the
area of human rights, particularly women’s rights, in
the past few years.
The coming months will be essential to addressing
the shortcomings of the electoral process and the
lessons learned in order to ensure credibility and
transparency and preserve the inclusivity of the political
process during the preparations for the presidential
elections. Strong measures that will preserve the safety,
transparency, accountability and credibility of the
ballot must be taken, and taken swiftly.
We remain deeply concerned about the security
situation in Afghanistan. We reiterate our call to all
parties to protect the civilian population, especially

S/PV. 8555

women and children. Conflict-related violence must
not destroy another generation’s livelihood, homes and
property, displacing families and limiting access to
education, health care and other services. We were very
pleased to hear from Ms. Samar about the progress that
has been made with regard to persons with disabilities.
We support and participate in the NATO Resolute
Support Mission, aimed at providing further training,
advice and assistance to the Afghan security forces
and institutions.
As other delegations mentioned, we believe that the
fight against corruption must continue and must deliver
concrete results, which will help maintain and increase
people’s confidence in the Afghan State and institutions.
The same applies to the protection of human rights,
with a particular focus on areas such as the elimination
of violence against women, the protection of children
and the prevention of torture and ill treatment.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Poland’s
acknowledgement of the crucial role played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and all the relevant United Nations agencies
in supporting the Afghan people. Poland remains
committed to supporting the Afghan people, UNAMA
and international partners in achieving a democratic
and self-sustaining Afghanistan.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are grateful to you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting. We thank Special
Representative Yamamoto for his briefing and
his analysis of the processes currently unfolding
in Afghanistan. We also listened carefully to the
statements by Mrs. Raz, the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, and Ms. Samar. We share the
Ambassador’s assessments and listened attentively to
Ms. Samar. We agree with many of the opinions in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/493), and would
like to make the following points.
We support the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
believe it has an important role to play in coordinating the
international humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan.
We greatly appreciate the work and selfless efforts of
United Nations personnel in the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan. We hope that in the future the United
Nations evaluations of the situation in the country will
continue to be based on the principle of impartiality
and an accurate identification of the country’s current

19-1834513/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

19/06/2019

challenges, first among them being terrorism. It is
unacceptable to pass over that in silence or to try to
embellish the reality.

to training narcotics police from Afghanistan, Pakistan
and the countries of Central Asia in cooperation with
many States around the world, including Japan.

We are concerned about the ongoing increase in
terrorist activity, the continued presence of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Afghanistan and
its ability to survive even after various defeats in the
north, indeed on the contrary to strengthen its ranks by
recruiting foreign terrorist fighters fleeing Afghanistan,
Syria and Iraq, as well as members of other terrorist
groups, of which there are more than 20 in Afghanistan.
We can see that the Islamic State has not only refused to
abandon its expansionist ambitions but is consistently
working to realize them, including by establishing
branches and sleeper cells, and including in northern
Afghanistan. That poses a real threat to the security
of our friends in Central Asia and the southern regions
of Russia. Against that background, the consensus
decision of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, chaired by Indonesia, to
list ISIL-Khorasan Province was timely. Although an
important step, it is not sufficient on its own and should
be followed by practical measures within the United
Nations to eradicate that terrorist threat. And we are
naturally very concerned about the major terrorist acts
that regularly occur in various cities in Afghanistan,
including the capital. Besides civilians, including
women and children, Afghan soldiers and police
officers are dying every day at the hands of terrorists.
We pay tribute to their heroism and courage.

Russia has consistently supported the desire of the
Afghan people to entrench lasting peace in their country.
This year Russia and Afghanistan are celebrating
the centenary of their establishment of diplomatic
relations. Our countries are indeed linked by a rich
history of mutual respect, good-neighbourliness and
cooperation whose foundation was laid back in 1919.
As was the case 100 years ago, today we are driven
by the desire to help Afghanistan become a peaceful,
independent State, free from terrorism and drugs. We
intend to continue to work with our Afghan friends on
eliminating security threats, particularly from ISIL
and Al-Qaida, and strengthening the capacity of civil,
security and anti-drug structures.

We are especially focused on the fight against drug
trafficking in Afghanistan. The drug threat continues
to be a serious problem for the region, for peace and for
Afghanistan itself. The revenue it generates provides
terrorism with significant financial support. We believe
it is extremely important to continue to strengthen
international efforts to combat this scourge. As with
any global threat, overcoming the challenges presented
by narcotics requires broad collective cooperation,
including through specialized entities. We remain
committed to helping to comprehensively combat this
threat, with the participation of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, among others. Our practical steps
are also in line with that approach, including through
regional authorities such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO). We will continue to contribute
14/37

We are sincerely interested in seeing a national
reconciliation process, and the country’s subsequent
stabilization, take place as soon as possible, led by
the Afghans themselves. We believe firmly that
everyone — Afghanistan, its neighbours in the region
and the world at large — wins when there is peace,
stability and national reconciliation. We are ready to
continue our full cooperation in furthering the process
of national reconciliation, and that purpose is what
guides us in implementing our own efforts in that area.
With that in mind, we held a second meeting of the
Moscow consultations format, with major participation
by interested parties.
We support a policy of making the upcoming peace
process in Afghanistan as inclusive as possible, involving
all the country’s social and political forces, including
the opposition. We believe that a broad dialogue is key
to achieving peace in Afghanistan. In that regard, we
support the continuation of the inter-Afghan dialogue
launched in Moscow in February, especially since
the meeting displayed all Afghans’ genuine interest
and desire to achieve peace and reconciliation. We
assume that the various international actors who have
decided to showcase their efforts in the area of national
reconciliation in Afghanistan will play by the same
rules and take into account of the gains already made in
the Moscow format and the trilateral dialogue between
Russia, the United States and China. What is needed is
cooperation, not artificial competition, and that is what
Afghanistan wants, too.
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

We want to point to the world’s growing
understanding of the importance that the regional
context also has for an Afghan settlement, and the need
in that regard to harness the potential of proven bodies,
particularly the CSTO and the SCO. We want to highlight
the revived mechanism of the SCO-Afghanistan Contact
Group. We were pleased that Afghanistan participated
as Chair in the Contact Group’s meeting in Bishkek
this spring. We see good potential for strengthening
the cooperation between Afghanistan and the CSTO.
After years of conflict, the efforts to reach a settlement
in Afghanistan require engagement and constructive
dialogue among all its neighbours, and there should
be no exceptions. We believe there is no alternative to
that, for only good-neighbourliness, collaboration and
cooperation will make it possible to resolve the acute
problems of Afghanistan today. It will be vital to ensure
that the international and regional efforts are aligned.
The quest for peace in Afghanistan requires
strategic patience in order to ensure that the formula for
a final settlement, designed to result in a comprehensive
agreement, not only promotes national reconciliation
among all patriotic political forces, but also unites them
on a platform of reconstruction for Afghanistan and
collective opposition to terrorist entities, of which the
country has more than 20, including the Islamic State
and Al-Qaida. We are confident that once Afghans
are united they will be able to end that threat and put
the country on a path to sustainable development,
which has to be the basis for the prosperity of all its
citizens, including women, as well for strengthening
the democratic foundations of Afghan society.
We firmly believe that the defining criterion
for all peace initiatives and for the elections planned
for September must be the goal of uniting the entire
country and all Afghans, without exception. Without it,
the conflict will only worsen. The task is to maintain
a united and indivisible Afghanistan where tolerance
prevails and its many ethnic groups coexist in peace
and harmony. Based on those principles, and those
principles alone, we are open to cooperate with regional
and international partners.
Ms. Batista Díaz (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, we would like to thank Special
Representative Yamamoto and Ms. Samar for their
valuable briefings, and to welcome the Ambassador of
Afghanistan to this debate.

S/PV. 8555

Events relating to the elections and the peace process
have dominated the political situation in Afghanistan.
In that regard, we welcomed the conclusion of the
parliamentary elections, which have enabled a new
Parliament to be inaugurated for the first time since 2011.
We hope that the instability resulting from the various
complaints and irregularities that were seen during the
elections will be overcome. It will be crucial to ensure
that the next elections are credible and legitimate and
that all stakeholders involved take to heart the lessons
learned during the parliamentary elections.
With regard to the security situation, we are
concerned about the increase in both the number of
victims of aerial and search operations and the use
of improvised explosive devices by anti-Government
elements. The announcements of offensive operations by
both the Government and the Taliban are also alarming.
We urge both the Government and the Taliban to
continue with initiatives such as the unilateral ceasefire
of last June, which raised hopes for peace among the
Afghan people, as well as the April consultations of
the loya jirga on peace, which laid a foundation for
peace talks without preconditions, a ceasefire, respect
for human rights and the right of women to participate
in the peace process, among other positive initiatives
establishing a road map for future negotiations.
We applaud the initiatives of international and
regional actors in calling for an intra-Afghan dialogue
and encourage the continuation of the talks that have
been held in Moscow, Doha, London and Washington,
in support of a process led and defined by the Afghans.
We also welcome the upcoming meetings in the context
of this process that are scheduled to take place shortly
in Germany.
We wish also to acknowledge the progress that has
been made in bolstering the level of participation of
women in the peace process, in particular the holding
of the national conference of Afghan women for
peace and the degree of participation of women in the
aforementioned loya jirga. We would like in particular
to underscore the holding of a separate loya jirga
in Shirzad district under the auspices of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, in which,
for the first time, women played an active role in a
jirga process in Afghanistan, leading to the adoption of
regulations on water distribution.
As the Permanent Representative of Germany
pointed out, also of concern is the humanitarian situation

19-1834515/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

resulting from the conflict and natural disasters. In
Afghanistan more than 10 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance, many of whom, like Tila, the
mother of four children and a widow, survive thanks to
the financial assistance provided by non-governmental
organizations in the field, as well as those who have left
their villages as a consequence of the conflict and the
severe drought.
We wish also to reiterate our deep concern about the
persistence of sexual violence against women and girls.
We urge the Afghan authorities to promote measures
that prohibit and punish these practices and to initiate
investigations into such cases, including those in which
the perpetrators are from the police or the military.
In conclusion, Afghanistan is at a critical juncture:
on the one hand, an electoral process and emerging peace
negotiations, and, on the other, a possible withdrawal of
troops and a worsening of the security situation.
All efforts must be deployed so that the Afghan
people can put an end to the instability and violence
to which they have subjected for years. It is our duty to
support them in this process, which must be Afghanled and feature the participation of all social actors,
especially women and young people.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me in turn to thank Special Representative Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Ms. Sima Samar and Ambassador Adela
Raz for their very enlightening briefings and their
commitment to their respective roles in the promotion
of peace and of the rights and respect for the freedoms
of all Afghan men and women.
France aligns itself with the statement to be made
later on behalf of the European Union.
I will make three observations.
The primary and fundamental urgent need is
to redouble efforts to protect civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, and to respond
to humanitarian needs. The number of casualties,
although it has decreased slightly compared with last
year, is of particular concern. With 11,000 deaths in
2018, Afghanistan has the most civilian casualties of
any conflict- affected country. The number of attacks
against aid workers increased by more than 150 per cent
in one year, and schools are also being targeted. This
is unacceptable. It is imperative that all parties to the
conflict respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law, and France welcomes the efforts
16/37

19/06/2019

undertaken by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in support of the Afghan
authorities to limit the number of civilian casualties
and minimize the impact of operations on civilians and
their infrastructure.
France welcomes the laws and action plans adopted
to protect children, which must be fully implemented
and provide protection against the six serious
violations. This must also be the case more broadly
with regard to laws on the protection of women and
children from violence, including sexual violence. It is
vital that the capacities of the judiciary be strengthened
in that respect.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2019/493), we must meet the growing humanitarian
needs of the 6.3 million Afghans requiring assistance
and ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access
throughout the country.
Secondly, our priority must be, now more than ever,
to ensure the success of efforts to achieve a negotiated
and lasting peace in Afghanistan. I commend the work
carried out by several partners, including the United
States, Qatar and Germany, which have engaged in
discussions with the Taliban with a view to bringing
them to engage in peace talks with the Afghan
Government. France calls on the Taliban to immediately
and concretely demonstrate its commitment to peace by
accepting direct talks with the Afghan Government and
declaring a ceasefire.
As the Special Representative recalled, the peace
process must be inclusive, led by and for the Afghan
people. It is crucial in this regard that women participate
directly and meaningfully in peace talks at all levels of
decision-making. The preservation and strengthening
of the achievements made in the areas of justice, the rule
of law and respect for rights and freedoms must remain
a top priority, particularly concerning respect for the
rights of women, respect for fundamental freedoms
in particular, the freedoms of opinion and expression
and the protection of journalists. Sacrificing those
achievements could jeopardize the support, including
financial support, of the international community for
the ongoing process.
Finally, the third priority is to ensure the holding
and smooth conduct of the presidential elections of
28 September, which must be free, transparent and
inclusive. The weaknesses identified in previous
elections must be remedied and preparations intensified.
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8555

The Independent Election Commission must continue
to work to enable the widest possible participation of
the people in the elections, including that of women as
candidates and as voters.

stress that any future peace agreement must preserve
the political, economic and social gains of the past
18 years, especially concerning the rights of women,
children and minorities.

Given the high level of threat, including in Kabul,
poll security will also be a determining factor. We
reiterate our full support for the Afghan security
forces, whose efforts during the legislative elections
were notable.

We are fully aware of the fact that peacebuilding
is a long-term process. For an agreement to be
lasting, the international community must be united
in its support. We call on all international partners to
closely coordinate their efforts in order to launch an
intra-Afghan dialogue and achieve an Afghan-directed
and Afghan-led peace process.

Allow me to conclude by recalling the vital role of the
United Nations in continuing to support Afghanistan. In
this regard, I wish to commend the outstanding work of
UNAMA and of the various United Nations agencies in
Afghanistan in a particularly difficult security context.
In reviewing the mandate of the Mission, which we will
be doing soon, we must not lose sight of the crucial
work that it does on a daily basis. It is imperative that
the international community, in particular the Security
Council, remain united in supporting Afghanistan’s
journey towards peace, democracy and economic and
social development.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I should like in turn to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Yamamoto, for his
briefing and for his tireless efforts to achieve a lasting
peace in Afghanistan. I thank Ms. Sima Samar for her
briefing and for her commitment to the promotion of
women’s rights in Afghanistan, and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for her statement.
Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
I will focus my remarks on three points: the peace
process; elections; and the importance of the promotion
and protection of human rights in Afghanistan.
First, concerning the peace process, Belgium
welcomes the intensification of national and
international efforts aimed at ending the lengthy and
devastating conflict in Afghanistan. We believe that a
lasting peace agreement can be achieved only through a
comprehensive and inclusive intra-Afghan dialogue. To
that end, we reiterate our call on the Taliban to engage
in direct peace talks.
In particular, Belgium calls on all parties to
promote the meaningful and equal participation of
women at all stages of the peace process. Lasting
peace begins with the appointment of a representative
and inclusive negotiating team. In addition, we would

My second point concerns the presidential elections
announced for September 2019. Belgium stresses the
need to learn from the elections held last year. Given
the tight timetable, we call on all parties to work to
restore confidence in the electoral process.
Elections are a responsibility shared by all
political actors. I emphasize the importance of
creating a favourable environment by avoiding
political interference in the decisions of the election
management bodies and engaging constructively so
that the presidential elections are free, transparent
and credible.
My last point concerns the human rights
situation in Afghanistan. We listened carefully to the
recommendations made by Ms. Samar. Belgium is
deeply concerned by the impact of the armed conflict
on the civilian population and in particular by the
high number of civilian casualties. Belgium urges all
parties to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and to take immediate steps to avoid
loss of life.
With particular reference to the situation of
violations of the rights of children, the Council awaits
the submission of the country report to the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict later this year.
Persistent violence against journalists and human
rights defenders is also unacceptable. All parties to the
conflict must comply with international standards for
protection. We are further concerned by the reports
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights on the treatment of detainees linked to the
conflict. Nearly one-third report credible accounts of
torture or ill-treatment in detention. We welcome the
steps taken by the Government in response and call for
stronger accountability measures.

19-1834517/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

With regard to demining efforts, Belgium welcomes
the Government’s efforts to align national standards for
the clearance of improvised objects that were abandoned
with international best practices.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my delegation’s
full support for the Afghan people and our strong
commitment to an Afghan-led and Afghan-led
peace process.
Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Mr. Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), and Ms. Sima Samar for their
briefings and personal contributions to the achievement
of peace and prosperity in Afghanistan.
Despite ongoing efforts at the national, regional
and international levels towards a negotiated peace
agreement, Afghanistan continues to face multiple and
complex difficulties in terms of security, stability and
development. Civilians continue to be the main victims
of the high level of instability and violence affecting
the country, and although the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/493) identifies a 23 per cent reduction
in civilian victims compared with the same period in
2018, we still worry about the high number of civilian
victims claimed by large-scale attacks perpetrated by
anti-Government forces and terrorists, including those
perpetrated with improvised explosive devices and
suicide bombings, although there were fewer of the
latter during the reporting period. Similarly, we are
dismayed by the ongoing recruitment and kidnapping
of and sexual violence against children, as well as
attacks on schools and medical institutions, during the
period covered by the report.
In that context, we condemn n the strongest
terms the deliberate attacks throughout the holy
month of Ramadan, during which civilians were
deliberately attacked by anti-Government elements.
We also condemn the 8 May attack on the staff of
non-governmental organizations in Kabul; the 24 May
murder of a religious scholar in a place of worship; the
incidents of 27 May and 3 June, respectively, directed
at civilian servants; and the attack of 2 June on Shiite
students. We express our solidarity with the people
and Government of Afghanistan for those losses. In
that same vein, we echo the words of the SecretaryGeneral’s call on all parties to comply strictly with their
obligations under international law and international
18/37

19/06/2019

humanitarian law to take all possible measures to
prevent attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
and the limitation of humanitarian access.
My delegation welcomes all efforts and initiatives
of the Government of Afghanistan to make progress
in the peace process, such as the formation of a
leadership council for peace and a negotiating team
that includes representatives of the political opposition
and women, and the convening of a loya jirga for peace
in Kabul on 29 April, among others. We encourage
the Government of Afghanistan to pursue its efforts
to achieve a comprehensive peace process, through
direct talks between the parties involved, and inclusive
and comprehensive talks among Afghans, with the
participation of countries of the region. Likewise,
we fully support the efforts of the international
community, the countries of the region and UNAMA to
promote peace and stability in Afghanistan in difficult
conditions. As has always been pointed out in this
Chamber, the strengthening of regional cooperation in
all spheres, including in the political, economic, social
and security spheres, is of vital importance and benefits
the entire region.
We hope that the new composition of the electoral
commissions — the Independent Election Commission
and the Electoral Complaints Commission — will enjoy
the support of all involved and interested parties. After
the lessons learned from the parliamentary elections
held in October 2018, it is now a priority to ensure
that the presidential elections of 28 September are
transparent, credible and inclusive.
We have taken note of the progress made in
achieving the meaningful participation of women, and
we take this opportunity to celebrate the milestone of
the election of two women as heads of the two electoral
bodies. We have no doubt that with the support they
deserve, they will do an excellent job. In that vein, we
hope that the Government will continue to implement
policies that guarantee the elimination of any persistent
obstacle to the participation of women in all spheres of
public and political life, and that their inclusion will be
a non-negotiable priority.
In conclusion, allow me once again to express
our full support for the efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan to find lasting peace and stability, and
to express our well-deserved praise and support for
the important role that the personnel of UNAMA are
playing, and in particular to Mr. Yamamoto for his
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

dedication to the promotion of peace and stability
in Afghanistan.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes this briefing and thanks
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his comprehensive briefing on the
activities of UNAMA and recent developments in the
political and security situation in that country. We also
thank Ms. Sima Samar, Chairperson of the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission, for her
informative briefing.
My delegation notes with satisfaction the
completion of the candidacy verification procedures by
the Independent Election Commission, approximately
three months before the presidential election in
Afghanistan. We encourage the Independent Election
Commission to continue to diligently register voters on
the electoral lists with a view to organizing the election
planned for 28 September, and to step up its efforts to
raise the awareness of voters and political actors on the
instructions for use and the guarantees offered by voting
machines in order to avoid the malfunctions observed
during the parliamentary elections of 20 October 2018.
My delegation believes that the progress made must
be strengthened by the commitment of all stakeholders
to creating an environment conducive to a free,
transparent and credible presidential election. Côte
d’Ivoire notes with concern the ongoing threats and
deadly attacks by the Taliban and the local branch of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, which could have
a negative impact on the turnout rate, as seen during
the parliamentary elections. We therefore call on the
international community and the troops of the Resolute
Support Mission to be vigilant and take preventive
security measures during this crucial electoral period
for the country’s future. Côte d’Ivoire also urges the
candidates to refrain from any action likely to lead to
tensions that could jeopardize the electoral process.
My country welcomes the appointment of women
to head the Independent Election Commission and the
Electoral Complaints Commission by President Ashraf
Ghani. It encourages the Afghan authorities to continue
their efforts to increase the participation of women in
institutions and the peace process, in accordance with
the outcomes of the national conference held in Kabul
on 12 December 2018.

S/PV. 8555

Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the establishment of
a leadership council for peace, whose task is to
contribute to the restoration of stability in Afghanistan.
The leadership council, together with the loya jirga
consultative forum, should serve as crucial tools for
strong national ownership of the process to emerge
from the crisis.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes all initiatives aimed at
facilitating dialogue among all Afghan parties. We
would also like to stress the importance of the support
of UNAMA and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for negotiations with the Taliban
with a view to involving them in the peace process. My
delegation also welcomes the efforts of the United States
Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation,
Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad, to initiate peace talks between
the Afghan Government and the Taliban.
My country remains concerned about the security
and humanitarian situations in Afghanistan, where the
widespread use of explosive devices and the systematic
obstruction of humanitarian assistance in the Talibancontrolled provinces represent real challenges. To
that end, my delegation welcomes the assistance that
the United Nations and its partners are providing to
the affected populations and urge the international
community to continue its humanitarian financial
support for Afghanistan.
The complexity of the multifaceted challenges
facing Afghanistan, including the fight against
corruption, terrorism and drug trafficking, requires
the continued attention of the international community
and significant support for the Afghan Government.
Côte d’Ivoire also calls for the continued presence of
the troops of the Resolute Support Mission and for the
funding pledges for the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces until 2024 to be met.
The latest developments in the situation in
Afghanistan give us reason to believe that political and
security instability is not inevitable and that peace in
the country is possible. That will be as a result of the
will of the Afghans themselves to write a new page of
peace and prosperity in their history.
In conclusion, my country expresses its support
for the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the UNAMA staff, the United
Nations specialized agencies, regional and international
organizations and all partners working to restore peace
and stability in Afghanistan.

19-1834519/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his
briefing and express our appreciation for his efforts
and those of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank Ambassador
Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, and
Ms. Samar, Chairperson of the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission, for their statements.
China congratulates Afghanistan on the 100th
anniversary of its independence and wishes the country
stability and development as soon as possible and
lasting peace in the future.
The situation in Afghanistan is now at a critical
juncture. The general elections and the peace and
reconciliation process are intertwined. The country’s
security situation is a cause for concern and its
humanitarian situation remains challenging. The
international community should earnestly fulfil
its commitment by continuing its strong support
for Afghanistan.
First, we should support Afghanistan in holding a
safe and successful presidential election in September.
We hope that the electoral institutions will learn from
the experience and lessons of last year’s parliamentary
elections and make orderly preparations for the
upcoming election. UNAMA must provide strong
support in that regard. We hope that the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces will plan their
deployment arrangements in advance to ensure security
and stability in the election period. All political
parties in Afghanistan should strengthen cooperation
and resolve their differences related to the elections
through dialogue.
Secondly, we should support the Afghan-owned
and Afghan-led reconciliation process. Recently, the
international community and countries of the region
have made efforts to actively promote direct dialogue
between the Afghan Government and the Taliban. The
loya jirga consultations also yielded positive results. We
call on all parties in Afghanistan to act for the greater
benefit of the country and its people and to seize this
significant opportunity for political reconciliation.
We hope that UNAMA will support the Government’s
efforts to promote political dialogue and encourage
the Taliban to promptly return to the negotiating
table. The international community should push for an
intra-Afghan dialogue as soon as possible.
20/37

19/06/2019

Thirdly, the international community must support
Afghanistan in building its capacity for combating
terrorism and maintaining stability. Recently, the
number of civilian casualties caused by the conflict
in Afghanistan has decreased compared to the same
period last year. However, the number of civilian
deaths attributed to air strikes and search operations
has increased while terrorist groups remain active.
China, the Russian Federation and the United
States have recently reached trilateral consensus on the
peace process in Afghanistan, calling for the orderly
and responsible withdrawal of foreign troops from
Afghanistan. We hope that UNAMA will continue
to help Afghanistan strengthen its security capacity.
The international community should strengthen
coordination and cooperation to support Afghanistan
in its counter-terrorism efforts to effectively respond
to terrorism, transnational crime and drug trafficking,
among other threats.
Fourthly, we must effectively help to improve
the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. Recently,
conflict and natural disasters have led to a significant
increase in the number of newly displaced people
in Afghanistan, while millions of drought-affected
Afghans still need humanitarian assistance. UNAMA
should coordinate with the United Nations agencies in
Afghanistan to help the Afghan people and Government
eradicate poverty and improve people’s livelihoods. The
international community should honour its assistance
pledges, help the people of Afghanistan seriously
affected by natural disasters, improve the humanitarian
situation of the Afghan refugees in the neighbouring
countries and support their return to their homeland at
an early date.
From 13 to 14 June, the 19th meeting of the
Council of Heads of State of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) was held in Bishkek, the capital of
the Republic of Kyrgyzstan. Afghan President Ghani
attended the meeting. The SCO member States have
always supported the efforts of the Afghan Government
and people to rebuild peace and promote stable
economic development. They reiterated their readiness
to support the Afghan-owned and Afghan-led political
reconciliation process bilaterally and as part of the
SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group.
At the SCO summit, Chinese President Xi Jinping
met with President Ghani. The two Heads of State
had an extensive and in-depth exchange of views on
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

issues such as the reconciliation process, development
of the Belt and Road Initiative and counter-terrorism
cooperation and reached many important agreements.
China and Afghanistan are old friends, close neighbours
and strategic partners. China has consistently supported
the Afghan reconciliation process and will continue to
use channels such as the SCO-Afghanistan Contact
Group, the China-Afghanistan-Pakistan Foreign
Ministers’ dialogue and the China-United StatesRussian Federation consultations on Afghanistan to
actively promote peace and encourage dialogue to help
the Afghan people achieve intra-Afghan dialogue.
China
actively
supports
Afghanistan’s
reconstruction and integration into regional economic
development. From 25 to 27 April, the second Belt and
Road Summit Forum for International Cooperation was
successfully held in Beijing. The Afghan Government
sent a delegation to the forum. In recent years, China and
Afghanistan have continuously increased cooperation
within the framework of the Belt and Road Initiative
and have achieved fruitful results.
China will continue to work with Afghanistan to
further implement the Sino-Afghanistan Memorandum
of Understanding on Joint Promotion of the Belt
and Road Initiative and advance results-oriented
cooperation across all sectors.
Lastly, I reaffirm that China stands ready to work
with the wider international community to contribute
to the security, stability, development and prosperity
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
Special Representative Yamamoto, Ms. Samar and the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for their
valuable briefings.
Peru has been keeping a close eye on the situation
in Afghanistan, particularly the peace process, which
has the potential to define the country’s future in the
medium and long terms, especially with respect to
strengthening democracy. We therefore consider it
crucial that the solution to the current crisis be engaged
in the framework of the intra-Afghan dialogue and
Afghan leadership. We agree that direct negotiations
must be held between the Taliban and Government
representatives. As the Special Representative reminded
us, there is no substitute for the Afghan people.
In this context, we consider the recent convening
of the loya jirga for peace in Kabul to be another

S/PV. 8555

meaningful step, which brought together more than
3,000 delegates from across the country, including
tribal leaders, and enjoyed the participation of a
significant and commendable number of women. Its
outcomes demonstrate the aspirations of the Afghan
people and form the consensus-based framework
for action aimed at achieving sustainable peace, the
restoration of the rule of law, respect for human rights
and the continuation of the reforms undertaken to date.
It is vital that the presidential elections scheduled
for next September take place in a spirit of dialogue,
tolerance and mutual respect. As Mr. Yamamoto
explained, this is a shared responsibility. Given the
existing technical and security difficulties, we must
avoid any additional setbacks caused by political
motivations or actions that cast doubt on the legitimacy
of the electoral process.
We wish to express our deep concern about the
precarious security situation. The deaths resulting from
air strikes by forces linked to the Government have
reached record levels, adding to the pain caused by
ongoing indiscriminate terrorist attacks on civilians. We
are particularly concerned by the presence of militants
associated with the Islamic State of Iraq and the LevantKhorasan Province who, given their association with
drug trafficking, represent an additional example of
the link between terrorism and organized crime, which
can be classified as a regional threat. We consider it
essential to intensify international efforts to combat
these scourges, in close coordination with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
Likewise, it is imperative that all parties to the
conflict respect their obligations under humanitarian law
and the protection of civilians. We also underscore the
importance of transitional justice and accountability in
the current peace process, as highlighted by Ms. Samar.
The unscrupulous actions of criminal groups must not
go unpunished or be forgotten.
In another vein, Peru commends the recent
headway made by the Government in the fight against
corruption, as well as reforms in the justice sector and
progress in the area of women’s empowerment. In that
regard, we welcome the steps taken to implement the
National Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan and
the election of two women as respective heads of the
most important electoral bodies in Afghanistan. We are
confident that women’s participation, together with that
of young people, in the political life of the country will

19-1834521/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

contribute to strengthening Afghanistan’s capacities
for prevention, peacebuilding and peacekeeping and
the vital entrenchment of democracy in Afghan society.
I conclude by thanking Special Representative
Tadamichi Yamamoto, as well as all United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan personnel, for their
work, which we fully support.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): We welcome the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General back
to the Council and thank him for his briefing. We also
thank our Afghan colleague for hers. I am very pleased
to welcome Ms. Samar back to the Council; I knew her
well when I was in Kabul two years after she became
the first civil society briefer on Afghanistan. I think it
is now more important than ever that we hear the very
strong voice of civil society, and we thank her for all
her work on this vital dossier.
The Afghan Ambassador already announced
the joint initiative that Afghanistan and the United
Kingdom have undertaken to launch a group of friends
of women in Afghanistan. We are very proud to be part
of this, as it is a very good joint initiative, if I may say
so. The group will bring together women ambassadors
and senior United Nations figures to work to highlight
and protect the gains that Afghan women have achieved
over the past 18 years. It is also a very good vehicle to
give meaningful practical expression to resolution 1325
(2000) and to promote the participation of women in
peace efforts and in public life.
As we all know, there are two main themes of
today’s debate: peace and elections. We, the United
Kingdom, share the interest of other Council members
in reiterating that a political solution is the only way
to end the conflict. The ongoing efforts of the Afghan
Government and the United States — in particular the
United States Special Representative for Afghanistan
Reconciliation, Zalmay Khalilzad — are making
important progress towards a sustainable peace process.
The United Kingdom fully supports all efforts to
convene a genuine political process to give Afghans the
chance to decide the future of their country. This will,
naturally, require the full support of the region as well
as the international community. I therefore hope we can
stay united in a call for intra-Afghan peace negotiations
without delay and with the full involvement of both
sides to the conflict, and the legitimate Government of
Afghanistan in particular.
22/37

19/06/2019

I would like to echo what the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General said about calling on Member
States to use their influence to encourage the Taliban
not only to show the leadership and foresight required
to engage in talks, but also to take the practical steps
that are undoubtedly required on the path to peace.
We have talked a little bit about women’s
participation. There is a lot of evidence of how important
this is and, as efforts progress, we encourage women’s
involvement in all forums, whether they involve local
or State-level negotiations in Kabul.
Turning to the elections, as many other speakers
have highlighted today, these are crucial for future
political stability. We know that the atmosphere is
already charged, three months ahead of election
day, so I would like to call on all political actors to
behave responsibly and constructively for the sake
of Afghanistan’s stability. We encourage the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to redouble its efforts, with the Special Representative
at the helm, to support and advise the election
management bodies.
I would also like to take this opportunity to urge the
Independent Election Commission to continue its work
to deliver timely and credible elections on 28 September.
As the Special Representative highlighted, the timeline
is tight, meaning we need a sustained effort by everyone.
We welcome the commitment to securing elections that
Afghanistan Ambassador was able to set out today, and
we urge the Afghan security forces to do their utmost
to provide the conditions to allow the Afghan people to
exercise their right to vote in safety.
A number of speakers have mentioned civilian
casualties. We share the concern at the high level of
civilian casualties, which underlines the human cost
of the conflict. All parties need to take immediate
measures to avoid the killing of innocent civilians,
including women and children. The United Kingdom
will continue to support the Afghan security forces in
improving their capacity to provide security for the
population and to implement the national policy on
civilian casualty mitigation.
In conclusion, I would just like to reaffirm the
United Kingdom’s commitment to supporting the
Government and people of Afghanistan in order to
achieve a peaceful and prosperous future.
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

The President (spoke in Arabic): I will now speak
in my national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to join other speakers
in thanking Mr. Yamamoto and Ms. Samar for their
briefings. I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for her contribution to our deliberations
earlier in the meeting.
The State of Kuwait highly appreciates the
efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the vital role played by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Yamamoto. We also appreciate the contribution
of all United Nations staff in Afghanistan, who make
dedicated efforts to support the people of Afghanistan
in difficult circumstances. We further commend the
important role of the bodies and institutions of civil
society in Afghanistan and their contributions in such
areas as human rights and the fight against corruption.
We reiterate our congratulations to Afghanistan
and its courageous people on the first parliamentary
elections to be held since 2011. The Afghan people
have faced many challenges and made major sacrifices
in order to choose their representatives in Parliament,
demonstrating their attachment to their political
rights. We support the friendly Afghan people and
encourage them to pursue the democratic process by
holding presidential elections during this year. We
are fully confident that the presidential elections, for
which preparations have been diligent, will be crowned
with success.
I fully agree with those who have spoken before
me concerning the importance of the current political
process, which requires all the wise and political leaders
in Afghanistan to work in the national interest rather
than for partisan gain in order to ensure that all Afghans
enjoy a safe and dignified life following decades of war
and conflict. We hope that the preparatory work for the
presidential elections will include more meetings and
consultations with all parties so as to ensure that the
right candidate is chosen as President of Afghanistan
for the upcoming period. We in the Council must step
up our efforts to support the political process and
UNAMA, as well as to encourage the holding of the
presidential elections in September.
With respect to security, like the Secretary-General
we are concerned by the instability in Afghanistan,
although the number of civilian casualties has slightly
declined compared with last year. The incidence of

S/PV. 8555

suicide attacks targeting electoral facilities during
the parliamentary elections has fallen by 72 per cent.
Fighting between Afghan security forces and their
adversaries has continued throughout the country,
accounting for the majority of security incidents.
That demonstrates the difficulty of the task facing the
Afghani Government and the international community,
especially in light of the fact that the Taliban and
Da’esh continue to launch terrorist attacks on villages
and unarmed civilians. We urge all parties to the
conflict to honour their obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights law and to take
immediate measures to avoid civilian casualties.
Addressing the political reconciliation process and
security situation in Afghanistan requires us to consider
the vital regional and international role in these two
basic issues. We have followed with satisfaction the
participation of Afghanistan at all levels in bilateral
meetings with many countries of the region so as
to reach understanding and ultimately improve the
security, economic and political situations. We also
welcome the efforts of many countries to promote
the political reconciliation process in Afghanistan by
sending their representatives and envoys, including the
efforts made by Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad, United States
Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation,
who has held many bilateral and multilateral
meetings with parties to the conflict and others at the
international level in order to strengthen the process of
political reconciliation.
The State of Kuwait has followed the issue of
humanitarian assistance and displaced persons because
we believe in its importance. Continued fighting and
acts of violence, in addition to drought and natural
disasters, led to the displacement of more than 110,000
people between I January and 16 May. We are more
alarmed by the fact that 58 per cent of those displaced
were children. It is regrettable that those figures are
the result of increased attacks on health facilities and
medical staff, in addition to restrictions on conducting
vaccination campaigns against polio.
The State of Kuwait believes that peace and stability
in Afghanistan and the region will be the result of a
negotiated diplomatic settlement, and that the time is
right for achieving a comprehensive political settlement
to the conflict in Afghanistan involving all parties in
a constructive manner and participating in diplomatic
efforts to attain a lasting peace in that country.

19-1834523/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto
and Ms. Samar for their briefings, and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Raz, for
her statement. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his enlightening report (S/2019/493).
The increasing engagement of the international
community in achieving peace in Afghanistan is
important. It is critical to seize the momentum and build
on the achievements of the past 18 years. This will be
sustained and enhanced only through joint efforts.
Over the past two decades, Afghanistan has
gone through an unprecedented transformation.
Improvements in the fields of security, democracy,
governance, economic development and human rights
should be commended. These achievements are not yet
at the point of no return and major challenges remain
to be tackled. As indicated by the Secretary-General in
his report, the security situation remains volatile, with
a consistently high number of incidents. The stability
of Afghanistan, and subsequently that of the region,
will depend on improved security. Turkey remains
committed to standing by the Afghan people in this
transition process, including in the fields of security
and development.
At this critical juncture, any attempt towards peace
should be designed with the active participation and
contribution of all segments of the Afghan society.
Sustainable peace is possible only with genuine
reconciliation. The Afghan people cannot sacrifice
the achievements they have made at high cost. For
instance, since 2001 the status of women has changed
profoundly. Now, Afghan women are rightly adamant
in calling for a peace process that protects their gains.
Some 2.5 million of the 8 million students enrolled in
Afghan schools are girls. None our efforts towards the
empowerment of girls and women should be wasted.
Ensuring women’s participation in elections, peace
negotiations and overall engagement in governance and
Government will help preserve the gains that we have
made to date.
We can achieve lasting peace and stability in
Afghanistan only with the support of neighbouring
and regional countries. The continued constructive
24/37

19/06/2019

engagement of the international community with
regional actors is essential to enable an atmosphere
conducive to genuine cooperation. The region has
demonstrated on various occasions its readiness to
resolve its own issues and to transform common
problems into areas of mutual benefit. Started in 2011,
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process is a unique platform
bringing all regional countries and international
stakeholders together. We are pleased to host the next
senior officials meeting of the Istanbul Process on
25 June in Ankara.
Increased trust and cooperation between Pakistan
and Afghanistan are also imperative to the stability of
the region. As announced by President Erdoğan, we are
ready to deploy efforts for the next Turkey-AfghanistanPakistan Trilateral Summit.
The holding of inclusive elections and the conduct
of a truly representative peace process will be a
litmus test for all of us. We should make sure that any
decision to withdraw from the country does not give
the impression that the international community is
disengaging. We cannot afford to leave Afghanistan
in a power vacuum. At the same time, we should all
support the efforts of the Afghan Government to make
peace with the Taliban while protecting democracy and
individual rights, especially the rights of women. The
desire of the Afghan people for peace and democracy
should prevail.
Before concluding my remarks, I would like to
repeat what has been said many times in the Chamber. An
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation
process is central to achieving long-lasting peace
in the country. Turkey will remain in solidarity with
the Afghan people and will continue to contribute to
a secure, stable and prosperous Afghanistan, as it has
done for many decades.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia welcomes the
significant momentum for peace in Afghanistan. The
Government of Afghanistan has taken important steps
towards bringing the long-running conflict to an end.
The recent peace jirga, sponsored by the Government
of Afghanistan, was a significant opportunity for
Afghan community representatives to focus on what
peace means to them. Securing such buy-in of people
from across Afghanistan is essential to reaching a
sustainable political settlement to the conflict. We
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

encourage the Afghan Government to persevere with
its efforts to build a national consensus on the terms of
a settlement.
Australia also welcomes the efforts led by United
States Special Representative Khalilzad to engage
in meaningful negotiations with the Taliban. The
progress made has been important and we hope that
the momentum developed will continue towards a
comprehensive agreement. While those negotiations
were never going to be easy, we are disappointed that the
Taliban continues to resist direct talks with the Afghan
Government. We do not believe that a sustainable
political settlement is viable without such talks and call
on the Taliban and other parties to immediately begin
discussions without preconditions.
We encourage the Afghan Government to continue
its efforts to ensure that the people of Afghanistan can
vote freely and fairly in credible presidential elections
on 28 September, without the threat of violence, and call
on the Taliban to respect and engage with that process.
Australia stands firm in its support for peace in
Afghanistan, as part of a committed international
community. We were pleased to hear today about
the formation of a group of friends of women in
Afghanistan and look forward to participating in that
important initiative. We appreciate the role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
under the able leadership of Special Representative
Yamamoto, in leading and coordinating United Nations
efforts in Afghanistan, and we remain committed to
the NATO-led international coalition and its effort to
support Afghanistan’s security and development.
While the outlook for peace is promising, we
must not forget the millions of Afghans who continue
to struggle in the face of a protracted humanitarian
crisis. Australia is helping respond to a range of needs,
including lifesaving food and nutrition assistance. We
encourage humanitarian partners to continue to find
better ways of coordinating to meet the needs of the
Afghan people.
In conclusion, we know that Afghans are ready for
peace. Australia stands ready to support them and we
look forward to working with the Afghan Government
and other partners to help secure a sustainable political
settlement and contribute to the post-peace economic
action plan and development agenda.

S/PV. 8555

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank Special Representative
Yamamoto for his informative briefing on the situation
in Afghanistan. His analysis helps us all to better
support Afghanistan during this critical period ahead
of the presidential elections. I was fortunate to have
received a more detailed briefing from the members of
the Group of Friends of Afghanistan, which was very
useful.
Let me also express our sincere thanks to the entire
staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan for their ongoing commitment and work in
the country. I would like to thank Ms. Sima Samar for
her briefing. I also welcome and thank Her Excellency
Ambassador Adela Raz, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for sharing the views of her Government.
Today I will address two important and longstanding issues for Canada: first, the upcoming
presidential elections and, secondly, the inclusion of
women in the peace process.
First, with regard to the upcoming presidential
elections, the holding of transparent and fair elections in
September is essential for building on the gains already
made. We welcome the decision of the Independent
Election Commission to postpone the Ghazni provincial
council and parliamentary elections in order to focus on
the presidential elections. Furthermore, we welcome the
fact that Afghan electoral authorities are applying the
lessons learned from the October 2018 parliamentary
elections, in particular with respect to the use of
biometrics. Canada supports the continuation of the
constitutional Government until elections are held and
encourages all parties involved to show restraint ahead
of the elections.
(spoke in English)
We are concerned about the increased number of
attacks on Afghan schools as a result of their being
used as polling centres. Education is not a privilege; it
is a right. Schools should be places where all students,
regardless of where they live, can learn and thrive in
peace. To minimize the negative impact of the elections
on education and children, we urge the Government
of Afghanistan to seek alternative venues for polling
stations, when possible. We underline the importance
of providing security to voters as a prerequisite to

19-1834525/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

19/06/2019

ensuring that women are able to safely and meaningfully
participate. Both the elections and the peace process
will be flawed if women are not effectively engaged at
each step.

Canada continues to support Afghan-led efforts
towards peace and democracy and will continue to
advocate for the inclusion of women and girls in both of
those endeavours.

That brings me to my second point. The research
is clear — when women are involved in peacebuilding,
peace negotiations and peace talks, outcomes are better
and last longer. Nearly 30 per cent of participants at last
month’s consultative loya jirga for peace were women,
and although that is an important step, more work is
needed to ensure that women’s voices are not just heard
but listened to. An agreement that does not bring peace
to all members of society is not peace. Men need to
stand in solidarity with women to reach a settlement
that benefits all Afghans.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.

Afghan women are not willing to sacrifice the hardearned gains in their rights for a political settlement with
the Taliban. To ensure that women’s rights, democracy
and the Constitution are not only preserved throughout
the peace process, but also extended to women and
girls living in Taliban-controlled areas, women must
play a substantive role in all peace negotiations. That
is why Canada is working with partners to equip
women’s organizations with the skills they need to
negotiate effectively and advocate for their seat at
the table. Through our support to the International
Civil Action Network, Canada is providing grants to
women’s organizations to build women’s capacity to be
more involved in local and national peace processes,
forming youth peace circles and helping to reintegrate
former fighters.
We have also contributed $8.4 million to the
Women’s Voice and Leadership project in Afghanistan.
That initiative supports the empowerment of women
and girls through capacity-building, advocacy and
the strengthening of networks among women’s rights
organizations. We are delighted to hear about the new
initiative undertaken by the Afghan and United Kingdom
Governments and look forward to learning more.
At the same time, we remain acutely aware that
the challenges faced by Afghan women are not limited
to civic life. The rates of violence against women are
among the highest in the world and justice for victims
remains utterly inadequate, despite the efforts of the
Government to curb that practice. Canada opposes the
use of mediation in cases of violence against women and
encourages the Government to demonstrate greater due
diligence in ensuring gender equality before the law.
26/37

Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me too begin by thanking
Special Representative Yamamoto and my good friend,
Ms. Sima Samar, for their briefings.
The situation in Afghanistan remains a source of
concern to the international community. Persisting
conflict, instability and turmoil and a fragile economy
continue to compound the suffering of the Afghan
people. That is also the message of the Secretary
General’s report (S/2019/493). We share his regret with
regard to the continued fighting and its heavy toll on
the civilian population. We are also concerned about
the aggravating humanitarian situation.
But there are also grounds for hope. After decades
of war, there is reason now to be cautiously optimistic
about the prospects for peace. Several rounds of direct
talks between the United States and the Taliban have
opened up a real opportunity for progress towards
peace in a country that has been ravaged by conflict and
violence for more than a generation. The international
community had long reached a consensus that a
negotiated peace was the best, and indeed only, hope
for securing durable peace, stability and prosperity
in Afghanistan.
That has also been my country’s consistent
position and recommendation. For almost two decades,
Pakistan argued that there was no military solution
to the conflict and that the only sustainable path to
peace in Afghanistan was through dialogue. We are
therefore gratified that this is the path that is now being
seriously pursued.
Apart from Afghanistan, there is no country
other than Pakistan that has suffered more from the
four decades of war and foreign interventions in
Afghanistan. There is no other country that will gain
more from peace in Afghanistan. In his very first
address to the nation after his election last year, Prime
Minister Imran Khan reaffirmed Pakistan’s support for
peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan, and we
have played an active role in the pursuit of that goal.
My Government responded positively to United
States President Donald Trump’s request to Prime
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

Minister Khan last year for help in the Afghan peace
process. We have not only called for a reduction of
violence on all sides, as well as a ceasefire, but have
taken whatever steps we could to contribute to that
objective. Our consistent efforts helped to overcome the
decades-old political impasse on the commencement of
a peace dialogue.
Our contribution to the launch of direct United
States-Taliban talks in Doha, after the initial round in the
United Arab Emirates, has been widely acknowledged.
As the next step, Pakistan released Taliban leader
Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar at the request of our
international partners. During the six rounds of talks
between the United States and the Taliban, Pakistan
maintained a close liaison with the process and fully
supported those peace efforts, with the endorsement
of those at the highest levels of the progress that has
been made.
Pakistan will continue to play whatever role it can
to help promote a political settlement that can end the
long suffering of the Afghan people. The path to peace
will not be easy. Hurdles remain. Many challenges
lie ahead before a comprehensive agreement can be
reached and accepted by all the parties. Together with
the other international partners, we feel that there is now
an urgent need to take the next important step — the
initiation of an intra-Afghan dialogue. We urge all sides,
including the Taliban, to commit to that. We also hope
that the seventh round of United States-Taliban talks,
expected early next month, will be able to kick-start a
genuine and inclusive intra-Afghan dialogue process.
That could lead potentially to the most decisive phase
in the peace effort.
Cooperation between Pakistan and Afghanistan
is a vital component of the endeavour to realize peace
and security within Afghanistan and the entire region.
Strengthening bilateral relations is a priority for my
Government. My Foreign Minister visited Kabul three
times last year, sending a strong signal of our desire to
work closely and meaningfully with the National Unity
Government. At the invitation of Prime Minister Imran
Khan, President Ashraf Ghani will visit Islamabad later
this month.
We are confident that the visit will provide impetus
to further strengthening our bilateral relations. The
combined potential of Pakistan and Afghanistan is
considerable. Expanded trade, energy cooperation
and the implementation of the various transregional

S/PV. 8555

economic projects already identified can greatly
enhance peace and prosperity for the entire region.
We stand committed to working with Afghanistan to
promote our shared political and economic objectives.
Let me conclude by recalling that the great
philosopher and poet of the East, Muhammad Iqbal,
who first conceived of Pakistan as an independent
State and also described Afghanistan as the heart of
Asia, declared more than a century ago that, if there is
instability in Afghanistan, all of Asia will be unstable,
whereas peace in Afghanistan will bring peace
and prosperity to the entire region. Today, we look
hopefully to a future where the restoration of peace in
our neighbouring country will lead to the realization
of stability and security that has for so long eluded
our region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy): The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/493), for which we are grateful,
highlights the rapid changes that we are witnessing
in Afghanistan. At the outset, I wish to underline
how crucial the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan remains to the stabilization and
development of the country. Italy thanks Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto
and his staff for their laudable commitment.
The attainment of peace is the most formidable
of the many challenges facing Afghanistan today.
The latest diplomatic developments, with the efforts
of the United States Special Representative to set up
the groundwork for peace negotiations, as well as the
trend towards greater regional cooperation, are opening
a window of opportunity that must be seized. All
stakeholders should do their part in order to achieve
that goal, with the United Nations playing a leading
role, in order to ensure that all positive initiatives and
contributions feed into a unitary and coherent design.
Persistent security threats continue to entail very
high costs, draining precious resources and energy
away from addressing other urgent needs, such as
institutional consolidation and economic and social
development. Italy expresses its deep gratitude to the
National Unity Government and its Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces for the sacrifices made in
the daily fight against terrorism and violent extremism.
We stand by their side and remain determined in our
support for strengthening the Forces’ capabilities, first

19-1834527/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

and foremost through our contribution to the Resolute
Support Mission.
The prospects for peace in Afghanistan have never
been more tangible than they are today. Italy expresses
its full support for those diplomatic initiatives that can
concretely facilitate the launching of a reconciliation
process in Afghanistan. Nevertheless, the lion’s share
of the work that must be done in order to seize this
opportunity lies in the domestic sphere. Only a process
that encompasses extensive and inclusive participation,
and where there is true Afghan ownership and
leadership, can ensure such an outcome.
Women, in particular, must be empowered to play an
active role in the process in order to protect their rights,
as enshrined in the Constitution, and to safeguard the
broader civil and social gains achieved in the course
of the past 17 years. I welcome the joint AfghanistanUnited Kingdom initiative for establishing a new group
of friends on women’s rights, and Italy stands ready to
join and contribute to the group.
We wish to reiterate our deep appreciation
of President Ghani’s commitment to peace and
reconciliation, beginning with his generous offer
made in February 2018 to negotiate with the Taliban
without preconditions, which was renewed in Geneva
last December. The determination to achieve peace also
found its expression in the consultative loya jirga that
was convened at the end of April.
The presidential elections scheduled for next
September will be a litmus test for Afghanistan. The
organizational and procedural difficulties of last
October’s parliamentary elections must serve as a
lesson learned in order to ensure that the upcoming
presidential elections will be credible and transparent. It
is vital that they be held without delays or shortcomings.
The credibility of Afghan institutions depends on that.
We invite all presidential candidates, from the current
President to members of the opposition, to commit
to a responsible approach that will ensure that those
institutions are protected.
The importance of the upcoming vote should not
distract our attention from seeking peace. Electoral
considerations should not prevail over the urgent need
to promote dialogue among all components of Afghan
society and make the necessary compromises in order to
reach a peace agreement. Italy fully joins in the appeals
to distinguish between the electoral track and the peace
track, pursuing each one independently of the other.
28/37

19/06/2019

In conclusion, I would like to express my country’s
unwavering support for all sincere efforts to restore
peace and stability to Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tajikistan.
Mr. Mahmadaminov (Tajikistan): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate Kuwait on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and express my
appreciation for the convening of today’s debate on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. I
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, for his efforts and valuable observations,
Ms. Sima Samar for her detailed briefing and my
colleague the Ambassador of Afghanistan for
her statement.
Among the countries of the region, Tajikistan has a
special relationship with Afghanistan. It is based on our
common historical, spiritual and cultural values.
With regard to the current political situation in
Afghanistan, we all equally feel the growing security
deficit in the region and beyond. That is due primarily to
the continuing threat of international terrorism, religious
extremism and illicit drug trafficking. Our particular
concern is the trend of the propaganda activities and
subversion being carried out by representatives and
supporters of the Islamic State in Afghanistan. The
activation of the supporters and militants of the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province is
happening against the backdrop of a significant flow
of drugs, weapons and human resources. The further
aggravation of the political situation in Afghanistan
poses a real threat to the security of the entire region
and will affect the functioning of the main transit routes
through Afghanistan in the direction of Central Asia.
The world community has been making substantial
efforts to free Afghanistan of terrorism and extremism
and to help it launch the phase of sustainable
development. In that context, Tajikistan supports the
implementation of the international strategy for the
comprehensive solution and further reconstruction of
Afghanistan. It is necessary to support the Government
of Afghanistan, especially during the decade of
reconstruction of Afghanistan, from 2015 to 2024.
It is our view that international assistance should
first and foremost meet the most basic needs of the
people of Afghanistan to enjoy a decent life, education,
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

their rights, social security and employment. That
assistance should bring hope and constructive power
to the people of Afghanistan so that they themselves
become more committed to ensuring peace and stability
and the socioeconomic revival of their country. In our
view, the United Nations could play a stronger and more
effective role in making further progress in that regard.
We support the Afghan Government in its efforts to
start an effective peace process as soon as possible. At
the same time, we emphasize the need to stop the armed
opposition groups from committing violence and break
their ties with Al-Qaida and the Islamic State. The peace
process is a key factor for the long-term stability and
unity of Afghanistan. The security of Afghanistan and
the region as a whole cannot be achieved without the
eradication of terrorism and radicalism. The countries
of the region need to restrict the physical movement of
terrorists in their territories and destroy their sources
of financing.
To tackle the issue of countering terrorism and its
financing, Tajikistan, in cooperation with the United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the European Union, hosted a highlevel conference entitled “International and Regional
Cooperation on Countering Terrorism and its Financing
Through Illicit Drug Trafficking and Organized
Crime” in Dushanbe on 16 and 17 May. More than 500
participants from 52 countries and 29 international
and regional organizations, as well as representatives
of the diplomatic corps, civil society and academia,
attended the conference. The objective of the Dushanbe
conference was to promote strengthened international
and regional cooperation and identify effective methods
of countering the current challenges and threats.
Last week, on 14 and 15 June, the capital city
of Dushanbe hosted another significant event: the
fifth Summit of the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-building Measures in Asia (CICA).
Speaking at the opening ceremony of the Summit, the
President of my Republic, His Excellency Mr. Emomali
Rahmon, expressed concern over the difficult situation
in neighbouring Afghanistan and called for taking
effective measures and the further coordination of the
efforts of the international community, including CICA
member States, in that area.
One of the lessons we learned from the history
of Afghanistan over the past two decades is that
terrorism and extremism cannot be eradicated through

S/PV. 8555

military means alone. Socioeconomic expansion and
Afghanistan’s integration into the regional economy are
therefore one of the ways to eliminate the foundations
of terrorism and extremist phenomena.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Tajikistan’s longstanding support for the constructive initiatives of
the world community to ensure sustainable peace and
the economic revival of Afghanistan, as well as its
willingness to further strengthen cooperation with the
Government of Afghanistan and international partners
in the future. Moreover, we wish Afghanistan every
success in holding peaceful, inclusive and transparent
presidential elections this year.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, for his informative briefing and tireless
efforts on behalf of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Let me further
express my appreciation to Ms. Sima Samar for her
briefing, and Ambassador Adela Raz of Afghanistan
for her valuable input.
Japan welcomes the finalization of the results of
the parliamentary elections held last October, as well
as the inauguration of the first Afghan Parliament since
2011. With the newly elected Independent Election
Commission and based on the lessons learned from
the elections, it is very important for the upcoming
presidential elections to be credible, so that the results
are widely accepted.
Japan commends the efforts of the Afghan
Government to achieve peace with the Taliban,
including the holding of the consultative peace
loya jirga from April to May, as well as the ongoing
preparations for the Kabul process meeting. Dialogue
among the Afghan people is fundamental to realizing
sustainable peace in Afghanistan. Japan hopes that the
efforts made by the relevant groups towards peace,
including the dialogue between the United States and
the Taliban and the trilateral dialogue among the United
States, Russia and China, will help lead to a successful
intra-Afghan dialogue.
Meanwhile, Japan expresses its deep concern about
the continuing terrorist attacks in Afghanistan. Japan
hopes that positive developments in the peace process
will put an end to violence, bring a comprehensive

19-1834529/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

ceasefire and, eventually, lead to lasting peace. Japan
will seek to cooperate with the international community
to advance the peace process.
The participation of women in the peace process in
Afghanistan is fundamental. Japan has been organizing
workshops for women in Afghanistan to enhance their
response capability towards gender-based violence. We
shall continue those efforts.
Japan remains committed to supporting a selfreliant and stable Afghanistan. In March, Japan
announced new assistance of approximately $96 million
to Afghanistan. That has since been disbursed to
projects, including efforts to provide assistance to
refugees and respond to drought, as well as demining
and counter-narcotics initiatives. In addition, in March
Japan provided emergency relief goods in response to
flood damage. Japan will continue to cooperate hand in
hand with the Afghan people, including through such
short-term humanitarian assistance.
Enhancing
regional
cooperation
between
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries is also
important. When the Foreign Ministers of Japan and
the five Central Asian countries gathered in Dushanbe
in May for a ministerial meeting of the Central Asia
plus Japan dialogue, Afghanistan also participated as
a guest country. Japan will remain committed to the
countries of the region, including through supporting
the enhancement of border controls.
I would like to conclude my statement by
emphasizing the important role of UNAMA in
achieving peace and prosperity in Afghanistan, and
Japan commends and supports the efforts made by
Mr. Yamamoto and his team.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate. I also thank Mr. Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and Ms. Sima Samar,
Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission, for their briefings. I would also
like to express my appreciation to Ambassador Adela
Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for
sharing her perspectives on the recent developments in
her country.
30/37

19/06/2019

By all accounts, this is a crucial year for
Afghanistan. While Afghanistan gears up to have its
fourth presidential elections later this year, all of us
need to be mindful of the gains that the Afghan people
have made in the past 18 years. They have strengthened
democracy in their country, established a constitutional
order, uplifted the status of women, protected the status
of minorities and youth, built a strong army and sturdy
security forces, and created stronger regional links.
They have also excelled in the sporting arena and
are among the elite group of 10 teams that are vying
for the Cricket World Cup currently under way. The
Afghan people have done all of that while confronting
and warding off the threats posed every day by
terrorism. While there may be perceptions of threats
of transnational terrorism from Afghanistan, in reality
it is the Afghan people who have long been victims of
transnational terrorism.
Even while the violence in Afghanistan continues,
the gains of the Afghan people are visible and tangible.
Support for the preservation and consolidation of those
achievements is the only available option. Reversal
and roll-back are not options that can be considered.
The international community needs to continue to
support the painstakingly achieved institutional gains
in Afghanistan.
The concluding communiqué of the loya jirga
convened by President Ghani on 29 April called, among
other things, for a ceasefire, talks without preconditions,
a Taliban office to be opened in Afghanistan, a
responsible withdrawal of international forces, the
formation of an inclusive negotiating team, continued
support from the international community and the
preservation of human rights, particularly women’s
rights. Those provisions, agreed by the Afghan people,
are long-standing and supported by several countries in
the region.
Opportunities created by recent international
efforts are welcome. However, we see that some may
be driven by a sense of urgency and have timelines that
are, perhaps, not intrinsic to the needs of the Afghan
people. We need to be cognizant that it is the Afghan
people who will have to implement and sustain these
agreements. The dignity and sustainability of the
gains made by the people of Afghanistan should be the
paramount factor in determining what outcome will best
suit the country and be implementable in a sustainable
and dignified manner. We support an Afghan-led,
Afghan-owned and Afghan-controlled inclusive peace
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

and reconciliation process that promotes and protects
the unity, sovereignty, democracy, inclusiveness and
prosperity of Afghanistan.
As the way forward is chalked out, we cannot ignore
the fact that groups enjoying support and safe havens
carry out violent and terrorist activities from across
borders. They cannot be allowed to negotiate from a
place of advantage. The sanctuaries and safe havens
provided to terror networks have to be addressed for
the sake of genuine and sustainable peace. The terrorist
activities of the Taliban, the Haqqani Network, Da’esh,
Al-Qaida and its proscribed affiliates, including
Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed, need to
end. Experience with the Hizb-e Islami shows that
a peace settlement within the rubric of the current
constitution is possible both politically and socially.
India has age-old historical, cultural, civilizational
and economic ties with Afghanistan. We are working
closely with our Afghan partners in implementing
development projects and will continue to do so.
Building reliable connectivity for land-locked
Afghanistan is a key component of our partnership.
We are mindful that all such projects must respect
State sovereignty and territorial integrity and be
based on universally recognized international norms,
transparency and principles of financial responsibility,
ecological and environmental protection and
preservation standards. It is in that spirit that we are
engaged in various connectivity projects in the region,
including the Chabahar Port project and the direct
India-Afghanistan air-freight corridor, which have been
successfully operationalized.
The people of Afghanistan have come very far
since 2001. India will continue to assist the Afghan
people in fulfilling their desire for a peaceful country
that can focus on development and build on the gains
in their journey towards greater prosperity and higher
achievements. The conduct of transparent, credible and
timely presidential elections during the year will assist
in that endeavour.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mrs. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan): Let me thank
Mr. Yamamoto, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), and Ms. Sima Samar for their detailed

S/PV. 8555

briefings on the current situation in Afghanistan. I also
thank Ambassador Adela Raz for her statement.
We stress the central role of the United Nations
in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan and
express appreciation and strong support for all the
efforts of the Secretary-General and UNAMA, in
accordance with resolution 2405 (2018). We welcome
the achievements of the National Unity Government
in political, economic, governance and social reforms,
in the management of the transition, as well as in the
organization of the parliamentary elections in 2018.
We hope that the presidential elections in Afghanistan
in September will be another important step towards
democracy in the country.
Unfortunately, despite the positive changes that
have been made, the political situation in Afghanistan
remains unstable. First of all, it is characterized by
the continued activities of armed anti-Government
and international extremist and terrorist groups, and
illegal human, arms and drugs trafficking. We are
also concerned about the situation in Afghanistan
and the region with respect to foreign fighters and
terrorists returning from conflict zones. In that regard,
Kyrgyzstan welcomes the steps taken by the Government
of Afghanistan to promote peace through the offer of
talks, and expresses full support for its peace initiatives
aimed at establishing stability in Afghanistan.
On the other side, Kyrgyzstan is ready to
contribute to the development of the peace process in
Afghanistan within the United Nations, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Moscow format, the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process, the Kabul Process and
other international platforms. The Kyrgyz Republic
is interested in a peaceful and stable Afghanistan
and calls for further cooperation with Afghanistan
and the development of regional cooperation and
confidence-building measures to resolve the situation
in the country.
As mentioned in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security
(S/2019/493), the meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group, held in
Bishkek in April, was co-chaired by Afghanistan.
Participants discussed cooperation with Afghanistan,
as well as progress on the Afghan peace process,

19-1834531/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

and reviewed the Contact Group’s draft road map for
further action.
My country hosted the eighth annual meeting of
the Deputy Foreign Ministers of the Central Asian
countries and Afghanistan in November 2018 in
Bishkek. The meeting was organized by the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of my country and the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia (UNRCCA). We are pleased that representatives of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
also participated in the meeting. During the meeting,
the joint efforts of the Central Asian States and
Afghanistan to respond to threats and challenges in the
region on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis and
within the framework of cooperation with UNRCCA
were reviewed. In addition, the participants discussed
potential opportunities for cooperation between
Central Asian States and Afghanistan and various
joint initiatives that will contribute to the economic
development of the country.
The Kyrgyz Republic is promoting initiatives to
establish a trilateral Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan-Afghanistan
agro-industrial consortium and the international centre
for Afghan research and regional cooperation in the
city of Bishkek. We also express our readiness to
consider the possibility of teaching Afghan students in
educational institutions of our country with financial
support from foreign donors.
In conclusion, I would like to note that we support
the commitment of all Central Asian States to longterm cooperation with Afghanistan. Along with our
international partners, we are ready to fully cooperate
to solve the tasks before us.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uzbekistan.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): First of all, I would
like to commend you, Mr. President, for convening
this quarterly debate on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. I thank Ambassador Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and Ms. Samar for their informative briefings
and Mrs. Raz, Ambassador of Afghanistan, for
her statement.
In Uzbekistan we continue to closely follow the
situation in Afghanistan because the prospects of
stable and sustainable development in Central Asia are
directly intertwined with the achievement of a durable
32/37

19/06/2019

peace in that country. Uzbekistan traditionally pursues
towards Afghanistan a policy based on the principles
of mutual respect, equality and non-interference in
each other’s internal affairs of and fully supports a
Government elected by the Afghan people. Given such
circumstances, engagement in the process of finding an
ultimate solution to the current situation in Afghanistan
and the maintenance of good-neighbourly relations with
that fraternal nation are among the top foreign policy
priorities of Uzbekistan. Tashkent’s principal position
stems from the firm belief that the Afghan Government
should be the main party to any peace process, which
should also encompass all political forces and ethnic
groups of the country. Only an Afghan-led and Afghanowned political process can lead to a peaceful settlement
of the current conflict.
For its part, Uzbekistan continues to render
assistance to Afghanistan in launching such a peace
process. As a practical step in that direction, in the
past year the Uzbek side met with representatives of
the Qatar-based Taliban Political Commission both
in Tashkent and in Doha. During those meetings the
Uzbek participants underlined the importance of
enforcing a ceasefire and its extension to the operation
of delivering humanitarian assistance and to large-scale
economic projects to be implemented in the country.
The Taliban movement has welcomed Uzbekistan’s
efforts in settling the situation in Afghanistan.
We should emphasize that Uzbekistan closely
coordinates all its contacts with the Taliban with the
Government of Afghanistan. In particular, we conduct
prior consultations with the Afghan authorities on our
upcoming meetings with the Taliban and brief them on
the outcomes.
Uzbekistan also actively participates in various
international negotiation formats on Afghanistan,
such as the Kabul process, the Moscow format, the
International Contact Group, the Heart of AsiaIstanbul Process forum, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group and the
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan (RECCA). Our main objective from
such participation is to support the international
community’s efforts to find a workable solution to the
Afghan conflict.
In that regard, I would like to cite the President of
Uzbekistan, His Excellency Mr. Shavkat Mirziyoyev,
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8555

who, in his address at the high-level conference on
Afghanistan held in Tashkent last year, said:

of Afghanistan, here in the Chamber, and I would like
to thank them for their valuable interventions.

“We stand ready, at any stage of the peace process,
to create all necessary conditions for organizing
on the territory of Uzbekistan direct negotiations
between the Government of Afghanistan and the
Taliban movement.”

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/493)
provides a realistic assessment of and important insights
into the situation in Afghanistan, with which we
concur. It also highlights the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, which deserves the
full support of the international community.

That statement clearly shows the strong
commitment of Uzbekistan to facilitating the peace
process in Afghanistan by creating conditions for direct
negotiations between the Government and the Taliban
movement without any preconditions.
Uzbekistan is also rendering practical assistance
to Afghanistan in rebuilding its social and economic
infrastructure and transport links by training local
personnel and involving the country in regional projects.
In the autumn, in Tashkent we are planning to
host next meeting of the RECCA, which will be
another excellent opportunity to discuss issues of
the rehabilitation of Afghanistan. As the President of
Uzbekistan said at the recent Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-building Measures in Asia held in
Dushanbe, the settlement of the situation in Afghanistan
and the implementation of large-scale infrastructural
projects in the country would open up new strategic
opportunities for the whole continent.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
Uzbekistan will continue its efforts to support the
earliest launch of the peace process between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban movement,
aimed at creating a peaceful future for all people
of Afghanistan. In that regard, Uzbekistan remains
committed to continuing close cooperation with the
Government of Afghanistan, the United Nations and
other stakeholders in bringing long-awaited peace to
the country.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Kuwaiti
presidency for convening this debate on the situation
in Afghanistan. I also thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan Tadamichi
Yamamoto for his detailed and informative update. We
are very glad to see Ms. Sima Samar, Chairperson of
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
and Ambassador Adela Raz, Permanent Representative

Despite the sincere and effective measures taken
by the Afghan Government and the international
community, the security situation in the country
remains fragile.
Kazakhstan is concerned about the increase in the
number of civilian casualties due to the large-scale
attacks by anti-Government forces and terrorists,
especially using improvised explosive devices and
suicide bombers. We are alarmed by the worsening
humanitarian situation due to conflicts and natural
disasters, which led to an increase in the number of
temporarily displaced persons. Unfortunately, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant continues to recruit
new adherents, which poses a threat to all the countries
of the region.
Taking into account the upcoming presidential
elections in late September, we consider it important
to draw lessons from the ballot in the autumn last year
so as to safeguard credible elections and the legitimacy
of the political system. A successful electoral outcome
will have a profound impact on the future positive
dynamics of Afghanistan’s development.
We welcome the efforts of the stakeholders to
advance the peace process and conduct relevant
negotiations with the Taliban. At the same time, a
speedy direct dialogue between the Government of
Afghanistan and the Taliban is of vital importance.
The difficult economic situation in Afghanistan
is of great concern to all of us. In that regard, it is
necessary to further develop regional cooperation
and enhance Afghanistan’s economic integration with
neighbouring States in implementing infrastructure
development, trade, investment, transit and transport
projects. Those numerous initiatives will clearly create
new jobs and help to reduce youth recruitment into
terrorist activities.
We believe that it is important to closely coordinate
United Nations efforts to assist in the peaceful
reconstruction of Afghanistan and provide humanitarian

19-1834533/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

assistance. It is key for us that Afghanistan’s interaction
with the States of Central Asia becomes a practical and
tangible model of partnership, based on best practices,
for peace and sustainable development for other regions,
as well as around the world.
We also call on donors to increase their contribution
to peace and development in and around Afghanistan. To
that end, Kazakhstan is continuing to work to establish
in Almaty a interregional hub for the Sustainable
Development Goals under the auspices of the United
Nations. That structure will contribute to coordinated
support for countries in the region and beyond in
order to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Last month, in Almaty we opened the
House of International Organizations, where 16 United
Nations agencies are now housed under one roof. It will
contribute to the overall United Nations reform process
on the ground through close regional and interregional
coordination and collaboration based on a One United
Nations, whole-of-system approach.
Kazakhstan is deeply committed to giving women
and youth a central place throughout the entire
cycle of conflict — from prevention to resolution
to peacebuilding and recovery. In this regard, we
welcome the continued efforts of the Government
aimed at promoting and protecting the rights of women
and their participation in the peace process. This is
best exemplified by the second phase of the National
Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan. For its part,
together with the European Union and other partners,
Kazakhstan continues to co-finance the education
programme for Afghan citizens.
In conclusion, I would like to pledge that Kazakhstan
will continue to work to assist our brotherly country
in all forums of the United Nations, in particular the
General Assembly, in regional organizations and
also bilaterally.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the floor
to the head of the Delegation of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of
North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this statement, of which a complete
version will made available to the Secretariat.
34/37

19/06/2019

I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
the briefers. I wish to offer special words of thanks to
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan and to
Special Representative Yamamoto, with whom we have
closely cooperated and with whom we have the clear
intention to continue to work very closely, as well as
with the Secretary-General.
The European Union commends the United Nations,
not the least through the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for the continuous
important efforts carried out and deployed both in
Kabul and at the international level aimed at supporting
Afghanistan on its way towards improved security and
prosperity and also in implementing the commitments
made at the 2018 November Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan. We reiterate our full support for these
ongoing efforts and pledge to strengthen EU-United
Nations cooperation on Afghanistan and elsewhere.
The first half of this year has been important for EUAfghanistan bilateral relations: High Representative
of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
Federica Mogherini paid a visit to Kabul in March, and
the EU held several bilateral meetings in the framework
of the EU-Afghanistan Cooperation Agreement on
Partnership and Development. In all these discussions,
the peace file held a prominent place, as we looked
at how the EU could help the peace process to really
materialize. The EU Special Envoy for Afghanistan,
Mr. Roland Kobia, has frequently visited Kabul and
the region to support the peace process. The EU
strongly believes that all international partners need to
strengthen efforts and coordination in the coming weeks
and months to capitalize on the current momentum
towards peace.
On 8 April the EU Foreign Affairs Council
discussed Afghanistan and approved important Council
conclusions, reiterating our commitment to playing an
active role in Afghanistan’s peace process and setting
out in detail the EU’s position and expectations on the
process. On that occasion, all of our 28 Foreign Ministers
endorsed the offer that Federica Mogherini had made at
the 2018 Geneva Ministerial Conference, namely, first,
helping the Government to make the peace process
more inclusive; secondly, supporting post-conflict
reforms, including security-sector reform; thirdly,
assisting the reintegration of ex-combatants; fourthly,
setting up a possible EU role as guarantor of the peace
process; and, fifthly, supporting cross-border trade and
infrastructure as well as regional connectivity.
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

It is in that framework that the EU is engaging in
dialogue with the Afghan Government and international
partners. The EU strongly believes that any future peace
agreement must preserve the political, economic and
social achievements of the last 18 years, in particular
the rights of women, children and minorities. Work
must also continue to enhance these achievements.
We support and appreciate the ongoing efforts of all
international and regional actors, in particular United
States Special Representative Khalilzad, aimed at
bringing the conflicting parties to the negotiating table.
Dialogue between the Government and the Taliban is a
priority and should start as soon as possible. Current
negotiations between the Taliban and the United States
should be integrated into intra-Afghan consultations.
Peace can be sustainable only if it is shaped and accepted
by all Afghans, including women and minorities, and
anchored in the communities across Afghanistan.
A sustainable settlement requires compromises on
all sides, including on how to set up and begin a dialogue.
The EU is ready to facilitate such a consultation process
and a dialogue that will contribute to inclusivity by
involving Afghan civil society, including women’s and
youth groups.
The EU supports the active participation of women
in line with the resolution 1325 (2000). Inclusivity
means addressing difficult but necessary issues
relating to the peace process at the outset. Management
of grievances and justice should not be overlooked but
should be dealt with at the right moment.
A peace agreement is not peace in itself. Peace
will take time. The implementation phase of the
peace agreement will be the key for achieving lasting
peace. The EU stands ready to continue its long-term
commitment to Afghanistan after a peace agreement has
been signed. If there are expectations that the EU will
provide substantial financial, political, diplomatic and
development support after the successful conclusion of
a peace agreement, the EU needs to be involved at all
stages of the peace process.
There is a continued need to strengthen Afghan
ownership and leadership of the peace process, including
intra-Afghan negotiations. The recent consultative loya
jirga could be seen as a useful contribution to achieving
this objective, especially if further consultations are
enlarged to additional constituencies and endorsed
by major political and civil society actors. Such

S/PV. 8555

intra-Afghan formats should be able to contribute to the
current regional track 1 negotiations.
We call on the Afghan political class — both the
Government and members of the opposition — to
prioritize peace and remain constructively engaged
when it comes to the needs of the peace process. We
strongly urge political actors in Afghanistan not to
allow their differences on other issues to divide them on
the core question of peace. For the sake of sustainable
peace, all political stakeholders in Afghanistan must do
their utmost to achieve unity as regards ongoing efforts
to end the conflict. In particular, elections and peace
should remain two separate processes.
Despite the current ongoing efforts to start a
peace process, the conflict in Afghanistan continues,
and insecurity is affecting the lives of the Afghan
people. During the past month, we have witnessed a
sharp increase in terrorist attacks in both Kabul and
other regions of the country. The number of internally
displaced people is on the rise and humanitarian
needs are increasing, with 6.3 million people in need
of assistance.
The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the high level of civilian casualties that the
conflict is producing. According to UNAMA reported
findings, the situation, where one-third of overall
casualties were children, is deplorable, and the need
to protect civilians is of crucial importance. In this
context, we reiterate once again our calls on all parties
to protect the civilian population, especially women
and children. Conflict-related violence must no longer
destroy another generation’s livelihood, homes and
property, as that displaces families and limits access to
education, health and other services.
I mentioned earlier the bilateral meetings the
EU recently held in Kabul. We had comprehensive
discussions covering many subjects, but I would like to
stress the outcome of the discussion on human rights and
good governance, which are areas of particular interest
for the European Union. The need for the legislation in
force on human rights and democracy to be properly
implemented was widely recognized in the discussions.
It is only in this way that Afghan citizens will reap
the full benefits of a democratic system. Moreover, in
the context of peace efforts, there was agreement on
the importance of preserving the constitutional order
of Afghanistan, guaranteeing the protection of human
rights and ensuring women’s inclusion at all stages

19-1834535/37

S/PV.8555

The situation in Afghanistan

of the peace negotiations and peace process. We took
note of the results of the consultative forum Afghan
Women’s National Consensus for Peace. There is a
need for an effective and credible platform to achieve a
unified women’s voice in the future peace process and
ensure their participation.
Promoting the rule of law and ending impunity
for corruption will also be core elements of a future
of sustainable peace. The European Union intends to
organize in the near future the fifth anti-corruption
conference in Kabul, aiming at a realistic discussion of
what has been done in this area and what concrete steps
are still needed for the full implementation of the national
strategy against corruption and related legislation.
Migration and forced displacement were also part of
our recent discussions. We have a good implementation
of the EU-Afghan Joint Way Forward on migration. At
the same time, the local and regional dimensions of
migration are high on the European Union’s agenda.
The sustainable reintegration of Afghan internally
displaced persons and returnees from the neighbouring
countries, including lately from Turkey, remains a big
challenge for Afghanistan and is an area where the
EU will continue to enhance its support. Sustainable
reintegration is also important in the context of future
peace efforts, where any lessons learned on successful
reintegration will have good added value.
The pursuit of peace must not be done at the
expense of Afghanistan’s democratic development.
Peace will be lasting only in a democratic and
prosperous environment. In that context, holding fair
and transparent presidential elections on time — that
is, on 28 September — is essential to strengthening the
legitimacy of State institutions, as well as the democratic
development and political stability of Afghanistan.
The Afghan authorities have an obligation to ensure a
level playing field. All candidates must take part in the
elections in good faith. The EU sees no alternative to the
holding of credible presidential elections in September.
Afghans should face the elections as if there were no
peace process and the peace process as if there were
no elections.
The European Union will continue its coordination
with the Afghan stakeholders and the international
community, providing support — more than
€18 million — to address some of the technical
difficulties of the previous parliamentary elections in
October 2018. We are a strong development partner
36/37

19/06/2019

for Afghanistan and our development cooperation
responds to the officially defined and presented Afghan
Government’s priorities.
The EU will continue its strong commitment to
on-budget support, based on Afghan progress and
impact in the implementation of its policies. We are
currently starting to work on the next programming
cycle for Afghanistan to cover the period from 2021
to 2027, and the potential priorities in the context of
a peace agreement. In that context, the EU would like
to thank once again the United Nations for its good
cooperation in the preparation of the Geneva conference
in November 2018 and its donor coordination efforts.
In conclusion, the European Union believes that the
following months will be crucial for a peace process to
succeed, but any peace negotiations and agreement will
be viable and accepted by the population only if they
support and maintain the values and achievements of the
past two decades. The democratization of Afghanistan
should continue, along with better protection of the
rights of all Afghans and safeguarding the country’s
democratic institutions.
It is in that spirit that the European Union will
increase is efforts and support for peace, in coordination
and cooperation with Afghanistan and the United
Nations, as well as regional and international partners.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting.
Our thanks also go to Mr. Yamamoto and Ms. Samar,
as well as Ambassador Raz, for their valuable
contributions to the work of the Council on the situation
in Afghanistan.
In its search for peace, stability and prosperity,
Afghanistan is now passing through a critical juncture.
Tired from years upon years of invasion, occupation
and foreign military presence, as well as a vicious
cycle of terror, insecurity and instability, the people of
Afghanistan from all walks of life are calling for peace.
This call has never been as loud and strong as it is today.
Now, peace is the main, most serious and strongest
demand of all Afghans. This call must be heard and
this demand has to be realized. This is imperative for
Afghanistan itself and for regional and international
peace and security.
19-18345

19/06/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

To be durable, peace must be established by the
Afghan people and for the Afghan people. This means
that it cannot be dictated to them and that the real
concerns and genuine interests of all Afghans cannot
be ignored. What the regional and international players
are expected to do in this regard is only to support the
realization of the long-standing aspiration of that great
nation to peace. This must be done by facilitating an
Afghan-led, Afghan-owned and Afghan-controlled
peace process, as the right to determine the future of
Afghanistan belongs exclusively to Afghans themselves.
In this context, and underscoring the need for
further consolidation of the foundations of democracy
and the rule of law, we welcome the recent convening
of the consultative peace loya jirga. By reaffirming a
commitment to Islamic principles and national values, as
well as safeguarding national sovereignty and territorial
integrity, the loya jirga stressed that establishing and
strengthening peace in Afghanistan must uphold the
integrity of the Islamic Republic system and the current
Constitution, as well as other achievements that are the
results of many years of sacrifice and struggle by the
people of Afghanistan.
It is unfortunate that the United States, instead
of acknowledging the positive role that Iran plays in
preserving peace and stability in Afghanistan, is
accusing Iran of fomenting insecurity in that country.
The sole purpose of this unfounded claim is to cover
the United States failed policy in Afghanistan over the
past 18 years.
The Islamic Republic of Iran, which has always
supported the realization of the aspirations of the people
of Afghanistan, stands ready, in close cooperation and
coordination with the Government of Afghanistan, to
fully and genuinely support and facilitate the peace
process in order to establish and consolidate an inclusive,
just and sustaining peace in this neighbouring country.
While the time-bound and responsible withdrawal
of all foreign forces is a strong national demand, this
should be complemented through the preserving and

S/PV. 8555

strengthening of the defence and security institutions
and forces of Afghanistan. This is essential, taking into
account the existing security challenges in the country,
in particular those emanating from the presence and
criminal activities of dangerous terrorist groups, such
as Da’esh, which has been helped in the transfer of its
elements from Syria and Iraq to Afghanistan. Da’esh
is not only destabilizing Afghanistan, but represents a
serious threat to certain central Asian countries.
The strengthening of Afghanistan’s defence and
security forces is also necessary to counter another
major challenge facing this country, namely, opium
poppy cultivation and illicit trafficking in narcotic
drugs, with all its adverse socioeconomic and security
impacts, which destroy the fabric not only of Afghan
society, but also that of neighbouring countries. It fuels
terrorist and other criminal activities as well.
Furthermore, proper socioeconomic conditions
can also greatly contribute to the preservation and
consolidation of peace and stability. Therefore, due
consideration must also be paid to the development
of Afghanistan’s economy, the realization of which
requires continued strong regional and international
support. In addition to the promotion of peace and
tranquillity, conducive socioeconomic conditions are
also required for the reconstruction of the country and
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Iran, for its part, is hosting 3 million of Afghans
refugees and fighting narcotic drugs that are heading
mainly to Europe, without proper and meaningful
international assistance. It is high time for the
international community to shoulder its responsibility
to assist Afghanistan in this regard.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is further expanding
its trade and economic relations with Afghanistan,
including by providing our port facilities, and is
determined to continue supporting the fraternal people
and Government of Afghanistan in all areas in their
search for the peace and prosperity that they deserve.
The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

19-1834537/37
