VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

activities, together with its conclusions and recommendations;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
continue to study this question as a matter of priority
and to take any step it may deem necessary to the pursuit of its work on the question of involuntary or enforced disappearances when it considers the report to be
submitted to it by the working group at its thirtyseventh session;
3. Appeals to all Governments to co-operate with
the working group and the Commission on Human
Rights and to enable them to perform their task effectively and in a humanitarian spirit;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to draw the concerns expressed in the present resolution to the attention of all Governments, regional and interregional organizations and specialized agencies.

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/194.

Report of the Economic and Social Council:
services of the Secretariat concerned with human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/47 of 23 November 1979,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution
22 (XXXVI) of 28 February 1980, 1 24
Recalling also Economic and Social Council decision
1980/132 of 2 May 1980,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 125
Noting that in his annual report on the work of the
Organization, submitted to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session, the Secretary-General stated that
he was prepared to consider all useful suggestions for
strengthening the contribution of the Secretariat in a
field which is of fundamental importance to the future
development of our society, 12 •
Also noting that the Secretary-General states in his
report 125 that while the Division of Human Rights meets
the technical criteria for a Centre, as set forth in his report on organizational nomenclature in the Secretariat, 127 he believes that further consideration of the
matter is required,
Requests the Secretary-General to keep this question
under consideration with a view to redesignating the
Division of Human Rights as a Centre for Human
Rights when he deems it appropriate, taking into account the views expressed by Member States at the
thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly.
96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/195.

International co-operation in drug abuse control

The General Assembly.
Recalling once more the resolutions on the problem of
drug abuse control adopted in recent years by the
'" A/35/607.

tl6
See Official Records of the General Assemhli·. Thirtv-fourth Session, Supplement No. I (A/34/ I). sect. VI I.
·

Ill

A/C.5/32/17,

207

General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the World Health
Organization and other relevant organizations,
Recalling, in particular, its resolution 34/ 177 of 17
December 1979, in which it pointed out the importance
of international co-operation in drug abuse control,
Recognizing the growing threat caused by the spread
of drug abuse, its serious impact on human health, its
adverse effects on social development (social disintegration. increasing criminality), economic advancement
and national security in a number of countries,
A ware that illicit traffic in drugs and the profits accruing therefrom to traffickers and criminal organizations
pose a threat to the socio-economic well-being of many
countries,

Referring to the relevant provisions of the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, 12 x of that Convention as amended by the 1972 Protocol Amending the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, 129 and of
the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of I 971, 1 ' 0
which form the basis of all international drug abuse control efforts.
Noting with satisfaction the positive results that have
been attained in a number of countries in the fight
against drug abuse and in the control of drug traffickConcerned that none the less many of the objectives of
drug abuse control set out in international conventions
on narcotic drugs and in the resolutions and documents
of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and other international bodies concerned with this question have not
yet been achieved,
Realizing the necessity of further concerted efforts by
the international community, particularly by the United
Nations, in addition to national measures, to resolve the
problem of drug abuse, in particular by the reduction of
the illicit supply, demand and traffic,
Conscious of the need for a five-year, continuously updated international programme of action in drug abuse
control, as called for in General Assembly resolution
32/ 124 of 16 December 1977 and Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolutions 8 (XXVIII) of 23 February
1979 1]] and 5 (S-VI) of 20 February 1980, 112 which
should be supplemented by a long-term strategy or programme,
Noting the report of the Economic and Social Council
on narc~tic drugs,' ;J
I. Takes note of the resolutions and decisions
adopted by the Economic and Social Council at its first
regular session of 1980 on the subject of narcotic drugs,
elaborated on the basis of the report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its sixth special session, and
urges all agencies and organizations concerned with the
implementation of the resolutions referred to in the
preamble. as well as all States and organizations whose
assistance has been requested, to take the necessary
measures so that the contemplated programme for practical and dynamic drug abuse control can be completed
and implemented at the earliest possible date;
,.,, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 7515, p. I 51.
'"' United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.Xl.3, p. 13.
'"' United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.Xl.3, p. 7.
'" See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, /979.
Supplement No 5 (E/ I 979 /35), chap. XIV, sect. A.
'" Ibid., 1980, Supplement No. 4 (E/1980/14). chap. XII, sect. A.
'" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Supplement No. 3 (A 115/J/Rev.1), chap. XXIII.

208

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

2. Repe_ats its appeal to all States w~ich have not y~t
become parties to the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs of 1961, the 1972 Protocol Amending the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 and the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 to take the
necessary steps to accede to these conventions and thus
ensure their universal application;
3. Invites all Governments to collaborate closely
with the International Narcotics Control Board, the
Division of Narcotic Drugs and the other relevant
bodies in the United Nations system, particularly by
supplying them with the necessary information so th~t
they may fulfil their tasks both pursuant to the_ provisions of the narcotics conventions and in accordance
with their purposes;
4. Urges all States to take suitable steps to implement Economic and Social Council resolutions 1979 /8
of 9 May 1979 and 1980 /20 of 30 April 1980 with a view
to achieving and maintaining a lasting balance between
demand and supply of opiates and avoiding the possibility of diversion of licit production to illicit channels;
5. Invites States concerned to take appropriate
measures to discourage the powerful economic interests
which are propagating a false and deceitful image of
drug use with the aim of increasing the number of drug
abusers and legalizing the abuse;
6. Underlines its appeal to all Govern~ents to_ increase their financial support for the Untted Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Control, so that it may forward
the enhancement of measures for the reduction of the
illicit supply, traffic and demand for narcotic drugs, a1:d
calls particularly upon States which require assistance m
crop-substitution o~ law enforcement prograri:mes to
present suitable projects to the Fund and other mternational funding bodies or projects for bilateral development assistance;
7. Underscores the need of producing countries to
receive greater assistance from interested Governments
and relevant international organizations to facilitate
drug abuse control, including crop-substitution policies
or law enforcement programmes;
8. Calls upon all States to co-operate in a suitable
fashion to prevent the uncontrolled or illicit cultivation,
production, export, import, transit and consumption of
narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances, and to take
suitable measures to prevent the misuse of chemical substances for the production of drugs;
9. Calls upon the Commission on Narcotic Drugs_to
present, at its thirtieth regular session, the completed mternational programme for drug abuse control so that
such a comprehensive, co-ordinated global strategy may
be translated at the earliest possible date into actions
seeking to interdict narcotics trafficking, eradicate the
illicit production and demand, educate citizens throughout the world regarding the dangers of drugs and treat
and rehabilitate those individuals who have become dependent upon or addicted to drugs;
lO. Invites the Economic and Social Council to give
once more particular attention to these questions at its
first regular session of 1981;
I l. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to all Governments.
96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35 / l 96.

Mass exoduses

The General Assembly,
Mindful of its mandate under the Charter of the
united Nations to promote and encourage resµect for
human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all,
Disturbed by the scale and magnitude of the exoduses
and displacements of populations involving hundreds of
thousands of men, women and children in many regions of the world,
Noting the immense burden imposed on the first host
countries and territories which receive the victims of
these sudden and massive movements of population,
Bearing in mind the resolutions of the Economic and
Social Council concerning international efforts to meet
humanitarian needs in emergency situations,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution
30 (XXXVI) of 11 March 1980 114 concerning human
rights and massive exoduses,
I. Expresses deep concern at the continued incidence
of large-scale exoduses and displacements of populations and the resulting hardships and problems for the
persons and States concerned;
2. Expresses its determination to facilitate solutions
to the problems caused by these large-scale movements
of population;
3. Endorses the requests of the Commission on
Human Rights in its resolution 30 (XXXVI);
4. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
examine the report of the Secretary-General to be submitted to it at its thirty-seventh session and, on the
basis of that report, to make recommendations for further action;
5. Decides, in light of the consideration given this
question by the Commission on Human Rights, to consider the question at its thirty-sixth session under the
item entitled "Report of the Economic and Social Council''.
96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/197.

Regional, national and local arrangements for
the promotion and protection of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34 / 171 of 17 D~cember 1979,
in which it reiterated its appeal to States m areas where
regional arrangements in the field of human rights do
not yet exist to consider agreements with a view to the
establishment within their respective regions of suitable
regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling also its resolution 34/49 of 23 November
1979 on national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights,
l. Notes with satisfaction the efforts currently under
way within the Organization of African Unity to elaborate an African charter of human rights and to establish an African commission on human rights, and
requests the Secretary-General to maintain close _cooperation with the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity on this matter and to keep the
'" See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. 1980.
Supplement No. 3 (E/1980/13 and Corr.I), chap. XXVI. sect. A.
