Rnolatlom adopted on the reportl of the Foarth Committee

109

10. RecommeRds tha! all Governments should inNoting with :atisfaction the further increase in contensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and other
tributions to the Programme and the corres~nding
organizations within the United Nations system of
increase in assistance for the education and training of
which they are members to ensure the full and effective
persons froip. the Territories concerned,
implementation of the Declaration and other relevant
1. Commends the Secretary-General and the Adresolutions of the United Nations and, in that convisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
nexion, should accord priority to the question of proand Training Programme for Southern Africa for the
viding assistance on an emergency basis to peoples in
work they have accomplished in strengthening and
the colonial Territories and to their national liberation
expanding the Programme;
movements;
2. Endorses the conclusions of the Advisory Com11. Urges the executive heads of the specialized
mittee based on the recommendations of the Evaluaagencies and other organizations within the United
tion Group;28
Nations system, with a view to facilitating the imple3. Notes, in particular, the conclusion to the effect
mentation of paragraph 10 above, to formulate and
that the Programme has been a significant and worthsubmit to their respective governing bodies or legiswhile effort of the international community, and that
lative organs, as a matter of priority and with the
a continuation and expansion of the Programme is
active .co-operation of the Organization of African
desirable to meet the increased needs arising from
Unity, concrete proposals for the full imJ?lementation
recent developments in the Territories concerned;
of the relevant United Nations decisions, 1D particular
4. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
specific programmes of all possible assistance to the
made voluntary contributions to the Programme and
peoples m colonial Territories and their national llberappeals to all States, organizations and individuals to
ation movements;
make generous contributions to the Programme in
12. Requests the Secretary-General:
order to ensure its continuation and expansion, par(a) To prepare for submission to the relevant bodies
ticularly during this moS t important period;
concerned with related aspects of the present item, with
5. Decides that, as a transitional measure, provision
the assistance of the specialized agencies and other
shall be made, under the regular budget of the United
organizations within the United Nations system, a reNations for the financial year 1976, for an amount of
port on the action taken since the circulation of his
$US 100,000 to ensure continuity of the Programme
previous report in implementation of the relevant reso- ' pending the receipt of adequate voluntary contributions.
lutions of the United Nations, including the present
2431st plenary meeting
resolution;
8 December 1975
(b) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
3423 (XXX). Offers by Member States of study
and other organizations within the United Nations
and training facilities for inhabitants of
system in working out appropriate measures for imNon-Self-Governing
Territories
plementing the present resolution and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its thhty-first session;
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3302 (XXIX) of 13 Decem13. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
ber 1974,
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies
on offers by Member States of study and training faciliand other organizations within the United Nations systies for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,14
tem in implementing the relevant resolutions of the
prepared under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
General Assembly;
of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mind the continued need to provide edu14. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
cational and training facilities at all levels for the inexamine this question and to report to the General
habitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Assembly at its thirty-first session.
2431st plenary meeting
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
8 December 1975
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made scholarships available to the inhabi3422 (XXX). United Nations Educational and
tants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
Training Programme for Southern Africa
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
The General Assembly,
generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, particuRecalling its resolutions on the United Nations
larly those in southern Africa, and, whenever possible,
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
to provide travel funds to prospective students;
Africa, in particular resolution 3301 (XXIX) of 13
4. Requests the administering Powers to ensure the
December 1974,
widespread
and continuous dissemination in the TerriFurther recalling its request to the Advisory Comtories
under
their administration of information relating
mittee on the United Nations Educational and Training
to offers of study and training facilities made by States
Programme for Southern Africa to arrange, in conand to provide all the necessary facilities to enable
sultation with the Secretary-General, for an evaluation
students
to avail themselves of such offers;
of the achievements of the Programme and of the ways
5.
Requests
the Secretary-General to report to the
and means for its further development,
General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the imTaking note of the report of the Secretary-General
plementation of the present resolution;
on the Programme for• 1974/75,12
22 A/10331.

23 Ibid., paras. 27 and 28.
24 A/10329 and Add.I and Add.I/Corr.I.
