S/PV.9260

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9260th meeting

Tuesday, 14 February 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Borg/Mrs. Frazier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Dlhovo
Mr. Chumakov
Mr. Gürber
Mr. Al-Suwaidi
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Sea-level rise: implications for international peace and security
Letter dated 2 February 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Malta to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/79)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-04411 (E)
*2304411*

S/PV.9260

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
Sea-level rise: implications for international
peace and security
Letter dated 2 February 2023 from the
Permanent Representative of Malta to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/79)
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General, as well as the ministers and
high-level representatives, whose presence here today
underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Austria, Bangladesh, Bahrain, Botswana, Canada,
Chile, Costa Rica, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
Egypt, Fiji, Georgia, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana,
Haiti, India, Indonesia, Ireland, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Italy, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Mexico,
the Federated States of Micronesia, Morocco, Nauru,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, the Niger, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, the Philippines, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovenia, Thailand, Tonga, Tuvalu, Ukraine and Viet
Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Csaba Kőrösi, President of the General Assembly;
His Excellency Mr. Bogdan Aurescu, Co-Chair of the
International Law Commission Study Group on sea
level rise and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Romania;
and Ms. Coral Pasisi, Director of Climate Change of the
Pacific Community and President of Tofia Niue.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Chargé d’affaires ad interim of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
2/30

14/02/2023

Nations; and Mr. Odd Reidar Humlegård, Special
Representative of INTERPOL to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in that regard.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/79, which contains the text of
a letter dated 2 February 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of Malta to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: My thanks go to the
Government of Malta for shining a light on the
dramatic implications of rising sea levels for global
peace and security.
Rising seas are sinking futures. Sea level rise is not
only a threat in itself; it is a threat multiplier. For the
hundreds of millions of people living in small island
developing States and other low-lying coastal areas
around the world, sea level rise is a torrent of trouble.
Rising seas threaten lives and jeopardize access to
water, food and health care.
Saltwater intrusion can decimate jobs and entire
economies in key industries, such as agriculture,
fisheries and tourism. It can damage or destroy vital
infrastructure, including transportation systems,
hospitals and schools, especially when combined with
the extreme weather events linked to the climate crisis.
Rising seas threaten the very existence of some lowlying communities and even countries.
The World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
has just released a new compilation of data that spells
out the grave danger of rising seas. Global average
sea levels have risen faster since 1900 than over any
preceding century in the past 3,000 years. The global
ocean has warmed faster over the past century than at
any time in the past 11,000 years.
Meanwhile, WMO tells us that, even if global
heating is miraculously limited to 1.5°C, there will still
be a sizeable sea level rise. Every fraction of a degree
23-04411

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

counts. If temperatures rise by 2°C, that level rise could
double, with further temperature increases bringing
about exponential sea level increases. Under any
scenario, countries such as Bangladesh, China, India
and the Netherlands are all at risk. Megacities on every
continent, including Cairo, Lagos, Maputo, Bangkok,
Dhaka, Jakarta, Mumbai, Shanghai, Copenhagen,
London, Los Angeles, New York, Buenos Aires and
Santiago, will face serious impacts. The danger is
especially acute for the nearly 900 million people who
live in coastal zones at low elevations. That is 1 in 10
people on Earth.
Some coastlines have already seen triple the
average rate of sea level rise. I saw with my own eyes
how people in small island developing States in the
Western Pacific are facing sea rise levels of up to four
times the global average. In the Caribbean, rising seas
have contributed to the devastation of local livelihoods
in the tourism and agriculture sectors.
Rising seas and other climate impacts are
already forcing some relocations in Fiji, Vanuatu, the
Solomon Islands and elsewhere. Flooding and coastal
erosion in West Africa are damaging infrastructure
and communities, undermining farming and often
costing lives. In North Africa, saltwater intrusion
is contaminating land and freshwater resources,
destroying crops and livelihoods alike. Somalia is also
grappling with saltwater intrusion, contributing to
competition over scarce freshwater resources.
Around the world, a hotter planet is melting glaciers
and ice sheets. According to the United States National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, Antarctica
is losing an average of 150 billion tons of ice mass
annually. The Greenland ice cap is melting even faster,
losing 270 billion tons per year. We should consider the
hundreds of millions of people living in the river basins
of the Himalayas. We have already seen how Himalayan
melts have worsened flooding in Pakistan.
But, as such glaciers recede over the coming
decades, over time, the Indus, Ganges and Brahmaputra
rivers will shrink, and rising sea levels, combined with
a deep intrusion of saltwater, will make large parts of
their huge deltas simply uninhabitable. We see similar
threats in the Mekong Delta and beyond.
The consequences of all such events are unthinkable.
Low-lying communities and entire countries could
disappear forever. We would witness a mass exodus
of entire populations on a biblical scale, and we would

S/PV.9260

see ever-fiercer competition for fresh water, land and
other resources. The impact of rising seas is already
creating new sources of instability and conflict. We
must meet that rising tide of insecurity with action
across three areas.
First, we must address the root cause of rising
seas — the climate crisis. Our world is hurtling past the
1.5°C warming limit that a liveable future requires, and,
with present policies, it is careening towards 2.8°C — a
death sentence for vulnerable countries.
We urgently need more concerted action to reduce
emissions and ensure climate justice. Developing
countries must have the resources to adapt and build
resilience against climate disaster. Among other
things, that means delivering on the loss and damage
fund, making good on the $100-billion climate finance
commitment to developing countries, doubling
adaptation finance and leveraging massive private
financing at a reasonable cost.
Secondly, we must broaden our understanding of
the root causes of insecurity. That requires identifying
and addressing a much wider range of factors that
undermine security, from poverty, discrimination,
inequality and human rights violations to environmental
disasters, such rising sea levels.
That is why, for example, the Peacebuilding Fund
actively supports grass-roots resilience efforts against
the effects of climate change. We must also improve
foresight and early warnings to prepare and protect
vulnerable communities. One prime example is our
plan to ensure that early warning systems against
natural disasters protect every person on Earth within
five years.
(spoke in French)
Thirdly, we must address the consequences of
rising sea levels for legal frameworks and human rights.
Rising sea levels are literally causing land masses to
shrink, leading to potential disputes over territorial
integrity and maritime spaces. The current legal regime
must be forward-looking and fill the gaps in existing
frameworks. That includes international refugee law.
It also means putting in place innovative legal and
practical solutions to address the impacts of sea level
rise on forced displacement and on the very existence
of the land territory of some States. The human rights
of people do not disappear when their homes disappear.

23-044113/30

S/PV.9260

Threats to international peace and security

Last year, the International Law Commission
examined this issue and explored a range of options
for addressing it, including preserving statehood
despite loss of territory, ceding or allocating portions
of territory to the affected United Nations State or even
creating confederations of States.
It is essential to have these discussions in order
to find solutions, and I commend the delegations in
the Sixth Committee that are actively engaged in
these issues. We must continue to work in order to
protect the affected populations and ensure their basic
human rights.
The Security Council has a critical role to play in
mobilizing the political will to address the devastating
security challenges posed by rising seas. We must all
continue to give this issue the visibility it deserves and
to support the lives, livelihoods and communities on
the front line of this crisis.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the President of the
General Assembly.
Mr. Kőrösi: I thank Minister Ian Borg and
the Permanent Mission of Malta for holding this
important debate.
We are in a new era of history — one of cascading,
interlocking, rapid and sweeping crises. We cannot deny
that climate change is one of the greatest challenges of
our generation. It was the single most raised issue by
world leaders during the high-level week in September
2022. It is the single biggest galvanizer of young people
marching in the streets, because our inaction is robbing
them of their futures. It is an issue that demands focus
and coherence across the United Nations system.
For the General Assembly, that means accelerating
action on climate and water. For the Economic and
Social Council, it means addressing the social and
economic aspects. And if we want to tackle it through
a whole-of-United Nations approach, as we should, the
Security Council has a role to play, too.
According to the ancient writer from Syria,
Publilius Syrus, “Anyone can hold the helm when the
sea is calm.” But our seas are not calm today. They are
rising. As mentioned by the Secretary-General, at the
current rate, sea levels will be 1 to 1.6 metres higher
by 2100, according to the World Climate Research
4/30

14/02/2023

Programme. That means that in less than 80 years, 250
to 400 million people will likely need new homes in
new locations.
It goes without saying that the displacement of
hundreds of millions of people is a security risk.
With a good part of global agriculture concentrated
on coastal plains and low-lying islands, sea level
rise is also bringing up long-term questions about
humankind’s survival.
In the Nile and Mekong Deltas, some of the richest
agricultural regions in the world, 10 to 20 per cent
of arable land will sink beneath the water. Those and
other fertile river deltas are now rice providers and
breadbaskets for their own countries and regions. They
are also vital pieces in the complex puzzle of world
nutrition to feed our growing population. Losing these
areas can have knock-on effects around the globe.
Climate-induced sea level rise is also raising new
legal questions that are at the very core of national and
State identity. What happens to a nation’s sovereignty,
United Nations membership and its citizens’ voting
rights if it sinks beneath the sea? There are rules about
the creation of States, but none about their physical
disappearance. As the Secretary-General has rightly
asked, who cares for their displaced populations? How
would even the first changes to shorelines influence
maritime boundaries? How would that affect exclusive
economic zones? I welcome that the International
Law Commission and the General Assembly’s Sixth
Committee have taken a proactive stance by considering
those issues for urgent debate.
We know the risks, and we see the uncertainties
and instabilities that we are going to face. We cannot
doubt that these will open the door for conflicts and
disputes, endangering global peace and security. And
where that door is open, the Council has a responsibility
to act. It is critical to invest in prevention today, rather
than address the implications of food scarcity and mass
migration tomorrow.
We can agree that it makes sense morally and
financially, and it can take many forms. We should
integrate climate analysis into our planning for conflict
prevention and protection efforts, and we should
recognize the significance of climate action as a key
tool for peacebuilding.
Science and data offer impartial evidence to direct
our decisions. Science tells us that whether cities or
23-04411

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

countries disappear depends on whether we as humans
counteract the threat. The Paris Agreement on Climate
Change and its targets for mitigation, adaptation and
finance offer our primary defence against that risk.
We need to collectively raise our ambitions. The
General Assembly is doing its part. Just last week,
we heard a briefing by eminent scientists on the links
between climate, conflict and cooperation. I heard the
urgent calls made for world leaders to take a whole-ofGovernment, whole-of-society approach to those issues.
We have the data. We have the frameworks. What
is needed now — as ever — is the political will to
act. As President Ramkalawan of Seychelles put it in
September (see A/77/PV.5): “We need bold actions, not
unfulfilled promises”.
Many at this table will remember 2012,
when Hurricane Sandy forced the United Nations
Headquarters in New York to close for an unprecedented
three straight days. Storm surges from the East River
came over the Franklin D. Roosevelt East River Drive
and rushed into the lower levels of the United Nations.
There were fish swimming in the basement next to the
United Nations servers. In the aftermath, the United
Nations faced sharp criticism over its silence and lack
of preparedness.
More than a decade later, I turn the question to
everyone here today: are we prepared? Have each of us
done our part to uphold the collective responsibility to
manage climate-related security risks? Have we learned
the lessons of prevention? As Lao Tzu wisely observed,
hundreds of years ago: “If you do not change direction,
you may end up where you are heading”.
Climate emergencies open new windows for
cooperation and inclusion. Let us therefore strengthen
our partnerships. Let us encourage local expertise to
guide our resolve. We have enough crises on our plate.
Our agendas are packed, and they are expanding. It is
our time to transform. I will work to support Member
States to ensure that the General Assembly plays its
part in that. I implore the Council to play its role. If
not, I fear that the President of the General Assembly
in 2100, or even in 2050, will represent fewer than 193
United Nations Member States.
The President: I thank Mr. Kőrösi for his briefing.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Romania.

S/PV.9260

Mr. Aurescu: I would like to thank the Maltese
presidency and my colleague, Minister Borg, for
the invitation to brief the Security Council on
the highly topical subject of sea level rise and its
security implications.
I speak today as a member of the International Law
Commission and co-Chair of its Study Group on sea
level rise in relation to international law, a position I
share with the Foreign Minister of Romania. I would
also like to inform the Council that in preparing this
intervention, I consulted with my colleagues, the
co-Chairs of the Study Group, Ms. Oral of Türkiye,
Ms. Galvão Teles of Portugal and Mr. Ruda Santolaria
of Peru. My message today is clear: sea level rise, which
is a direct negative effect of climate change, has obvious
implications for security and stability around the world.
It creates global problems that affect the international
community as a whole and therefore require global
solutions. That is why the United Nations is rightly at
the forefront of the efforts to address its consequences,
find appropriate solutions and prevent the associated
risks of international conflict.
Sea level rise poses a real risk to more than two
thirds of United Nations Member States, which are
likely to be affected directly or indirectly. The science
in that regard is clear, as shown by the most recent
assessment reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change on the alarming projections of sea level
rise. Indeed, a growing number of expert assessments
conclude that the phenomenon presents mounting
dangers for human and State security. The negative
national and international security implications and
consequences linked to sea level rise include its effects
on coasts, which because of that phenomenon are pushed
landwards, thereby affecting the baselines, so that their
actual position is likely to be affected by the physical
changes of the coasts’ positioning and configuration,
as well as the maritime zones that are measured from
those baselines — territorial seas, contiguous zones
and exclusive economic zones — and therefore coastal
States’ entitlements to those areas and access to the
resources therein are threatened.
Such a loss of the resources on which littoral
populations depend for their sustenance is likely to
prompt increased competition over natural resources
and, together with the deterioration of living
conditions, the forced migration and displacement
of those populations as well. Sea-level rise can also
impact coastal military installations and critical

23-044115/30

S/PV.9260

Threats to international peace and security

infrastructure. And most importantly, it can lead to the
loss of State territory. Indeed, sea level rise poses an
existential threat to low-lying coastal States, especially
small island developing States, which may consider
their statehood and sovereignty in danger, as their land
surface may be totally covered by the sea or become
fully uninhabitable.
What are our options for dealing with the security
implications of sea level rise? The phenomenon requires
policy changes and legal changes at the same time. We
need to react quickly and efficiently, including by using
all the political, legal and institutional tools provided
within the United Nations framework. Since the States’
coasts are the first to be affected by sea level rise, there
are at least two options for action to protect the coasts
and therefore States’ territories, populations and rights,
as well as their maritime zones and resources, that is,
the affected States’ interests and rights.
One such course of action is to physically protect the
coast through coastal fortifications and consolidation.
But that is very costly, and small island developing
States and many low-lying coastal States simply cannot
afford such costs. The international community must
find innovative instruments to support such efforts. In
September 2022, at the high-level event on the theme
“Staying ahead of the curve: climate security and
international law”, which was organized by Germany
and Palau on the sidelines of the General Assembly’s
high-level debate, I proposed creating an international
voluntary fund for that purpose, and I reiterate that
proposal today.
The second option is the use of international law.
In taking into account the needs of and appeals from
Member States, as well as the fact that the effects
of sea level rise represent a pressing concern of the
international community as a whole, the International
Law Commission (ILC) promptly included in its active
agenda for 2019, upon the proposal of the current
co-Chairs of the Study Group, the topic of sea level rise
in relation to international law. That was followed up,
as soon as 2020, by the drafting and presentation of
a first issues paper, which I co-authored together with
Nilüfer Oral and which focused on the law of the sea
aspects related to sea level rise. It generated ample and
fruitful debates at the ILC in 2021 and in the Sixth
Committee in 2020 and 2021. In 2022, a second issues
paper was presented by the other two co-Chairs of the
Study Group, which was dedicated to statehood and
the protection of persons affected by sea level rise. It
6/30

14/02/2023

was thoroughly debated last year within the ILC and
the Sixth Committee. As we speak, Ms. Oral and I are
finalizing a paper in addition to the first issues paper,
which focuses on certain important aspects also related
to the law of the sea, in order to further develop the
analysis of the first issues paper.
What legal solutions can be shaped? With regard to
law of the sea aspects, it is obvious that for all States
affected by sea level rise, the maritime zones established
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea (UNCLOS) are central to their economies, food
security, health and livelihoods. Therefore, the concept
of legal stability, security, certainty and predictability in
relation to maritime zones is of paramount importance.
The additional paper on which we are currently working
focuses, inter alia, on that essential concept. One option
for ensuring that much-needed security was already
proposed by the co-Chairs in the 2020 first issues
paper and endorsed by States from various regions
of the world, as evidenced by the submissions to the
ILC and a large number of statements presented in the
Sixth Committee, as well as by collective regional and
cross-regional declarations, such as the August 2021
Declaration on Preserving Maritime Zones in the Face
of Climate Change-Related Sea-Level Rise adopted by
the 18 member States of the Pacific Islands Forum and
the September 2021 declaration by the 39 Heads of State
and Government of the Alliance of Small Island States.
That possible solution refers to the interpretation of
UNCLOS that there is no obligation under the Treaty to
maintain baselines and outer limits of maritime zones
under review or to update charts or lists of geographical
coordinates, once they are deposited with the
Secretary-General, and that such maritime zones and
the rights and entitlements that flow from them shall
continue to apply without reduction, notwithstanding
any physical changes caused by sea level rise. In other
words, preserving, fixing or freezing the baselines and
outer limits of maritime zones is crucial for ensuring
legal stability and security, thereby allowing for the
safeguarding of the rights of the affected States with
respect to their maritime zones.
At the same time, as analysed in the 2020 first
issues paper and the 2023 additional paper, which was
supported by Member States in their submissions to the
ILC and statements before the Sixth Committee, legal
stability and security mean that sea level rise cannot
be invoked, in accordance with the Vienna Convention
on the Law of Treaties, as a fundamental change of
23-04411

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

circumstances for terminating or withdrawing from
a treaty that establishes a maritime boundary, since
maritime boundaries enjoy the same regime of stability
as any other boundaries. Such possible options are
perfectly in line with the need to preserve the integrity
of UNCLOS and the balance of rights and obligations
included therein. They are also in line with the mandate
of the Study Group, which provides that that ILC topic
will not propose modifications to existing international
law, such as UNCLOS.
Beyond the law of the sea aspects of sea level
rise, another part of the urgent answer to be given by
the international community must be to address its
increasing humanitarian consequences. I believe that
global solidarity is key in that regard. We have a duty to
prevent situations in which vulnerable countries must
choose between responding to climate change and their
own development. In order to avoid possible situations
of de facto statelessness, we should keep in mind a
number of measures: preserving the fundamental rights
and the conservation of the identity of persons who are
compelled to settle on the territory of third States as
a result of such phenomena; safeguarding the rights
of the affected States with respect to their cultural
heritage; preserving the right to self-determination
of the affected populations; and enabling, through
international cooperation, the granting of financial and
technical support to affected States when exercising
their rights to preserve their own existence.
The impact on local populations, which is the human
face of sea level rise, is already quite visible in the
most vulnerable areas. For such populations, solutions
should be based on international cooperation between
the States affected, third States and international
organizations and other relevant stakeholders.
Vulnerable groups, such as women, children, the elderly
and indigenous populations, are likely to suffer the
most. It is also crucial to involve local populations in
the decision-making process relating to their possible
relocation. Without such measures, the impact on the
human rights of the populations affected and their
displacement, whether internally or cross-border, have
the potential to cause instability and conflict and to
constitute a threat to peace and security.
Moreover, since territory has long been considered
one of the requirements for statehood, the submerging
of land poses obvious threats to the territorial integrity
of States and even to their existence. That is a novel
situation for international law and the possible legal

S/PV.9260

implications should be assessed accordingly. The
Secretary-General mentioned some of the solutions.
The 2022 second issues paper (A/CN.4/752 and
Add.1), as well as last year’s dedicated debate in the
International Law Commission (ILC), examine past
and present experiences and situations in detail on the
basis of which legal options might be identified. But
the possible international law options are not limited to
the work of the ILC. The advisory opinion requested in
December from the International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea and the advisory opinion under preparation
by the International Court of Justice on Vanuatu’s
initiative, which is also supported by Romania and other
States, can shed more light on the legal implications of
climate change, including from the perspective of sea
level rise. Those are some of the avenues that are being
explored or can be further explored in order to identify
the most appropriate legal options to deal effectively
with the effects of sea level rise. Those endeavours
could encourage a higher level of ambition for climate
action in the future.
In conclusion, I want to assure the Council of my
country’s full commitment to continuing to be part
of the global efforts addressing the risks that climate
change in general, and sea level rise in particular,
pose around the world. I encourage the Security
Council to stay actively involved in those efforts. Due
to its serious implications for international peace and
security, the topic of sea level rise should continue to
hold the Council’s attention. I am sure that together, in
solidarity, we will find the right solutions.
The President: I thank Mr. Aurescu for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pasisi.
Ms. Pasisi: It is a privilege to be present at this very
important debate on sea level rise and the implications
for international peace and security. Let me also thank
the Government of Malta for inviting me to brief
the Council from the perspective of a civil-society
organization. My experience is heavily informed from
a small island developing State (SIDS) lens, particularly
that of the Pacific islands, where I was born, have
worked and lived my entire life, and intend to do so for
its remainder.
By 2050, within the lifetimes of our children and
grandchildren, sea level rise will have exceeded at
least one metre for most SIDS, and that will last for
thousands of years. In addition, the extreme sea level
events that currently occur once in a century will be

23-044117/30

S/PV.9260

Threats to international peace and security

experienced every single year. Of course, there are
many other scary projections as well, but due to those I
have just mentioned alone, sea level rise and the impacts
of climate change present a direct security threat
and a threat multiplier to individuals, communities,
provinces, nations and certainly to our region — the
Blue Pacific continent — as a whole. Regardless of
whether that is acknowledged by any international
body or individual State, it does not change that fact.
A threat to one’s security is best defined through the
lens of those who are affected, not those who continue
to be most responsible for its cause. The point at which
the threat of sea level rise and climate change becomes
so severe that it is deemed a threat to the peace and
security of every country in the world is only a matter
of time and scale. For many SIDS, that reality is already
upon our shores, and for some it has already washed
them away.
But how serious is the threat of sea level rise and
climate change to the statehood and security of SIDS?
The certainty of jurisdiction is what enables law and
order and supports the upholding of peace and security.
It is well understood how much conflict can arise from
ambiguity surrounding which islands belong to which
nations and the boundaries defining that in the sea.
The Blue Pacific continent is well known as a quilt
of geopolitical interests, forged through both world
wars, patchworked via the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), and coloured by
globalization. It is now threatened with being torn
apart by the effects of sea level rise and climate
change, something that will only be exacerbated by the
uncertainty of jurisdiction, as law remains ambiguous
about the impacts of sea level rise on the base points
by which exclusive economic zones are measured and
fixed. It is also being exacerbated by impunity and
the continued flouting of responsibility with regard to
the failure to act to stop climate change, despite clear
evidence of the existential threat it poses to many
States, communities and the human rights of individuals
the world over. It is a security issue of paramount
importance to the Pacific region and its nations, and
it is why Pacific leaders have developed the following
critical declarations.
First, in 2018, the Boe Declaration on Regional
Security was adopted. It elevates climate change as the
single greatest threat to the livelihoods, security and
well-being of the peoples of the Pacific.
8/30

14/02/2023

Secondly, in 2021, the Declaration on Preserving
Maritime Zones in the face of Climate Change-related
Sea-level Rise was issued, followed by efforts by
individual nations to reinforce it in sovereign law
and policy. The Declaration is our region’s good-faith
interpretation of UNCLOS, noting that the relationship
between climate-change-related sea level rise and
maritime zones was not foreseen or considered by
the drafters of UNCLOS at the time. It is critically
important that the international community, the
United Nations system and Member States support that
declaration and the efforts of individual island nations
to secure their statehood.
Thirdly, late last year, the 2050 Strategy for
the Blue Pacific Continent was endorsed by the
Pacific Island Forum leaders. The strategy reinforces
commitment and working together as a collective
for advancing Pacific regionalism based on the Blue
Pacific narrative — an approach that fully appreciates
the threat of climate change to our security as a region,
nations, communities and individuals.
Fourthly, we hope that next month, as championed
by the Government and people of Vanuatu and supported
by all Pacific nations and a growing number of countries
at the United Nations, the General Assembly will adopt
a draft resolution requesting an advisory opinion from
the International Court of Justice on the obligations of
States with regard to climate change. As the SecretaryGeneral noted last month, it is an opportunity for the
International Court of Justice to examine the conduct
that has led the world to the brink of collapse and
threatens the very existence of countries, peoples and
cultures, as well as the human rights of individuals
around the world. It is a critical piece of work for
upholding our responsibility to do our best to ensure
intergenerational equity.
Let me now turn to the realities of the insecurity
already happening in the most vulnerable countries and
communities. Long before land goes under water, it will
become so degraded that it cannot support human life
and the complex and critical ecosystems it once did. That
is already manifesting itself across SIDS and coastal
States. Coral reefs are bleaching, causing irreparable
damage and affecting the vital food sources, livelihoods
and cultural fabric of coastal communities and countries.
Seawater is seeping into delicate groundwater systems
and threatening to salinate drinking water and arable
lands. The traditional knowledge and practices of
indigenous peoples, who constitute the vast majority of
23-04411

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Pacific island populations, are being lost, as the natural
resources to which they are tied are being eroded by sea
level rise and the effects of climate change.
The early findings of the Pacific Security Outlook
Report 2022–2023 reaffirm the complexity of those
security implications for our region. An ongoing
climate security project funded by the SecretaryGeneral’s Peacebuilding Fund in the Pacific is assessing
the security threat to our lowest-lying atoll nations as
those on the front lines where the impacts of sea-level
rise and climate change are concerned. At the top of
the fears voiced so far are food and water security,
coastal erosion and land security, as well as their
disproportionate impact on women, girls and children.
There are also unique non-economic impacts,
and in many ways they are the most concerning. A
nation can be at war and its people still have hope and
determination to survive. The war against climate
change is quite different. The opponent is much larger
and amorphous, and the ability to stop it is outside of
our direct control. While we can do our best to adapt
with the limited resources we have, we continue to
suffer loss and damage and fear for the future of our
children. Despite that, SIDS remain resolute and among
the most ambitious to lead by example and their young
people defy being written off as the orphans of climate
change. They are pushing for greater accountability of
our generation to the next, whether we sit on a beach or
in a glass tower.
Intergenerational equity is a responsibility we must
all carry and one at the heart of the Security Council’s
mandate. What then is the role of the Security Council in
acting to address the threat of sea level rise and climate
change to the security and peace of the world? In many
ways, the Council has the greatest mandate and reason
to address the issue, because the fall-out of failing to
do so will fall directly into its remit of response. In
our region, the increasing demand for concurrent lawand-order and defence responses is already straining
preparedness and response capabilities. And that is
happening not only in developing countries — New
Zealand just declared a national state of emergency
because of the impact of consecutive extreme weather
events that hit the country in a very short span of time.
That is becoming an all-too-common occurrence across
the world and is especially devasting to those least able
to cope and respond.

S/PV.9260

What are the solutions? I do not think we have
enough time to do justice to that question today, but a
great start would be to acknowledge and advocate to stop
greenhouse gas emissions, targeting the root cause of
the multiplicity of complex security threats. In addition,
we must support the efforts of the regions and countries
most at risk to secure their jurisdictional space on the
planet and the certainty of their existence as States into
the future. We must develop and implement an ambitious
policy on greening the practices of the United Nations
and its key bodies and stakeholders in the field. Wars
are costly, not just to people and nations but also to the
stability of our planet. We must keep regularly apprised
of the manifestations of sea level rise and climate change
impacts by combining United Nations efforts with those
of other institutions, undertaking site-specific risk
assessments and developing appropriate responses. We
must go and meet in those places to fully appreciate the
situation first-hand. We should give voice to the most
vulnerable, in particular women, girls and children,
who are disproportionately impacted. That will help to
inform our pre-emptive and proactive ability in order to
cauterize as much of the potential insecurity and unrest
before it becomes so great an issue that none of us can
effectively respond.
The President: I thank Ms. Pasisi for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign and European Affairs and Trade
of Malta.
I begin by thanking the Secretary-General, the
President of the General Assembly, the Co-Chair of the
International Law Commission’s Study Group on sea
level rise and Ms. Pasisi for their presence today and
sharing their views and observations on the implications
of sea level rise for peace and security.
The Security Council was established with the
responsibility to ensure the maintenance of international
peace and security. While wars and conflict persist, we
are now increasingly aware of other global challenges
that may exacerbate insecurity if left unchecked.
Scientific research can help us discern the impacts of
new and emerging threats, such as climate change. By
tapping into that knowledge, the Council will be better
placed to identify, address and drive responses to peace
and security.
The manifestations of climate change are multifold
and felt across the globe. Ocean-related climate security
risks are a daily reality for many countries, with such

23-044119/30

S/PV.9260

Threats to international peace and security

threats disproportionately affecting island States, small
island developing States, coastal regions and low-lying
cities, threatening their very existence. As an island
State, Malta knows that reality all too well. In fact,
science is what guided Malta when it first proposed
the notion that climate change is a common concern to
humankind at the United Nations. Today, especially as
a member of the Security Council, our commitment is
just as strong to ensuring that climate change remains
an important part of the discussions of this organ. We
are deeply appreciative of the extensive work that has
been carried out in this area by the Council over the
past few years, and we stand ready to continue building
on what has already been achieved.
Today highlights our recognition that sea level
rise unleashes threats to the existence, identity and
security of peoples and nations. Those threats, both
sudden and gradual, have the potential to wipe out
entire communities and nations. Submerged coastlines
will threaten critical infrastructure and precipitate
disputes over scarce vital resources, such as food and
water, while pushing our most vulnerable communities
into further marginalization. Sea level rise has already
resulted in the partial or total inundation of coastal
areas, further leading to the loss of land, housing and
property, sea water intrusion into agricultural lands
and water tables, and the disruption of basic services.
The dire humanitarian consequences that could result
from rising sea levels are no longer mere rhetoric.
Science already forecasts that up to 1 billion people
will be at risk from coast-specific climate hazards by
the year 2060 and hundreds of millions of people will
be displaced by the year 2100. That pattern is set to
only increase if no action is taken.
Women and children, including girls — who are
largely responsible for securing household water
and energy resources — often face the brunt of
those climate-induced adverse manifestations, with
devastating impacts on family survival. Increasingly
unpredictable weather patterns and reduced freshwater
access disproportionately affect women’s small-scale
agricultural livelihoods and also limit the capacity of
current and future generations to be resilient. Those
consequences have now reached a turning point for
international peace and security, and it is our belief that
the Council must appropriately address those risks. It
is amply clear that the issues created by sea level rise
run through the very heart of State sovereignty, as they
10/30

14/02/2023

represent a direct threat to the security of those areas
and the people who call those areas their home.
The potential loss of statehood — one of the most
severe consequences of rising sea levels — as well as
issues related to maritime boundaries and jurisdiction,
are an established theme in the current discourse because
of associated far-reaching security implications. While
the legal issues arising from rising sea levels are under
review by the International Law Commission, the
obvious security-related risks require the attention of
the Council. The political and security consequences of
sea level rise reflect a potentially catastrophic reality,
which if left unaddressed may lead to a completely
different world than the one in which we currently live.
Having spearheaded the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea, which today remains the
fundamental pillar that ensures peace and security at
sea, Malta continues to be committed to ensuring that
the voices of those States and peoples most affected by
those threats are heard.
Today we are encouraged to hear about best
practices from people who face that reality on a daily
basis, especially women, who are on the front line,
identifying actions in the field that are long-lasting and
can truly drive positive impacts on their populations
and regions. As climate change catalyses new waves of
activism around the world, threats and violence against
women environmental defenders, especially indigenous
women, is increasing. Their protection must be an
integral part of the global agenda for peacebuilding and
for sustaining peace. We are therefore pleased to have
this opportunity to engage in an open dialogue, so as to
properly address the threats that sea level rise poses to
international peace and security, and we look forward
to hearing from all delegations today.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of the Republic of Mozambique.
Ms. Dlhovo (Mozambique) (spoke in Portuguese;
English interpretation provided by the delegation):
Mozambique would like to warmly congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your country, Malta, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February. We greatly value Malta’s leadership
in conducting the proceedings of the Council, and
Mozambique therefore pledges you its full support. We
are also very grateful to the President of the General
23-04411

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Assembly, the Secretary-General, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Romania and the Director of Climate
Change of the Pacific Community for their important
and insightful statements.
Mozambique believes firmly in the importance and
urgency of the topic proposed by Malta today on the
impact of sea level rise. Its implications for peace and
security and the possible loss of all or parts of States’
territory and maritime zones are pressing issues for
our times.
Mozambique is a low-lying coastal State that is
particularly vulnerable to the effects of sea level rise.
We have been experiencing extreme weather events
on an unprecedented scale since 2019. With more than
2,700 kilometres of coastline, nine international river
basins, a high dependence on agricultural yields and
developing infrastructure, my country is extremely
sensitive to rising sea levels. Most of our population lives
along the low-lying coast. Any changes to those areas
therefore have an immediate and detrimental impact
on our communities, which are largely dependent on
agriculture and fishing for their livelihoods. The scale
of Mozambique’s increased vulnerability through its
increasing exposure to climate risks has prompted us
to conduct detailed scientific studies on the impact of
those changes, giving us a global view of the impact of
sea level rise, especially in low-lying regions such as
the Zambezi and Lower Limpopo deltas.
In the past 12 months alone, Mozambique has
endured five tropical storms and cyclones. Cyclone
Gombe, for instance, which occurred in 2022, affected
almost 1 million people. In the capital city and province
of Maputo in my country, 40,000 people were affected
and nine lost their lives owing to heavy rains and
upstream floods. On top of that, much infrastructure
was destroyed. We are talking about people who lost
almost everything that they had sacrificed a great deal
to accumulate in their lifetimes. Now they need help.
Many cities, including Maputo, Xai-Xai, Inhambane,
Beira, Quelimane, Ilha de Moçambique, Nacala and
Pemba are suffering from severe erosion caused by
sea level rise and other factors. The problem is also
affecting other large coastal cities in Africa, such as
Lagos, Luanda, Dar es Salaam, Alexandria, Abidjan,
Cape Town and Casablanca, to name just a few. If
urgent action is not taken to protect them in the near
future, they may disappear. That is why, among other
measures, we need to engage in prevention by investing
in resilient housing in the coastal communities.

S/PV.9260

Rising sea levels are expected to affect some regions
more than others. Small island developing States are
some of the most peaceful nations in the world today.
However, population displacement, the loss of territory
and possible threats to national identity may deeply
affect their stability, peace and security. The possibility
of significant territorial loss resulting from sea level rise
is a sensitive and worrisome issue, as it encompasses a
range of concerns linked to statehood, national identity,
refugee status, State responsibility, access to resources
and international peace and security. Sea level rise
does not pose a threat to land areas alone, as it has the
potential to significantly affect the extent of national
claims to maritime jurisdiction. Most African States
have been able to peacefully settle disputed maritime
boundary claims with their neighbours in accordance
with international law. However, by undermining
the physical basis for the delineation of maritime
boundaries, rising sea levels may very well disturb
those established maritime boundaries. We therefore
urgently need to develop clear rules at the international
level to safeguard the certainty and stability of those
boundaries, if we are to avoid new conflicts over access
to resources.
With a view to mitigating these growing risks,
Mozambique has established a national climate-change
adaptation strategy, and the results are encouraging.
We think that we need protected marine reserves
and incentives to promote the active participation of
coastal communities in the conservation measures of
marine ecosystems. We need to formulate a consensus
solution to the displacement and the loss of territory
that are bound to come. In that context, among other
issues, the international community should reflect on
how to reaffirm the principle of self-determination
and the continuation of statehood in perpetuity even in
situations where territory has been lost.
Let me conclude by reiterating that Mozambique
remains fully committed to working closely with the
international community on disaster prevention. We
are certain that together we can lessen the negative
impact because there is strength in numbers, and the
united determination of our countries will be the key to
winning this battle.
The President: I now call on the Permanent
Representative of the United States and member of
President Biden’s Cabinet.

23-0441111/30

S/PV.9260

Threats to international peace and security

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s discussion. We truly appreciate your presence
here with us at this meeting on a very important topic.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General, as well
as President Kőrösi and Foreign Minister Aurescu of
Romania, and especially our briefer, Ms. Pasisi, for their
thoughts and insights. I also welcome the ministers who
are here in the Chamber with us today.
Seas rising and overtaking homes, offices, towns,
cities and nations should be the stuff of apocalyptic
novels and movies. Instead, it is the very real threat we
face today. Around the world, the shores of small island
nations and low-lying coastal areas are flooding, causing
damage, disruption and dislocation on a dramatic scale.
Too often, countries have limited national budgets to
enhance resilience, little land to lose and constrained
migration options. Such challenges all have the
potential to disrupt peace and security and exacerbate
existing insecurity and conflicts. In my own home state
of Louisiana, the United States National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration projects that Gulf Coast
waters could rise by as much as two feet by 2050.
Already, Louisiana fishers report that rising waters are
damaging infrastructure and livelihoods, forcing locals
whose families have lived and worked in those areas for
generations to move to higher ground. And even right
here in New York City, we caught a glimpse into the
future during Hurricane Sandy, as large parts of Staten
Island, New Jersey, lower Manhattan and the coasts of
Brooklyn and Queens were submerged underwater.
The threat of sea level rise is real. It is a direct result
of our climate crisis, and it is a matter of international
peace and security. The Security Council must take
notice and it must take action. More than 680 million
people in low-lying coastal areas will lose their homes,
livelihoods and communities. Billions more will be
displaced. Many will become climate refugees, and
most of us will experience severe weather because of
rising tides. The Council must also be immediately
and specifically concerned with the way that the
rising sea levels will make it harder for peacekeeping
operations to fulfil their mandates, especially for
missions that have coastal borders. For our part, the
United States is responding to those challenges by
working with communities vulnerable to sea level rise
at home and engaging vulnerable States abroad. The
Biden Administration has stepped up efforts to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, including through the
12/30

14/02/2023

historic Inflation Reduction Act, which puts us on track
to meet our commitments under the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change.
Internationally, we are urging major emitters to
raise their ambitions and meet the Paris Agreement
targets. Nothing could be more important for limiting
the dramatic effect of our oceans rising. The President’s
Emergency Plan for Adaption and Resilience is also
helping vulnerable developing countries adapt to and
manage the impact of climate change, including sea
level rise. As part of that plan, we are integrating climate
support into critical sectors, such as food security,
infrastructure, water and health, and ensuring that
vulnerable countries and communities access climate
and disaster-risk financing. We are also working with
our partners to strengthen early warning systems.
As we announced at the twenty-seventh Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, we are responding to
the Secretary-General’s call for early warning for all.
We have committed more than $40 million to help close
the early warning gap, including for new resources for
small island States in the Pacific. Those efforts are
not only important on a humanitarian level but also
forestall potential conflicts between and within States
ignited by sea level rise.
Finally, we are working to establish international
policies to blunt the impact of rising sea levels. At the
United States Pacific Island Country Summit held last
year, we announced a new policy on sea level rise in
maritime zones. That policy affirmed our commitment
to preserving the legitimacy of States, maritime zones
and associated rights and entitlements that have been
established consistent with international law and that
are not subsequently updated despite sea level rise
caused by climate change. The United States will not
challenge such maritime zones, even if they are not
subsequently updated to reflect sea level rise caused by
climate change. Our new policy reflects the approach
taken by the Pacific Islands Forum and the Alliance
of Small Island States. We encourage others to adopt
practices consistent with that approach and will work
with partner countries to establish and maintain
baselines and maritime zone limits. Those actions aim
to prevent conflict by ensuring that countries maintain
access to their long-standing maritime zones and the
corresponding economic opportunities.
The truth is that as we look ahead, the threat of
sea level rise raises challenging questions on statehood
23-04411

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

for certain particularly vulnerable islands. We must
work together to address those challenges. Those risks
also bring into stark relief the urgency of reducing
global emissions and helping vulnerable countries and
communities to adapt to a changing climate. That is
happening today. Fortunately, the worst impacts can
be averted, but we have to act now and we have to act
together. We look forward to hearing everyone’s views
today and partnering to prevent sea level rise in the
days to come.
The President: I now call on the State Secretary
of Switzerland.
Mr. Gürber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s open debate. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the General Assembly, the
co-Chair of the International Law Commission’s Study
Group on sea level rise in relation to international law
and Ms. Coral Pasisi for their briefings.
The facts are clear: our planet is getting warmer,
causing sea levels to rise and glaciers to melt. Switzerland
is at the forefront of the latter phenomenon. According
to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
limiting global warming to an increase of 1.5°C would
slow sea level rise. The effective implementation of the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change is therefore crucial
for preventing the worst impacts of climate change.
Addressing climate security is one of the priorities
of the Government of Switzerland in the Security
Council. My country will therefore remain committed
to limiting the negative effects of climate change on
peace and security. Allow me to highlight three points.
First, rising sea levels caused by global warming
can increase insecurity. Rising seas threaten the
infrastructure and even the existence of some island
and coastal States. Some of those States could end up
submerged. Moreover, agricultural production, food
security and access to water and housing are threatened
by soil erosion and the salinization of water. Some areas
are becoming uninhabitable, which could force millions
of people to flee within or outside their country. In
fragile contexts in which State capacity is limited,
that can lead, for example, to tensions over access to
basic services. While rising seas affect populations as
a whole, they also have a disproportionately negative
effect on marginalized groups and women.
Secondly, the Security Council has a key role to
play. It must face one of the greatest contemporary

S/PV.9260

threats to humankind. The Council must have the
capacity to anticipate the impacts of climate change on
international peace and security through conflict earlywarning systems that are based on sound science. It
must then integrate the findings of those assessments
into its activities, including peacekeeping and special
political missions. In that regard, the Climate Security
Mechanism’s climate advisers are a good example.
Nevertheless, sea level rise requires an integrated
response from the entire United Nations system,
including the Peacebuilding Commission, on the basis
of the mandates attributed to each entity working on
the issue.
Thirdly, in order to address sea level rise,
international law must serve as our guide. The United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and the
principle of damage prevention are crucial elements of
that law. However, despite the established framework
of international law, such climate challenges also pose
new and complex questions, for example, with regard
to statehood, human rights and the protection of people
against the particular effects of such threats. We
therefore welcome the ongoing work of the International
Law Commission.
Today the impacts of climate change and sea level
rise are already being felt in different ways depending on
the context. Like the water that links Swiss glaciers and
the Pacific islands, their effects on peace and security
transcend borders and concern us all. Switzerland
has adopted a proactive role in launching the Nansen
Initiative with Norway, as well as the Geneva-based
Platform on Disaster Displacement. The Platform seeks
to improve the protection of people displaced beyond
borders in the context of disasters and climate change.
Particularly as co-Chair of the Informal Expert Group
on Climate and Security, we will remain committed to
limiting the negative impacts of climate change on peace
and security during our term on the Security Council.
Mr. Al-Suwaidi (United Arab Emirates): Allow
me to begin by thanking you, Mr. Minister, and Malta
for convening this important debate. I also want to
thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, for
his consistent leadership on this issue. I am grateful to
Mr. Csaba Kőrösi, Mr. Bogdan Aurescu and Ms. Coral
Pasisi for their insightful briefings to us today.
Nowhere are the urgency and the complexity of
the climate crisis more evident than in our seas and
oceans. Today the Security Council is listening to

23-0441113/30

S/PV.9260

Threats to international peace and security

the testimonies of people living on the front lines of
climate change. They are telling us that their security,
livelihoods and identities are already under threat long
before temperature rises have risen to 1.5°C. Climate
change is already having a devastating impact on
peoples, livelihoods and lives today.
The world cannot look away. Warming, rising and
acidifying water poses an existential threat, especially
to low-lying countries and coastal communities. Many
territories are poised to become uninhabitable, even
before becoming permanently inundated. We must
respond to this crisis with unity and solidarity and with
action. We know that we are currently off track with
regard to the 1.5°C goals of the Paris Agreement and a
meaningfully coping capacity for climate impacts.
I serve as the Director-General and Special
Representative of the twenty-eighth session of the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 28). I
am joining Member States today because the United Arab
Emirates recognizes the urgent need for a coordinated
response across the multilateral system. We cannot
neglect any element of the climate crisis, including its
clear implications for international peace and security.
With each body contributing within its mandate, our
obligation is to reverse the current trajectories with
inclusive, effective and responsive climate action.
Accordingly, I would like to emphasize four points that
should inform the development of a shared response to
the perils that we are discussing today.
First, the potential consequence of sea level rise,
such as disputes over resources, the displacement
of millions of people and serious implications for
sovereignty and statehood, must be at the heart of
maintaining international peace and security. We
applaud Malta for bringing this issue to the Security
Council’s attention. But we also recognize that it is a
response to the gap in this organ’s engagement. Regular
reporting by the Secretary-General on the basis of
scientific data on, and an analysis of, the risks and
impacts of climate change with regard to international
peace and security would enable context-specific and
evidence-based approaches by the Council. It would
also help to sustain the Council’s focus and ensure that
it complements the ongoing efforts across the United
Nations system.
Secondly, we must catalyse greater and higher quality
climate finance for fragile and vulnerable countries.
14/30

14/02/2023

There is glaring international underinvestment in food
and water systems, as well as infrastructure resilience.
Reform of the international financial institutions and
multilateral development banks is a critical dimension
of our response, enabling them to run towards, instead
of away from, destabilizing climate threats. The loss and
damage facility agreed at the twenty-seventh session
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change must
also be operationalized. This is the year to politically
recognize the financing gap regarding fragility and to
close it. The peace dividends of such actions will be
immediate and enduring.
Thirdly, early-action work by humanitarian actors
gives us a range of proven tools to reduce the security
impacts of sea level rise. It also provides an opportunity
to understand the implications for the most vulnerable,
such as women and children, and to ensure an inclusive
response from the start. Accordingly, the United
Arab Emirates is fully supportive of the SecretaryGeneral’s Early Warnings for All initiative. We also
underscore the urgent need for an annual investment
plan, increased data collection and integration with
anticipatory action systems.
Fourthly, we must acknowledge and address the
unprecedented legal and policy challenges posed by sea
level rise. That includes ensuring that the multilateral
system offers adequate solutions. In that regard, the
United Arab Emirates encourages the International
Law Commission’s continued work on sea level rise,
especially its implications for the law of the sea,
sovereignty and statehood. Similarly, we also recognize
the important efforts by Pacific small island developing
States to advance the normative legal debate on sea
level rise.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
commitment of the United Arab Emirates here in the
Security Council, as the incoming President of COP 28
and in all forums to listening to affected communities
and responding with ambition and urgency and with
action that leaves no country and no community
behind. Preventing and addressing insecurity are one
of the most important investments that we, as the
international community, can make.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank Malta
for organizing this meeting on this important topic
and you, Mr. Minister, for presiding over it. I thank
you for bringing the inherent link between climate
23-04411

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

and security back to the Security Council. I also thank
the Secretary-General, the President of the General
Assembly, Minister Aurescu and Ms. Pasisi for their
important information.
It has been said many times, but it needs to be
recalled, that there is no greater danger to our bare
existence than climate change because, as a threat
multiplier for instability at a scale that we can hardly
imagine, it risks altering everything on Earth to
the point of no return, threatening our very ability
to survive.
Sea level rise is one of the most significant effects
of climate change. It is a clear sign of a catastrophe
in the making, and it is already a reality for tens of
millions of people and not only island States, but also
many other developing countries, as listed by the
Secretary-General today.
Science has been very clear and vocal, and we have
been warned: sea level rise will create a profound shift
in coastal flooding over the next decades, threatening
entire livelihoods and the ability to subsist in many parts
of the world. Undisputed scientific reports find that by
the end of this century, regardless of our actions, global
sea levels will most likely rise up to 1.1 metres or more,
one of the direst sea level rise projections ever made
by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. As
alarming as that is, the reality may even be worse and its
multifaceted implications — as mentioned today — far
more complex.
We already see climate change exacerbating
poverty, aggravating underdevelopment and causing
massive displacement, which, as we know, are
among the root causes of conflict. It was rightly
mentioned — hundreds of millions will be displaced,
forced from their homes by extreme weather events,
exacerbated by rising global temperatures.
Let us not forget that more than 30 million people
were displaced in Pakistan by the extraordinary
floods last year. In many developing countries, the
accumulation of climate-related catastrophes chips
away at resources and makes each successive disaster
more damaging.
That is why climate change should be a core topic
on the agenda of the Security Council. It is not only
a development issue. It is not only an environmental
issue. It is, undeniably, and will continue to be, an
acute security issue. Denying it means sleepwalking

S/PV.9260

into a disaster written in front of our eyes in capital
letters. Preventing the Council from doing its part
only adds to attitudes that steal the future from our
children, punishing them to live with the consequences
of our inaction.
We will have no part in it and deplore that the
Council has so far failed to put this existential threat
where it should be, where it belongs — front and centre
in its work — not at the exclusion of other specialized
forums and bodies, but as a sign of joining forces and
canvassing our collective strength for our own sake and
that of our children and future generations, who will be
there when the Earth will be more inhospitable, more
in danger.
That is why we think we should work with the
existing tools and create new ones in order to move in
the right direction. I would like to briefly mention some
such tools:
First, we need to raise awareness about the impact
of climate change on security in order to properly
assess and respond to climate-related security risks.
The Secretary-General should report regularly to the
Security Council — as he did today — on the security
implications of climate change.
Secondly, the United Nations needs to increase
cross-agency cooperation and coordination in sharing
information, knowledge and best practices among
States and United Nations missions. We support the
appointment of a special representative for climate and
security in order to improve the Organization’s ability
to address climate-related security risks.
Thirdly, we must prioritize early warning systems,
which have proven to be effective, and feasible climate
adaptation measures that save lives.
Fourthly, ambitious climate plans will remain
as wishful thoughts — right, but toothless. Without
access to appropriate financing, efforts to mitigate and
address the climate-related risks to peace and security
will fall short. Mitigating the effects of climate change
is a global collective effort, but it starts at home, and we
all must do our part.
In 2019, Albania became the first country in
the region to adopt a strategy on climate change and
related action plans on mitigation and adaptation. We
are working and are on a very good track to achieve
the United Nations global goal to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions by 45 per cent in the next decade and

23-0441115/30

S/PV.9260

Threats to international peace and security

14/02/2023

achieve net-zero emissions by 2050, in accordance with
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.

with particularly severe impacts on coastal communities
worldwide and their livelihoods.

In conclusion, while we work to mitigate and
address the climate-related risks to peace and security,
we must not forget that climate change has a strong
gender dimension. Climate change, environmental
degradation and sea level rise disproportionally affect
women and girls. Climate and environmental action
and disaster risk reduction therefore need to be gender
responsive, value and promote all women and girls as
agents of change and directly address the specific risks
that they face.

Sea level rise has the potential to challenge the basic
defining characteristics of a State: a defined territory
and a population. We are pleased that the International
Law Commission is cognizant of that.

Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
congratulate Malta on taking the initiative of holding
this important debate. I thank the Secretary-General
for having perfectly spelled out the stakes of the threat
posed by rising sea levels. I would also like to thank
the President of the General Assembly, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Romania and Co-Chair of the
International Law Commission Study Group on sea
level rise and Ms. Pasisi for their informative briefings.
Gabon is firmly convinced that there is a clear nexus
between peace, security and sustainable development.
It is a constant domino effect, now exacerbated by
the threat of climate change. That threat affects all
countries of the world, developed and underdeveloped,
and requires a comprehensive strategic response at the
national and multilateral levels. The magnitude of the
threat requires transcending the preliminary debate
about which international institution is best suited to act
on behalf of the international community in response to
the phenomenon of climate change.
Indeed, the threat to the peace and security of the
entire human race is real for coastal States, like Gabon.
It is existential and imminent for small island States.
The Security Council must address that
fundamental issue, including the range of risks to
international peace and security posed by the effects of
climate change, and consider action at the international
and regional levels. The expected response is primarily
preventive and must include risk assessment, planning
and appropriate funding for resilience and capacitybuilding in fragile States.
The scientific evidence is clear on the scale of the
threat that sea level rise poses to the territorial integrity
of small island developing States and low-lying States,
16/30

For several decades, global sea level has been
rising noticeably, and that trend is accelerating. At the
current rate, hundreds of millions of people in Africa
will be exposed to sea level rise by 2030, with some
low-lying African coastal cities potentially becoming
uninhabitable in the medium term. In addition,
urbanization and the rapid expansion of communities
in coastal areas will put more people at risk.
Rising sea levels are causing sudden events. Among
those, the most salient are the retreat of the coastline,
the intrusion of salt water into the land, coastal erosion,
the modification of coastal ecosystems, storm surges
often associated with intense cyclones or massive
flooding phenomena, the humanitarian consequences
of which are often disastrous.
Damage or destruction of infrastructure, increased
competition or inequalities in access to land or natural
resources, the loss of submerged land, resource scarcity,
food insecurity, reduced livelihoods, impacts on
coastal economic activities or damage to the heritage
and cultural identity function of coastlines are just
some of the non-exhaustive list of adverse impacts of
sea level rise.
As exposure to the effects of sea level rise
increases, so does the likelihood of sudden and forced
mass migration of people living in coastal areas due
to climate change. Depending on the context, there is
a risk that the arrival of large numbers of displaced
people, sometimes with different ethnic or religious
identities, could exacerbate social tensions owing
to identity issues or factors related to access to
resources, livelihoods and pre-existing services, with
the consequent risk of exacerbating social or political
instability, including radicalization that could trigger
both intrastate and inter-State conflicts.
At the same time, tensions and conflicts can affect
countries’ ability to deal with climate-related security
risks and significantly increase their vulnerability.
That is why the countries that are most vulnerable
to the effects of climate change are also likely to be
vulnerable to high levels of insecurity, which reduces
23-04411

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

their ability to respond or adapt to climate change. The
strong correlation between the vulnerability caused
by climate change and insecurity results in a negative
feedback loop, which increases the vulnerability
of exposed communities, particularly women and
children, who are less resilient and less able to cope
with the effects of the consequent destabilization.
Without
effective
resilience-building
or
climate-change adaptation strategies, increasingly
severe and frequent extreme weather events will
continue to have a negative impact on the socioeconomic
development of coastal areas. An adequate response
to climate-related security risks demands that we
raise our expectations in the fight against climate
change. The best way to prevent, mitigate and manage
climate-related security risks is to address their causes.
In the context of fragile States that are already affected
by conflict, we must fill the gaps in scientific and
traditional knowledge to increase climate resilience
and ensure sustainable coastal development. Our
understanding of how climate change threatens peace
and security and fuels conflict must be improved
across the entire United Nations system. Only then can
climate policy underpin all other development planning
and initiatives.
We cannot talk about global peace, security or
sustainability when the effects of climate change make
development unattainable. The inclusion of relevant
analysis in the regular reports, risk assessments and
early warnings of the Secretary-General is crucial.
Gabon therefore endorses the call for the appointment
of a special representative on climate and security,
which would fill a critical gap in the United Nations
system by providing the Security Council with the
information it requires. An adequate response to
climate-related security risks also requires sustainable
and increased funding for climate-change adaptation
with targeted funding for the most vulnerable countries
and communities.
In conclusion, we will not be able to build or
ensure security, or achieve inclusive and lasting peace,
if we do not address every element of instability and
conflict. They include the threats posed by climate
change, including those related to sea level rise. Given
the obvious repercussions, which have already had a
significant impact on the stability and security of
various regions and States, the security dimension of
climate change is no longer in doubt. More than ever, the
question is no longer whether the Security Council is the

S/PV.9260

competent organ to deal with the issue but rather how the
Council’s work will take into account the multifaceted
security risks associated with climate change.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank Malta for convening
this important debate and all the speakers for their
contributions. The Paris Agreement has set the course
we must take in limiting global warming by 1.5°C
and increasing our capacity to mitigate, adapt and
be resilient to climate change, especially in the most
vulnerable countries. To that end, we need everyone’s
commitment. I will underscore two points.
The first is the observation that global warming
is causing sea levels to rise and posing a threat to
international peace and security. As a vital carbon
pump, the ocean absorbs more than 90 per cent of the
excess heat generated by human activity. At the same
time, that is leading to rising water temperatures
and the rapid and almost irreversible deterioration of
marine ecosystems. It is therefore by combating climate
change that we can protect the ocean. The latest report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change on
the oceans and the cryosphere predicts a rise in global
sea level by 48 centimetres in 2100. That means that
productive areas, agricultural land and homes will
be submerged and uninhabitable in the future. Small
island developing States are by their nature the most
exposed to the effects of climate change on the oceans.
Their very survival is at stake. Besides sea level
rise, all the cumulative disruptive effects caused by
climate change are potential sources of instability and
conflict — scarcity of resources, the disappearance of
submerged land, forced migration and food insecurity,
to name only a few related issues. We must anticipate
and respond to the state of emergency that the ocean,
our shared resource, is facing.
In that challenging context, the response to climate
risk requires a global and preventive approach. In Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982), the Secretary-General
provides us with a road map for building peace, creating
the conditions necessary for sustainable and inclusive
development and simultaneously combating the
effects of climate change. France is contributing to the
international community’s efforts to counter the security
consequences of rising sea levels through initiatives to
increase States’ resilience to climate change, including
the Climate Risk and Early Warning System Initiative,
which is aimed at improving early-warning systems to
address climate risks in the countries most vulnerable

23-0441117/30

S/PV.9260

Threats to international peace and security

to disasters and to which France will double its annual
contribution to €8 million by 2023.
The entire United Nations system must act in a
coordinated manner to reduce climate risks, whether
through the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea, the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, the Paris Agreement or the Security
Council. I would like to acknowledge the role of the
Climate Security Mechanism in building resilience to
climate risk, and I would be remiss if I failed to mention
the Convention on Biological Diversity. In keeping with
Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework,
we must promote nature-based solutions.
The threat posed by rising sea levels is no longer
in doubt. It is therefore up to us to urgently commit
to dealing with it while there is still time. It is in that
spirit of commitment that France, together with Costa
Rica, will be proud to host the next Ocean Conference
in 2025. We will address this subject as one of the
Conference’s priorities.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s high-level open
debate on such an important theme for island countries,
including Japan. Japan commends the solidarity shown
by Malta with small island developing States (SIDS) in
addressing the impact of sea level rise. I also thank all
the briefers for their valuable contributions.
The looming sea level rise is threatening people’s
safety and existence in various ways. Nevertheless,
when we talk about international peace and security
and focus only on how to prevent international armed
conflict, we need to recognize that the threat of sea
level rise is as imminent and critical as threats such
as those posed by invasion by a foreign nation. At the
core of both crises, human life and dignity are at stake,
and as such both are serious security issues. While it is
obvious that the Security Council should get involved
when such peace and security issues arise, as Ms. Coral
Pasisi said earlier about the expectations that the
Security Council should play its role, at the same time
it is also obvious that the Council alone cannot offer
comprehensive solutions or directly carry out responses
to climate-change-related development issues.
However, the Security Council, which is primarily
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, can fulfil its duty by calling together
other United Nations bodies, including the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
18/30

14/02/2023

Peacebuilding Commission. It is from that perspective
that Japan underscores the importance of preventive
diplomacy and called for more robust communication
between the Council and various players, including
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), at its signature
event held last month (see S/PV.9250).
As mitigation and adaptation for climate change
are prerequisites for addressing sea level rise, resilient
institutions are necessary to implement them as
efficiently and effectively as possible. Japan believes
that, along with valuable advice from the PBC, the
Council can promote sustainable peace through resilient
institutions by investing in people, including women,
young people and indigenous people, as agents for the
shaping and promotion of such institutions. As part of
our efforts to strengthen institutions, Japan supports
small island developing States (SIDS) in capacitybuilding, for example through disaster risk reduction
training for Government officials, local leaders
and children and young people; the second phase of
the Sendai Cooperation Initiative for Disaster Risk
Reduction; and the programme for women’s leadership
in tsunami-based disaster risk reduction led by the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research.
Japan also believes that legal stability and
predictability are a necessary foundation for island
nations, as well as for the coastal States of continents
that are exposed to various uncertainties due to sea level
rise. In that context, I would like to make clear Japan’s
position that it is permissible for coastal countries to
preserve the existing baselines and maritime zones
established under the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, notwithstanding the regression of
coastlines caused by climate change. We are confident
that such an interpretation is legitimate and will ensure
legal stability and predictability, in particular for
SIDS. I am grateful that our position was welcomed
by the delegation of the Pacific Islands Forum, led
by the Honourable Mr. Mark Brown, Prime Minister
of the Cook Islands, at a meeting with Mr. Hayashi
Yoshimasa, our Minister for Foreign Affairs, held on
6 February.
Japan is an island country, and as such we fully
understand the seriousness of sea level rise. Japan
will continue to spare no effort in working proactively
within the United Nations to address the issue of sea
level rise, as well as that of climate change and security
more generally.
23-04411

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for the initiative to convene this meeting
and for providing us with the opportunity to exchange
views on the possible implications of sea level rise for
international peace and security. On that note, I thank
the Secretary-General, the President of the General
Assembly, Minister Aurescu and Ms. Pasisi for their
contributions to our debate today.
Indeed, no ecosystem or State is protected from
the negative impacts of climate change, but its effects
on oceans may bear even more significant implications
for statehood. They can also threaten the livelihoods
of communities and impact human mobility. Sea level
rise, as a consequence of climate change, is particularly
critical for small island States. We strongly empathize
with their claim that their very existence is threatened
by that phenomenon. The issue is of such importance
that it must be discussed in an inclusive, legitimate and
representative forum, with the mandate and the right
tools to tackle climate change and its implications. It
does not fall within the mandate of the Security Council
to discuss climate change. If, as set out in the concept
note (S/2023/79, annex), the goal of this discussion is to
focus on how to prevent political and security concerns
related to sea level rise and build resilience, then the
securitization of the current debate may prove itself
undesirable and counterproductive.
First, as underscored by the Secretary-General
in his Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), one of the
primary roles of the United Nations should be to act
as a source of reliable data and evidence. The same
should be applied to the Security Council. In this
case, there is no evidence proving that climate change
directly causes armed conflicts. In that regard, the
sixth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change stated that not only are non-climatic
factors the dominant drivers of existing intra-State
conflicts, but even in some assessed regions in which
extreme weather and climate events have had a small,
adverse impact on the length, severity or frequency of
intra-State violent conflicts, the statistical association
is weak. Moreover, the document also stresses that
compared to other socioeconomic factors, the influence
of climate on conflict is assessed as relatively weak.
Secondly, despite the many tools in its toolbox,
the Security Council does not have the ones we need
to fight climate change or to build resilience against
its impacts. Therefore, a security-centred discussion
cannot offer solutions to support the countries affected

S/PV.9260

by sea level rise, particularly small island developing
States. Instead, we believe that climate change and sea
level rise implications need to be dealt with through
international law and cooperation for development. The
first relates to the political and legal implications of sea
level rise for States. The second is a necessary condition
for the implementation of the consensus-based, agreed
goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) and its Paris Agreement on
Climate Change. The Conference of the Parties (COP)
to UNFCCC is the forum in which the countries most
affected by climate change and its implications have a
permanent seat, unlike the Security Council.
Brazil also reiterates its position that solutions
to the complex legal implications arising from the
topic at hand should be crafted in the framework
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea, including at the Meeting of States Parties to the
Convention. The International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea also has an important role to play, especially in
the context of the request for an advisory opinion on
climate change and international law submitted by the
Commission of Small Island States on Climate Change
and International Law in December 2022. The work
of the International Law Commission is also key to
enhancing our understanding of the legal implications
of sea level rise, including issues pertaining to the law
of the sea and the protection of persons and statehood.
Information and legal certainty are crucial tools for
preventing disputes between Member States.
On the sustainable development front, we note with
concern that despite the huge interest expressed in our
oceans today, Goal 14 is still the least funded of all the
Sustainable Development Goals. If we want to build
resilience in the countries and communities affected by
sea level rise, the first step is to fulfil the goals we have
set for ourselves in that respect — some of which are
already outdated. Moreover, developed countries do not
seem to be as keen on fulfilling their climate finance
commitments under the UNFCCC as they are on
insisting on addressing those issues within the Security
Council. That insistence only reinforces the perception
that there is an interest in diverting attention from clear
implementation gaps in the 2030 Agenda and in the
climate change regime, particularly in the provision of
means of implementation for developing countries by
developed countries. One of the most relevant outcomes

23-0441119/30

S/PV.9260

Threats to international peace and security

of the twenty-seventh COP was precisely the decision to
establish a dedicated fund for loss and damage caused
by climate change to assist developing countries that
are particularly vulnerable — a decision that Brazil
fully supported.
I want to take this opportunity to stress how urgent
it is for all developed countries to fulfil and update
their long-overdue climate finance commitments under
the UNFCCC and its Paris Agreement, including the
mobilization of $100 billion per year to address the
needs of developing countries. The mobilization,
scaling up and timely delivery of climate financing by
developed nations are the need of the hour to support
developing States affected by sea level rise and other
implications of climate change.
In conclusion, climate change and its related
challenges, such as sea level rise, should be handled with
the tools of development and international law. Such
discussions must remain open to the entire membership
of the United Nations. We must strive to avoid any
duplication of work and ensure that specific mandates
and responsibilities within the United Nations system
are respected. Time and energy diverted to reallocate
the climate agenda to the Security Council would be
better spent fostering financial flows to support existing
commitments and enhanced climate and ocean action.
The current consensus that economic, social and
environmental challenges should be assessed jointly
and in a balanced manner through the lens of sustainable
development is the result of five decades of multilateral
efforts in the United Nations, starting in Stockholm,
in 1972, followed by Rio de Janeiro, in 1992 and 2012,
and ending in New York in 2015, with the adoption of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Let us
not put the multilateral achievements of the past halfcentury at risk to further advance the encroachment of
the Security Council on the climate-change agenda.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me thank Malta for
its leadership on the issue of sea level rise and its
implications for international peace and security. I
welcome the fact that you are presiding over today’s
open debate, Mr. President. I also welcome the
participation of all the high-level officials here today. I
thank the Secretary-General for his statement and our
briefers for their insightful contributions.
The existential risks to humankind posed by
rising and increasingly extreme sea levels is evident.
The special report of the Intergovernmental Panel
20/30

14/02/2023

on Climate Change on the ocean and cryosphere in a
changing climate has already sounded the alarm — sea
level rise is both a present and future danger. It poses
a clear risk to livelihoods as well as to the security and
well-being of millions who live in low-lying coastal
areas, particularly in small island developing States
(SIDS). The homes, culture and identity of millions are
being destroyed or lost. Water sources for millions are
being salinized. Food systems for millions are being
wiped away. The long-term implications of sea level rise
for the integrity of maritime boundaries, the ownership
of marine resources and the statehood of affected
countries call for urgent action. Delaying action means
being too late to make the needed difference.
While some may argue that at least in this
context we are not threatened by the force of arms,
the existential risks posed by sea level rise show that
the consequences of the forces of nature could be
similar, if not worse. Combined with the complex,
multifaceted and simultaneous impact of other crises,
the implications of sea level rise for international
peace and security are unimaginable. In several parts
of Africa, for instance, we are beginning to witness
an increasing incidence of coastal erosion, coastal
flooding and powerful storm surges, including in
West Africa, where coastal communities account for
a third of the population and generate more than half
of the region’s gross domestic product. As estimated
by the World Bank, erosion, flooding and pollution
cause $3.8 billion in damages annually in Benin,
Côte d’Ivoire, Senegal and Togo alone. In Ghana, my
own country, rising sea levels on our 580-kilometre
coastal stretch have threatened historic towns like
Keta, Ada and Shama. We are therefore sharing in
the consequences of rising temperatures, which have
triggered migrations of fish stocks, while salinization
has contaminated farmlands and freshwater reserves,
affecting the livelihoods of fisherfolk and farmers.
Frequent inundations have led to forced migration,
displacement, the destruction of property and even
the loss of human lives. Rising sea levels are therefore
affecting lives and livelihoods negatively.
While discussions on climate-change-related
subjects in the Council have not always been consensusbased, it is important that we act collectively in
anticipating threats to international peace and security,
no matter how the risk is defined, and mobilize
international commitment and solidarity for addressing
those threats, including through the relevant bodies.
23-04411

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

That said, we want to point to four priority areas for
global action.
First, we believe that in the light of the long-term
trajectory of sea level rise, as confirmed by several
scientific studies and models, adaptation efforts for
protection, reclamation and accommodation to reduce
coastal risks should be urgently supported, especially
where SIDS are concerned. Such adaptation efforts
for developing resilience will require strengthened
international partnerships and adequate funding. We
also encourage respect for community-based resource
management practices and nature-based solutions for
sustainable outcomes.
Secondly, mindful of the anthropogenic drivers
of the incidence of sea level rise, we emphasize the
need for the faithful implementation of commitments
to climate action to urgently reduce greenhouse-gas
emissions. We therefore urge major emitting countries
to redouble their efforts to align their 2030 Paris
Agreement emission targets with the 1.5℃ goal, which
is a survival limit for the most vulnerable. The fact
is that 2℃ is a death sentence for many small island
developing countries in the Pacific, Asia and Africa.
Thirdly, climate action is impossible without
adequate financing. Adequate climate financing is
equally impossible if developed nations continue to
renege on their commitments and obligations. As the
Secretary-General indicated last week, developed
countries know what they must do, and we join the
Secretary-General in calling on those countries to do
what they know they must do urgently. At a minimum,
they must begin by delivering on the commitments
made at the most recent Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (COP 27), including the long-delayed
delivery of the $100 billion promised to developing
countries; operationalizing the loss and damage fund
agreed in Sharm El-Sheikh; doubling adaptation
funding, including a stand-alone implementation plan;
replenishing the Green Climate Fund by the time
COP 28 is held and advancing plans for early-warning
systems to protect every person on the planet within
five years.
Fourthly, we must strengthen existing mechanisms
to peacefully prevent and resolve conflicts in this era
of climate change. That includes land-based conflicts
over diminishing resources, as well as tensions relating
to ocean governance. We are pleased to note that those

S/PV.9260

dimensions of the problem, as well as the broader
implications for the protection of vulnerable persons
and those relating to a potential loss of sovereignty, are
already under consideration by the International Law
Commission. We commend the work of the Commission
and the Study Group and call for cooperation and
support in their efforts to develop and provide the legal
framework for addressing the impacts of sea level rise
and for maintaining international peace and security on
the oceans and seas.
In conclusion, let me say that the time when the
risks to international peace and security could be put
into neat, simple categories for action is fading. With
the adverse effects of climate change and sea level
rise and the looming threat of a climate catastrophe,
we face a present and looming danger never previously
imagined in modern times. We must therefore mobilize
our collective capacity as never before to head off that
threat to our existence.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important debate today. I join others in thanking all our
briefers today.
As we have heard, continued sea level rise will
increase the likelihood and magnitude of coastal
flooding. That could lead to an increase in recognized
drivers of insecurity, such as humanitarian disasters,
population displacement and competition for
natural resources.
Even if those impacts are not yet apparent at scale,
that should not stop us from doing more to urgently limit
global temperature rises to 1.5°C above pre-industrial
levels, to monitor and analyse those risks, anticipate
and plan for them, and to prevent now the worst
consequences of climate impacts on our security in the
future. I offer three ways in which we can do that.
The first way is with data and evidence gathering.
That includes monitoring and analysis of conflict risk
through a climate lens to better understand climate
security risks at local and regional levels. For that,
we need to strengthen the capacity of the United
Nations system to share and analyse information and
integrate that into United Nations decision-making.
The Council has a clear role in encouraging the United
Nations system to consider and respond to the security
implications of climate change.

23-0441121/30

S/PV.9260

Threats to international peace and security

Secondly, we need cohesive strategies to mitigate
and address climate-related risks to peace and security
in a coordinated way. The United Nations system is
well positioned to coordinate efforts on peacebuilding,
climate action and building resilience. Again, the
Council has a clear role in driving a more coherent
United Nations response to those challenges.
Thirdly, we need to help to build the resilience of
coastal States. The Government of the United Kingdom
has a number of programmes to strengthen resilience in
developing countries against climate change, including
the $600 million Blue Planet Fund, the $50 million
Small Island Developing State Capacity and Resilience
programme, as well as providing significant support
through the Green Climate Fund.
Finally, I note the concerns of some Member
States around the risk of maritime border disputes
resulting from climate-induced sea level rises and
whether maritime baselines should therefore be fixed.
The United Kingdom is considering that carefully.
We remain open to pragmatic and creative solutions
and will continue to engage with other States and the
International Law Commission on some of the complex
legal issues arising from that.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes Malta’s initiative, as President of
the Council, to convene today’s meeting. I also thank
Minister for Foreign Affairs Ian Borg for presiding
over the meeting personally. I thank Secretary-General
Guterres, President of the General Assembly Kőrösi
and Co-Chair Aurescu for their briefings, and I have
listened attentively to the statement by Ms. Pasisi.
Sea level rise has heightened the vulnerability of
the ecosystem and human society globally may give rise
to the submersion of territories, human migration and
property loss, among a plethora of issues; and poses allaround challenges to human survival and development.
For small island developing States and low-lying coastal
countries, it is even an existential issue.
China, as a country with a long coastline, also pays
great attention to the risks of sea level rise. In addition,
the rising sea level has brought about new questions
on, inter alia, the law of the sea, statehood and human
protection and, as such, has intricate links with security,
which all merit in depth and comprehensive study.
China expects that the dedicated study on sea level rise
in relation to international law being examined by the
22/30

14/02/2023

International Law Commission will produce practical,
objective and valuable outcomes.
Sea level rise is caused by a multitude of factors,
such as global warming and polar glacier melting, and
is a key indicator for climate change. The international
community should step up forward-looking studies
on the consequences of the rising sea level and, in the
meantime, focus on climate change as its root cause,
rigorously slow down global warming and contain the
trend of rapid sea level rise.
Secretary-General Guterres has repeatedly warned
us that the planet is fast approaching a critical point for
climate change. The international community should
adopt a greater sense of urgency without delay, seize the
opportunity to take all necessary actions and prevent
climate change from causing irreversible catastrophes
for humankind.
As climate change mitigation concerns the future
of all humankind, the international community should
be unwaveringly determined and relentless in its
efforts to achieve the temperature cap set out in the
Paris Agreement, and developed countries must take
the lead in further reducing emissions. However, since
last year, there has been backtracking in the energy
policy of some developed countries and an increase,
rather than a decrease, in their fossil fuel consumption
and carbon emissions, which makes the already
elusive global emissions reduction prospect even more
precarious. Most developed countries established their
carbon-peaking and carbon-neutrality targets and
programmes relatively early and should set an example
by taking concrete actions to implement them.
Financing always lies at the heart of — and is a
key issue for — global climate governance. Developed
countries are obliged to providing climate change
financing and assistance to developing countries and
are responsible for doing so. As early as 2009, developed
countries pledged $100 billion annually to developing
countries, which has yet to be truly delivered,
making their so-called “commitment” nothing but an
empty promise.
Worse still, one country, while passively responding
to the funding needs of developing countries, invests
hundreds of billions of dollars in hefty subsidies to its
domestic manufacturing industry through the so-called
“Inflation Reduction Act”, purportedly to promote its
energy transition. Such hypocritical and self-serving
green protectionism violates World Trade Organization
23-04411

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

rules, discriminates against relevant industries in other
countries and undermines the collective efforts to
tackle climate change globally.
Adhering to true multilateralism and strengthening
solidarity and cooperation are the only way to address
the climate change challenge. We should stick to the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities,
which is related to international equity and justice.
Deviation from that principle will severely damage the
unity and cooperation of the international community
in tackling climate change.
The United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change and its Paris Agreement constitute
the main framework for international cooperation on
climate change, the hard-won achievements of which
are to be jointly cherished and maintained by all.
The Security Council may, under country-specific
items and in line with the specific circumstances,
examine and provide targeted responses based on an
accurate grasp of climate-driven security risks.
Efforts to address climate change and sea level
rise should always be aimed at implementing the
2030 Agenda and creating conducive conditions for
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Small
island developing States are the most exposed to
climate shocks but the least adaptable. The international
community should effectively address the concerns
and needs of small island developing States and should
help them, through financial and technical assistance,
to strengthen their capacity-building, enhance their
climate resilience and achieve green and low-carbon
development. The ocean is the bedrock of survival
and development on which all countries of the world
depend, which makes marine environment conservation
the common responsibility of humankind.

S/PV.9260

its commitments. We have made steady and significant
progress towards carbon peaking and carbon neutrality,
pursuing with determination a green and low-carbon
development pathway that prioritizes ecological
conservation. We have made a series of notable
achievements in the areas of energy conservation,
renewable energy, new energy vehicles and forest
carbon sequestration, among others, thereby making
tangible contributions to global climate governance.
China has always advocated for and engaged
in South-South cooperation on climate change. To
date, we have signed 45 climate change cooperation
instruments with 38 developing countries, built three
low-carbon demonstration zones, carried out 42 climate
change mitigation and adaptation projects, and trained
technical personnel in relevant fields from more than
120 developing countries, which has been welcomed
and highly commended by many developing countries,
including small island developing States.
China will continue to work with all parties to
actively participate in global climate governance and
collectively address the challenge of climate change.
The twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change will be held in December in the United Arab
Emirates. China appreciates the contribution of the
United Arab Emirates to promoting the global response
to climate change and supports its efforts to host a
successful conference. It is our hope that all parties will
focus on the purposes and objectives of the Convention
and together build a fair, reasonable, cooperative and
win-win global climate governance system.

One urgent current challenge is the discharge
of 400,000 tons of nuclear-contaminated water
from the Fukushima nuclear power plant, which
will seriously damage the marine environment and
people’s health, with small island developing States
and their people bearing the brunt. China urges Japan
to fulfil its international obligations, dispose of the
nuclear-contaminated water in a science-based, open,
transparent and safe manner and effectively protect the
marine environment and ecosystem.

Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would first like to thank Malta for organizing
today’s open debate, which we see as an opportunity
to improve our common understanding of sea level
rise and its potential implications for international
peace and security. We also thank Secretary-General
António Guterres, Mr. Csaba Kőrösi, President of the
General Assembly, Mr. Bogdan Aurescu, Co-Chair
of the International Law Commission Study Group
on sea level rise, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Romania for their introductory remarks. We thank
Ms. Coral Pasisi, Director of Climate Change of the
Pacific Community and President of Tofia Niue, for her
interesting briefing today.

In the face of climate change, China has always been
consistently action-oriented, sparing no effort to fulfil

The science is clear. Climate change is a global
phenomenon that constitutes a major threat to

23-0441123/30

S/PV.9260

Threats to international peace and security

humankind and the environment. One of the most
worrisome effects of the climate-change-induced
increase in global temperature is sea level rise, which
disproportionately affects developing countries and
people in vulnerable situations. In that regard, small
island developing States are particularly vulnerable to
sea level rise. Ecuador is also affected because of its
densely populated coastal zone and fragile ecosystems,
including the Galapagos Islands. Rising sea levels
and the loss of territory resulting in displacement and
climate refugees could lead to a humanitarian crisis.
The findings of the International Law Commission,
especially those of the Study Group on sea level rise
in relation to the law of the sea, statehood and the
protection of persons affected by sea level rise, are
key to our understanding of the legal implications of
sea level rise and to preventing conflicts. We believe
that a multidimensional vulnerability index needs to
be developed, in addition to improving developing
countries’ availability of resources, capacity-building
and technology transfer.
In line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, Ecuador recognizes the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change as the
main intergovernmental forum for negotiating the
global response to climate change and fulfilling the
commitments taken under the Convention, including
by mobilizing $100 billion of assistance annually for
developing countries from 2020 to 2025 and doubling
adaptation finance until 2025, as well as through the
recent creation of a new fund to address the loss and
damage resulting from climate change in vulnerable
countries. In that context, I would like to highlight
the progress achieved at the twenty-seventh session
of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention,
held in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, as a framework for
implementing adaptation goals.
Ecuador would like to highlight the importance
of implementing resolution 1325 (2000) universally.
Women’s leadership and full and equal participation
must be included at all levels of decision-making,
especially in addressing the impacts of climate change.
As an advisory body of the Security Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission has a guiding role to play
in addressing the effects of sea level rise, and the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 20152030, which identifies prevention and resilience as
essential components of disaster risk reduction, could
be an important tool in that regard. In that connection,
24/30

14/02/2023

my delegation agrees that it would be useful to provide
peacekeeping missions with an analytical capacity in
order to help States transition from conflict to peace in
the context of climate change, while taking into account
the different national realities and challenges.
In conclusion, we believe that discussions in the
Security Council on climate-change related realities,
such as rising sea levels, are fundamental for ensuring
the capacity of the United Nations system to contribute
in a comprehensive manner to undertaking actions
aimed at containing that problem and its impacts.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the presidency for having convened
today’s debate. We also thank our briefers today.
Sea level rise is a global challenge that calls for
the particular attention of many States, including ours.
Russia has the world’s third-longest coastline. Our
territory ecompasses more than 1,300 islands. Sea level
rise is a potential challenge, which should be taken into
account in socioeconomic development planning.
No one disputes the scientific consensus that
the rapid sea level rise seen over the past century is
directly linked to climate change. However, we note
with concern that, in our view, the securitization of the
climate agenda, which includes the challenges posed
by rising sea levels, is counterproductive. We once
again emphasize that there is no scientific basis to the
climate-security nexus. According to a report by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, “compared
to other socioeconomic factors, the influence of climate
on conflict is assessed as relatively weak”.
Let us once again take a close look at the components
of our agenda today. Indeed, changing sea levels have
economic implications, such as the destruction of critical
infrastructure, reduced fish catches, flooded farmlands
and worsening food security and access to drinking
water. The social impacts of the increasing number of
natural disasters are also a concern, as is the failure of
countries to put in place modern early warning systems
and other technologies. Such socioeconomic challenges
can become drivers of instability, but linking their
root causes only to the climate aspect is misleading
and even harmful. It deflects from seeking solutions
and discussing donor commitments. Attention should
be paid to the entire range of sustainable development
challenges. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
for highlighting the whole gamut of problems today.
23-04411

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

We would like to make a separate point about the
legal aspects. The International Law Commission is
currently discussing sea level rise from the perspective
of international law. We believe that that discussion
is critically important. However, we emphasize that
legal experts have not yet reached a consensus, and
the results will be presented only after the thorough
consideration of each of the three sub-topics, namely,
issues pertaining to the law of the sea, statehood and
the protection of persons affected by sea level rise. The
topic is also being dealt with in the Sixth Committee
of the General Assembly. We therefore believe that it
is premature to discuss the issue, particularly in the
Security Council, which is not a dedicated platform for
the topic.
We once again underscore the importance of the
division of labour within the United Nations system.
Three equal pillars, namely, peace and security, human
rights, and development, are enshrined in the first lines
of the Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations.
For 77 years now, the United Nations system has been
evolving based on this princicple. It has been proven
that the division of labour in society leads to a more
efficient economic system, capable of producing more
high-quality innovative goods. By analogy, the division
of labour at the United Nations was not envisaged by
chance by the founding States of the United Nations,
and, in seeking better and innovative solutions to
the challenges facing us, we should use the proper
tools. Conflict resolution is dealt with by Member
States in the Security Council, while development
issues, including environmental protection, should be
considered in the context of the work of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
high-level political forum on sustainable development
and the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, which is the specialized platform for
climatic discussions.
Since we are meeting today to discuss environmental
issues, we would specifically like to join our Chinese
colleagues, who expressed concern over Japan’s plans
to dump radionuclide-contaminated wastewater from
the Fukushima-1 nuclear power station into the ocean.
When making that decision, our Japanese colleagues
did not think it necessary to discuss the issue with
the neighbouring States. We count on Tokyo to
demonstrate due transparency, report actions that may
pose a genuine radiation threat and, if necessary, allow
for the monitoring of the radiation situation in areas in

S/PV.9260

which such wastewater discharge takes place, as well as
take measures to minimize the negative impact on the
marine environment and environmental degradation.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that it is
completely justified for island States to seek to draw
the international community’s attention to their most
pressing environmental and development challenges.
The Russian Federation takes into account such needs
in its development assistance project activities and
stresses the importance of discussing such issues,
but only at specialized platforms in the context of the
development system, within which we can not only
treat the symptoms of that condition, but also address
its root causes.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the
microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Singapore.
Mr. Faishal Ibrahim (Singapore): I would like
to congratulate Malta on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council and to commend it for convening
today’s debate on the implications of sea level rise
for international peace and security, which is a very
relevant and important topic. I also wish to thank
Secretary-General António Guterres, the President of
the General Assembly, Mr. Csaba Kőrösi, the Co-Chair
of the International Law Commission Study Group
on sea level rise and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Romania, Mr. Bogdan Aurescu, and Ms. Coral Pasisi
for their briefings.
For small island developing States, including
Singapore, climate change-induced sea level rise is
an existential threat to our survival, viability and
prospects for growth, including, for some, through the
loss of territory. The adverse impacts of sea level rise
have the potential to contribute to social instability and
conflicts, which, in turn, can become a serious risk to
international peace and security.
There is an urgent need to implement measures
to mitigate, and adapt to, the impacts of sea level rise,
such as coastal protection and land reclamation, and to
take concrete steps towards addressing or alleviating
its potential negative impacts on peace and security.

23-0441125/30

S/PV.9260

Threats to international peace and security

However, sea level rise and its impacts, including
on international peace and security, will ultimately
be a global problem that requires multilateral rulesbased solutions.
In that regard, I wish to make several points.
First, the Security Council must assume its
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and security
in the context of climate change and sea level rise.
While the primary multilateral forum for addressing
climate change issues is the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), under the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council
has primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and must discharge
that responsibility. In our view, the work of the
Security Council in addressing the peace and security
aspects of climate change, including sea level rise, can
complement multilateral efforts under the UNFCCC.
Singapore therefore supported and cosponsored the
draft Security Council resolution on climate security in
December 2021 (S/2021/990).
Secondly, every country must do its part to
support multilateral efforts to address climate change
and its adverse effects, including sea level rise and
the attendant implications for international peace
and security. That includes implementing nationally
determined contributions and long-term low-emissions
development strategies under the Paris Agreement on
climate change, as well as supporting relevant initiatives
through the General Assembly to address issues
pertaining to peace and security. Capacity-building in
the area of climate change mitigation and adaptation
action, including protecting coasts and infrastructure
against sea level rise and building flood resilience, is
also critical, in particular for small island developing
States and the least developed countries.
Thirdly, all efforts to address sea level rise and
its impacts must be in accordance with international
law. Solutions that are inconsistent with international
law will serve only to undermine the rule of law at the
international level, which would be detrimental to the
maintenance of international peace and security. In that
regard, Singapore looks forward to further progress on
the International Law Commission’s work on the topic
of sea level rise in relation to international law.
We also wish to underscore the fundamental
importance of the United Nations Convention on the
26/30

14/02/2023

Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which sets out the legal
framework within which all activities in the oceans
and seas must be carried out. Just as the UNFCCC and
the Paris Agreement provide the framework to address
climate change, UNCLOS must be the framework
within which all law on sea-related issues, including
pertaining to sea level rise, should be considered.
Singapore is a small, low-lying city-State, with
more than 50 per cent of our population living within
about two miles of the coast. For us, the threat posed
by sea level rise is of existential proportions. We stand
ready to work with members of the Security Council
and other Member States in order to address the
challenges posed by sea level rise, including its impact
on international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): I thank you,
Mr. President, for bringing this important topic to our
attention through an official meeting of the Security
Council for the first time. It is long overdue for the
Council to take on a human security perspective that
encompasses all possible threats to international peace
and security. The far-reaching consequences of sea
level rise demonstrate as clearly as any phenomenon
that climate change is in itself a security threat worthy
of the Council’s systematic attention.
When we addressed Council members in the past
on the topic of sea level rise, at an October 2021 Arria
Formula meeting, a stand-alone Security Council draft
resolution on climate and security (S/2021/990) was
being negotiated. Despite the overwhelming support
of the United Nations membership for that draft
resolution, it was blocked by the use of the veto. As a
result of the adoption of General Assembly resolution
76/262 last year, the General Assembly now has another
tool to hold the veto-wielding member accountable and
make its position clear on this most important of issues.
Especially for people living in low-lying atoll
States, sea level rise is the most pressing security threat.
As with all questions of peace and security, women and
girls undoubtedly shoulder a disproportionate burden.
At the same time, they remain crucial agents of change.
A gender-sensitive lens is therefore urgently needed in
all climate and security responses.
As we all know, Member States are far off track
if we are to avert the worst consequences of climate
23-04411

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9260

change. According to the United Nations Environment
Programme, there is no credible pathway to 1.5°C in place.
Only drastic reductions to global emissions will spare
populations the most serious consequences of sea level
rise. That is true for atoll nations, whose groundwater
is at risk of saltwater intrusion and whose territory is
at risk of inundation. It is also true for volcanic island
nations, whose populations predominantly live close to
sea level and are, in addition, often at greater risk of
natural disasters such as hurricanes. The international
community must therefore also ensure that particularly
affected States and countries have the legal certainty to
make decisions on behalf of their populations.

Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): My delegation
thanks the Secretary-General, the President of the
General Assembly and the other briefers.

In line with our commitment to the rule of law, we
support efforts to have the General Assembly request
an advisory opinion from the International Court of
Justice on climate change.

Sea level rise epitomizes that gradual but certain
destruction. While its impacts are disproportionate in
small island developing States and for future generations,
none of us are really immune to those impacts.

Liechtenstein also appreciates today’s presence
of Dr. Aurescu, Co-Chair of the International Law
Commission Study Group on sea level rise, and
continues to support ongoing efforts at the Commission
to clarify aspects of international law relevant to sea
level rise in relation to the law of the sea, the protection
of persons affected by sea level rise and statehood.

My delegation acknowledges that there are
different views on which forum within the United
Nations is best suited to address this issue. However,
the Republic of Korea believes that the Council, as the
organ responsible for maintaining international peace
and security, should not remain aloof on this matter.
The Security Council must start to join global efforts
based on its own perspective, by contemplating the
implications of climate change for peace and security
and considering its role in preventing possible future
conflicts with a sense of urgency.

In conclusion, I wish to focus on questions of
statehood affected by sea level rise. We have heard today
references to sea level rise’s existential threat for certain
States. Part of the role the international community
can play for those most affected is to recommit to the
right to self-determination of peoples, as set forth in
common article 1 of the twin human rights covenants. In
situations of sea level rise, where territory is inundated
and individuals are forced to relocate, that should not in
itself imply challenges to State persistence — a position
that Liechtenstein has emphasized in our submissions
to the International Law Commission process and for
which we see strong support in international law. As
we heard earlier today, the novel situation of full or
partial inundation of the territory of a State or country
or the relocation of its people should not change the
presumption in international law more generally that
only the relevant people should be able to determine the
mode of expression of their right to self-determination,
including through statehood.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.

The Republic of Korea aligns itself with the joint
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Nauru on behalf of the Group of Friends on Climate
and Security.
The nexus between climate change and peace and
security is undeniable. If not addressed in time, climate
change does pose a global-scale threat to peace and
security in the long term. We are already witnessing
that ominous linkage in many parts of the world,
including Africa.

Against that backdrop, my delegation calls for
enhanced efforts to inform the Security Council
and equip it with an adequate toolbox. After all,
understanding the security implications of climate
change requires putting together scientific data with
local perspectives and other socioeconomic factors. The
Council needs information from diverse stakeholders,
such as scientists, regional organizations, other United
Nations entities and civil society. United Nations peace
operations with mandates reflecting climate-related
risks can also be the eyes and ears of the Council on
the ground. My delegation encourages the Informal
Expert Group on Climate and Security to strengthen
its role in integrating and developing the information
and analysis gathered by those various sources. Draft
resolution S/2021/990, which was proposed by the
Niger and Ireland in 2021, can also serve as a useful
reference. In particular, regular reports and updates by
the Secretary-General can be a good entry point for the
Council to remain seized of the matter.

23-0441127/30

S/PV.9260

Threats to international peace and security

The Republic of Korea, as an Asia-Pacific country
surrounded by water on three sides, fully sympathizes
with the Pacific island countries on the effects of sea
level rise. My Government is strongly committed to
strengthening its partnership with them, and in that
regard, we will host the first-ever Republic of KoreaPacific Islands Countries Summit this year. Those
efforts will be supported by an expansion of our
overseas development (ODA), including green ODA,
to assist our partner countries with their low-carbon
energy transition, and by sharing green and digital
technologies. The high-quality data produced will
help to inform the climate-related policy priorities
and governance of the countries most affected. In the
meantime, the Republic of Korea will also continue
to support regional efforts such as the Rising Nations
Initiative, launched to preserve the statehood and
culture of Pacific atoll countries that face existential
threats owing to sea level rise.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan): At the outset, Mr. President,
I would like to congratulate Malta on its presidency of
the Security Council for this month and to welcome
your Minister for Foreign Affairs. We truly appreciate
Malta for its role in organizing this timely meeting
on a topic as important as sea level rise in relation to
international peace and security.
The issue of sea level rise has drawn significant
attention over the past few years, as a result of the
scientific evidence that the phenomenon is indeed on
a scale that will affect the existence and livelihood of
States, especially a number of low-lying coastal States
and small island developing States (SIDS) and their
peoples. The sovereignty of the States affected will
be challenged, and there will definitely be an impact
on maritime zones and agreements as a result of sea
level rise. Millions of people will also find themselves
displaced as a result over the next few decades. There
will be massive implications for international peace
and security as a result of the potential conflicts arising
from such challenges to sovereignty and maritime
disputes related to sea level rise. It is therefore vital to
ensure that the international community, including the
United Nations, acts to prevent such possibilities from
becoming a reality and to contain the effects of sea level
rise, especially on international peace and security.
28/30

14/02/2023

International cooperation in the prevention and risk
management of sea level rise is crucial to the success of
any strategy aimed at combating it. The legal aspects
relating to sea level rise are complex, and there are
no clear-cut solutions. That said, the International
Law Commission is to be commended for its work on
the issue. We look forward to the presentation of the
outcome of the work of the Commission’s Study Group,
co-chaired by Mr. Aurescu. It is important to understand
that only through concerted international cooperation
can we ensure that such legal lacunae can be overcome.
One idea is that States parties to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea should also consider
negotiating a protocol or other instrument to deal
with the maritime aspects of sea level rise, including
potentially changing baselines and base points, while
obviously taking into consideration issues of stability,
security, international relations and borders.
In that context, it is our moral duty, in terms
of burden-sharing, as well as a legal one, to assist
small island developing States (SIDS) in overcoming
challenges to their sovereignty and dealing with the
risk that their populations could be displaced. Several
developed countries are already planning and have the
resources to build sea barriers to protect their territories
from sea level rise. The same facilities should be
provided to SIDS and other developing States. In that
regard, the United Nations and international financial
institutions can play a very important role in devising
and implementing strategies that include similar
solutions for such States. In the same vein, the United
Nations should initiate a debate on the risk of human
displacement occurring as a result of sea level rise, with
a view to addressing all the aspects of the matter and the
means by which the international community can share
such a burden. With the possibility that millions could
be displaced, no country would be able to deal with a
massive influx of such displaced persons on its own.
Jordan is also of the view that the Security Council
has an important role to play in highlighting the
challenges to international peace and security resulting
from sea level rise and proposing actions and strategies
to prevent the possible consequences, including
conflict-prevention measures and the pacific settlement
of dispute mechanisms under Chapter VI of the Charter
of the United Nations, notably Articles 33 and 36.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
23-04411

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I congratulate Malta on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council, and I
would like to express our appreciation to Mr. Borg for
organizing today’s meeting. The General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council, as well as the relevant
international conventions, especially the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
and its Paris Agreement, remain the platforms, together
with the original mandate, for addressing the climate
crisis in all its manifestations, including sea level rise.
At the same time, climate change is recognized as a
threat multiplier and a driver of conflict in a number of
regions around the world, and hence the importance of
addressing the increasing connection between climate
change and security. Egypt, as President of the twentyseventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 27),
is fully cognizant of the severe impact that the adverse
effects of climate change, including sea level rise, are
having on human livelihoods and on our planet.
I would like to point to a number of important facts.
First, the latest needs report of the UNFCCC Standing
Committee on Finance highlights that if developing
countries are to implement their nationally determined
contributions between now and 2030, their needs
amount to $5.6 trillion. Secondly, estimates of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development indicate
that annual climate adaptation costs in developing
countries could reach $300 billion in 2030. Thirdly, the
adverse effects of climate change will cost Egypt more
than 6 per cent of its gross domestic product annually.
Fourthly, because it is low-lying land, the Nile delta
in Egypt is identified in the fourth assessment report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change as
one of the world’s three extremely vulnerable hotspots.
The increase in sea level rise will affect 25 per cent
of our population and 90 per cent of our agricultural
land, with an immediate impact on 2 million people and
with a loss of land amounting to a value of $35 billion.
Sea level rise will further add to the challenges that
Egypt is facing, as the most heavily populated waterscarce country in the world. Sea level rise will lead to
reduced recharge rates and higher evaporation rates
and further compound Egypt’s current challenges in
the area of water security. The United Nations 2023
Water Conference, to be held in March, will present an
excellent opportunity to place the water agenda among
the priorities of the international community.

S/PV.9260

Based on the points I have made, we believe that,
in order to address the root causes of climate change
while adapting to its manifestations, climate finance is
urgently needed, including the financial commitments
made in the context of the UNFCCC, especially the
$100 billion. Concessional financing must be an integral
part of the financial instruments provided to developing
countries. Realizing a new quantified financial goal on
the basis of the $100 billion by 2025, as well as double
climate financing for adaptation, remains a top priority.
The twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to
the UNFCCC (COP 27), which was held in Sharm ElSheikh, Egypt, succeeded after 30 years in achieving a
historic decision on the funding arrangements for loss
and damage. The loss and damage fund was established,
and the Santiago Network for Loss and Damage was
operationalized. The main decision of COP 27 included
important outcomes in relation to our discussion today,
such as encouraging parties to consider ocean-based
action in their national climate goals and reiterating the
Secretary-General’s initiative to protect everyone on
Earth through the universal coverage of early warning
systems. The Sharm El-Sheikh Climate Implementation
Summit also prominently featured the impacts of
climate-related threats. During the round table on
the theme “Climate change and the sustainability of
vulnerable communities”, leaders reaffirmed their
commitment to working together to address the adverse
effects of climate change.
In conclusion, Egypt remains fully committed
to addressing the existential threat of climate change
and its implications, including sea level rise and will
continue its global efforts to achieve the sustainable
development of developing countries while ensuring
their peace and security, stability and prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico thanks Malta for convening today’s debate and
appreciates the briefings delivered.
We are seeing more and more examples of how
the consequences of climate change can be conflict
multipliers. Sea level rise is another phenomenon that
threatens the very existence of States, and therefore
a better understanding of its potential implications is
needed in order to design comprehensive plans of action
that include a peace and security dimension. Recent
reports of rising sea levels are alarming. According to

23-0441129/30

S/PV.9260

Threats to international peace and security

the World Meteorological Organization, the rate of sea
level rise has doubled since 1993. That phenomenon
poses a particular threat to small island developing States
and millions of people living in coastal communities,
including in middle-income countries. The findings of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change are
clear with regard to the consequences of human action
for sea level rise through the melting of glaciers and the
warming of the oceans. Climate action is needed more
than ever, through mitigation, adaptation, and loss and
damage measures, as well as resilience-building.
We reiterate our commitment to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. We call
for the implementation of the agreements reached at
the twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the
UNFCCC, held in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, including
the new loss and damage fund for countries vulnerable
to climate change. We also highlight the importance
of strengthening disaster risk reduction measures
and ensuring the availability of efficient and safe
humanitarian assistance. That requires a preventive

30/30

14/02/2023

approach in which comprehensive risk assessments play
a key role. Rising sea levels have legal implications that
cannot be underestimated. As recognized in the second
issues paper of the International Law Commission’s
Study Group on the topic, it is important to analyse
the legal effects of sea level rise on the continuity of
statehood. It is also a priority to work on clarifying the
legal regime for the protection of persons affected by
sea level rise. With regard to the Security Council, we
believe that it must take into account the effects that any
phenomenon may have on its sphere of action, so that
it can fulfil its responsibility to maintain international
peace and security. It is not a question of securitizing
the environmental agenda but of ensuring that this
organ does not ignore the multiplicity of factors that
can generate current or future conflicts.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

23-04411
