A /67/PV.56

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Ofﬁcial Records

Sixty-seventh session

56

th plenary meeting
Friday, 14 December 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Reports of the Sixth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Sixth Committee on agenda
items 76 to 84, 105, 116, 131 and 165 to 170.
I request the Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee,
Mr. Pham Quang Hieu of Viet Nam, to introduce the
reports of the Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam), Rapporteur of the Sixth
Committee: I have the honour to introduce the reports
of the Sixth Committee on its work during the sixtyseventh session of the General Assembly. The Assembly
allocated to the Committee 17 substantive and three
procedural agenda items. Except for the item relating
to the election of officers, all these agenda items fall
under three headings, corresponding to the priorities
of the Organization, namely, “Promotion of justice and
international law”; “Drug control, crime prevention and
combating international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations”; and “Organizational, administrative
and other matters”.
I will introduce the reports of the Sixth Committee
on the various items in the order in which they fall
under these three headings.
I shall begin with the first heading, “Promotion of
justice and international law”, under which the Sixth
Committee considered nine agenda items and adopted
11 draft resolutions.

The Sixth Committee considered agenda item 76,
“Criminal accountability of United Nations officials
and experts on mission”. The report on this agenda
item is contained in document A/67/464, and the draft
resolution recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption is reproduced in paragraph 9 thereof. The draft
resolution confirms the various measures, adopted in
previous resolutions, aimed at ensuring the criminal
accountability of United Nations officials and experts
on mission, and preserves the reporting mechanisms set
forth in those resolutions.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would also include the item in the provisional
agenda of the sixty-eighth session, while deciding that
the consideration of the report of the Group of Legal
Experts, in particular its legal aspects, would be
continued at the seventieth session in the context of a
working group of the Sixth Committee.
The report on agenda item 77, “Report of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law on
the work of its forty-fifth session”, is contained in
document A/67/465. The Sixth Committee recommends
two draft resolutions for adoption by the General
Assembly, which are reproduced in the report. Under
the terms of draft resolution I, the General Assembly
would commend the Commission for finalization and
adoption of a Guide to Enactment of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law Model Law on
Public Procurement and its recommendations to assist
arbiter institutions and other interested bodies with
regard to arbitration under the Commission’s Arbitration
Rules as revised in 2010. Draft resolution II pertains to

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-64939 (E)

*1264939*

A/67/PV.56

these recommendations, of which the Assembly would
recommend the use in the settlement of disputes arising
in the context of international commercial arbitration.
The report on agenda item 78, “United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law”, is to be found in document A/67/466, and the
draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof. Under
the terms of the draft resolution, the General Assembly
would reaffirm that the Programme constitutes a core
activity of the United Nations and that there is an increase
in demand for international law training, which creates
new challenges for the Programme. The Assembly
would authorize the Secretary-General to carry out the
activities specified in his reports on the Programme
in 2013; reiterate its request to the Secretary-General
to provide to the programme budget for 2014-2015
the resources necessary for the Programme to ensure
its continued effectiveness and further development;
and to decide to consider the viability of voluntary
contributions as a sustainable method for funding the
United Nations Regional Courses in International Law
and the Audiovisual Library of International Law and
the need to provide a more reliable funding method.
The report on agenda item 79, “Report of the
International Law Commission on the work of its
sixty-third and sixty-fourth sessions”, is contained
in document A/67/467, and the draft resolution
recommended to the General Assembly for adoption is
reproduced in paragraph 8 of the report. Under the draft
resolution, the General Assembly would, among other
things, express its appreciation to the Commission for
the work accomplished at its sixty-fourth session, in
particular for the completion of the first reading of the
draft articles on the expulsion of aliens. The Assembly
would also decide that the consideration of chapter IV
of the report of the International Law Commission on
the work of its sixty-third session (A/66/10, paragraphs
51 to 76, and A/66/10/Add.1), dealing with the topic
“Reservations to treaties”, would be continued at the
sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly, during
the consideration of the report of the Commission on
the work of its sixty-fifth session. Furthermore, the
Assembly would take note with appreciation of the
inclusion by the Commission of two new topics in its
programme of work, namely, the topics “Formation
and evidence of customary international law” and
“Provisional application of treaties”, and encourage
the Commission to continue the examination of the
2

topics that are in its long-term programme of work;
invite the Commission to continue to give priority to
the topics “Immunity of State officials from foreign
criminal jurisdiction” and “The obligation to extradite
or prosecute (aut dedere aut judicare)”; and take note
of the tentative work programme of the Commission for
the remainder of the five-year period.
The Sixth Committee also considered agenda
item 80, “Status of the Protocols Additional to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and relating to the
protection of victims of armed conflicts”. The report
on this agenda item is contained in document A/67/468,
and the draft resolution recommended to the General
Assembly for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 8
thereof.
The report on agenda item 81, “Consideration of
effective measures to enhance the protection, security
and safety of diplomatic and consular missions and
representatives”, is contained in document A/67/469,
and the draft resolution recommended to the General
Assembly for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7 of
the report.
The report on agenda item 82, “Report of the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization”, is contained in document A/67/470.
The two draft resolutions recommended to the General
Assembly for adoption appear in paragraph 12 thereof.
Under the terms of draft resolution I, the Assembly
would encourage all Member States to commemorate
the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the Manila
Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of International
Disputes. Under draft resolution II, the Assembly
would request the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of all proposals concerning the question
of the maintenance of international peace and security
and of the questions of the implementation of the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations related
to assistance to third States affected by the application
of sanctions, and to continue to consider, on a priority
basis, ways and means of improving the Committee’s
working methods and enhancing its efficiency.
The report on agenda item 83, “The rule of law
at the national and international levels”, is contained
in document A/67/471. Under the terms of the draft
resolution recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption, the Assembly would, inter alia, recall
its high-level meeting held on the topic during the
high-level segment of the present session, and the
12-64939

A/67/PV.56

Declaration adopted at that meeting. The Assembly
would also decide to include the item in the provisional
agenda of its sixty-eighth session and to invite Member
States to focus their comments in the upcoming Sixth
Committee debates on the subtopics “The rule of law
and the peaceful settlement of international disputes”
at the sixty-eighth session and “Sharing States’ national
practices in strengthening the rule of law through
access to justice” at the sixty-ninth session.
The report on agenda item 84, “The scope and
application of the principle of universal jurisdiction”,
is contained in document A/67/472. Under the draft
resolution recommended for adoption, which is
reproduced in paragraph 9 of the report, the General
Assembly would decide that the Sixth Committee shall
continue its consideration of the matter next year,
including in the context of a working group of the
Sixth Committee, which would undertake a thorough
discussion of the item.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolutions
under the first heading without a vote, and it is my hope
that the General Assembly will be in a position to do
the same.
I shall now turn to the heading “Drug control, crime
prevention and combating international terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations”.
The Sixth Committee considered agenda item
105, “Measures to eliminate international terrorism”,
under this heading. The relevant report is contained
in document A/67/473, and the draft resolution
recommended to the General Assembly for adoption
is reproduced in paragraph 10 thereof. Should the
Assembly adopt the draft resolution, it would, inter
alia, decide that the Ad Hoc Committee established
by General Assembly resolution 51/210 shall meet
from 8 to 12 April 2013 in order to, on an expedited
basis, continue to elaborate the draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism and to discuss
the item included in its agenda by resolution 54/110
concerning the question of convening a high-level
conference under the auspices of the United Nations.
Future meetings of the Ad Hoc Committee would be
decided upon subject to substantive progress in its
work.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and it is my hope that the Assembly will
be able to do the same. Following previous practice,
when an Ad Hoc Committee is anticipated to report

back during a session in the event of progress, the
present item will remain open in the agenda of the
General Assembly.
Under the third and final heading, “Organizational,
administrative and other matters”, the Sixth Committee
considered seven substantive and two procedural
items. It should be recalled that agenda item 141,
“Administration of justice at the United Nations”, was
allocated both to the Fifth and Sixth Committees. The
views of the Sixth Committee on this item are reflected
in a letter, dated 23 October 2012, addressed by the
Chairman of the Sixth Committee to the President of
the General Assembly. That letter appears as an annex
to document A/C.5/67/9.
The report on agenda item 165, “Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country”,
is contained in document A/67/477, and the draft
resolution recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption appears in paragraph 8 of the report.
Furthermore, the Sixth Committee considered five
requests for observer status in the General Assembly. It
recommended that the General Assembly grant observer
status to the Andean Development Corporation, under
agenda item 168, and to the European Organization for
Nuclear Research, under agenda item 170.
The Sixth Committee recommended that the
General Assembly defer decisions on the requests for
observer status in the Assembly for the Cooperation
Council of Turkic-speaking States, under agenda item
166; the International Conference of Asian Political
Parties, under agenda item 167; and the International
Chamber of Commerce, under agenda item 169, to
the sixty-eighth session of the Assembly. The reports
concerning each of the requests for observer status
are found in documents A/67/480, A/67/556, A/67/478,
A/67/479 and A/67/481, respectively. The relevant
draft resolutions and draft decisions are reproduced in
paragraph 7 of documents A/67/480 and A/67/556, and
in paragraph 8 of documents A/67/478, A/67/479 and
A/67/481.
Under the third heading, the Sixth Committee
also considered two procedural items, namely, agenda
item 116, “Revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly”, and agenda item 131, “Programme
planning”. The report under agenda item 116, containing
the provisional programme of work of the Sixth
Committee at the sixty-eighth session, is to be found
in document A/67/474. The draft decision by which the

12-649393

A/67/PV.56

General Assembly would take note of the provisional
programme of work is reproduced in paragraph 7 of
the report. The report on agenda item 131 is contained
in document A/67/475, and no further action by the
General Assembly is recommended.
The draft resolutions and draft decisions relating
to the agenda items under this third heading were also
adopted by the Sixth Committee without a vote, and
it is my hope that the General Assembly will be in a
position to do the same.
Finally, I wish to inform the Assembly that there
is no report in respect of agenda item 5, “Election of
the officers of the Main Committees”. Consistent with
previous practice, the election of the officers of the
Sixth Committee for the sixty-eighth session will be
taken up at a later stage in the course of the current
session.
This concludes my introduction of the reports of
the Sixth Committee. Let me take this opportunity
to express my gratitude to the Chairman of the Sixth
Committee, Mr. Yuriy Sergeyev of Ukraine, for his
dedicated work and for the commendable leadership
that he provided to the Committee, and the other
members of the Bureau — Mr. Martin Huth of Germany,
Mr. Gonzalo Bonifaz of Peru and Mr. Ismail Chekkori
of Morocco — for their cooperation. I also wish to thank
all representatives and colleagues for their valuable
contributions to the success of the session. Finally, I
would like to express my gratitude and appreciation to
the secretariat of the Sixth Committee, backed by the
Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs,
for its efficient and valuable support and for the
competent and professional advice provided throughout
the session.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General
Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the Sixth
Committee that are before it today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of vote. The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendations of the Sixth Committee
have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records.

“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Sixth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives
that we are going to proceed to take decisions in the
same manner as was done in the Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. I should
therefore hope that we may proceed to adopt without a
vote those recommendations that were adopted without
a vote in the Committee.
Members are reminded that additional sponsors
are no longer accepted now that draft resolutions and
decisions have been adopted by the Committee. Any
clarification about sponsorship should be addressed to
the Secretary of the Committee.
Agenda item 76
Criminal accountability of United Nations officials
and experts on mission
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/464)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 67/88).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 76?
It was so decided.

May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that:

4

12-64939

A/67/PV.56

Agenda item 77
Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its
forty-fifth session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/465)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now take a decision
on draft resolutions I and II, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Report of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the
work of its forty-fifth session”. The Sixth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 67/89).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Recommendations to assist arbitral institutions and
other interested bodies with regard to arbitration under
the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law as revised in 2010”. The
Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 67/90).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 77?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 78
United Nations Programme of Assistance in
the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/466)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 67/91).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 78?

It was so decided.
Agenda item 79
Report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its sixty-third and sixty-fourth sessions
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/467)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 67/92).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 79?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 80
Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection
of victims of armed conflicts
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/468)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 67/93).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 80?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 81
Consideration of effective measures to enhance the
protection, security and safety of diplomatic and
consular missions and representatives
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/469)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision

12-649395

A/67/PV.56

on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 67/94).

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 67/97).

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 81?

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 83?

It was so decided.

It was so decided.

Agenda item 82

Agenda item 84

Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization

The scope and application of the principle of
universal jurisdiction

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/470)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 12 of its report. We will now take a
decision on draft resolutions I and II.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Thirtieth anniversary
of the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of
International Disputes”. The Sixth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 67/95).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the
United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role
of the Organization”. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 67/96).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 82?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 83
The rule of law at the national and international
levels
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/471)

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/472)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 67/98).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 84?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 105
Measures to eliminate international terrorism
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/473)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 10 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 67/99).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 105?
It was so decided.

The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision

6

12-64939

A/67/PV.56

Agenda item 116 (continued)

Agenda item 166

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly

Observer status for the Cooperation Council of
Turkic-speaking States in the General Assembly

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/474)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
decision recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take action on the
draft decision, entitled “Provisional programme of work
of the Sixth Committee for the sixty-eighth session of
the General Assembly”. The Sixth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
116.
Agenda item 131 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/475)
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the Sixth
Committee?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 131.
Agenda item 165
Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/477)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/100).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 165?
It was so decided.

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/478)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take action
on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 166?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 167
Observer status for the International Conference of
Asian Political Parties in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/479)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take action
on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 167?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 168
Observer status for the Andean Development
Corporation in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/480)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

12-649397

A/67/PV.56

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/101).

of the Bureau, the Secretary of the Committee and
representatives for a job manifestly well done.

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 168?

The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Sixth Committee
before it.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 169
Observer status for the International Chamber of
Commerce in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/481)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take action
on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 169?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 170
Observer status for the European Organization for
Nuclear Research in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/556)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/102).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 170?
It was so decided.
The President: On behalf of the General Assembly,
I would like to thank Mr. Yuriy Sergeyev of Ukraine,
Chairman of the Sixth Committee, the members

8

Agenda item 110 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(a) Election of seven members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination
Note by the Secretary-General
(A/67/125/Rev.1/Add.1)
The President: Pursuant to decision 42/450, of
17 December 1987, and upon their nomination by
the Economic and Social Council, the Assembly
elects the members of the Committee for Programme
and Coordination. Members will recall that, at its
34th plenary meeting held, on 12 November, the General
Assembly elected five members to the Committee for a
three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2013.
Members will also recall that by its decisions
2012/201 A and B, the Economic and Social Council
postponed the nomination of one member from Latin
American and Caribbean States and one member from
Western European and other States for a term beginning
on 1 January 2013 and expiring on 31 December 2015.
In that connection, the Assembly has before it a
note by the Secretary-General contained in document
A/67/125/Rev.1/Add.1. As indicated in that document,
by its decision 2012/201 C of 26 November 2012, the
Economic and Social Council nominated El Salvador
to fill an outstanding vacancy in the Committee for
a term beginning on 1 January 2013 and expiring on
31 December 2015.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
all elections should be held by secret ballot and there
shall be no nominations. However, I should like to
recall paragraph 16 of General Assembly decision
34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing with the
secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs when
the number of candidates corresponds to the number
of seats to be filled should become standard, unless
a delegation specifically requests a vote on a given
election. In the absence of such a request, may I take it
that the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on
the basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
12-64939

A/67/PV.56

It was so decided.
The President: May I therefore take it that the
Assembly wishes to declare El Salvador elected
a member of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination for a term of office beginning on 1 January
2013 and expiring on 31 December 2015?
It was so decided.
The President: Members are reminded that the
Economic and Social Council postponed the nomination
of one member from the Group of Western European
and other States for a term beginning on 1 January 2013
and expiring on 31 December 2015.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 110.
(b) Election of thirty members of the
United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law
Letter dated 7 November 2012 from the
Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the General Assembly (A/67/572)
The President: Members will recall that, at its
37th plenary meeting, on 14 November, the General
Assembly elected the following 29 States as members
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law for a six-year term of office beginning on
8 July 2013: Armenia, Bulgaria, Cameroon, China,
Côte d’Ivoire, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, France,
Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Indonesia,
Japan, Kuwait, Liberia, Malaysia, Mauritania, Mexico,
Namibia, Panama, the Republic of Korea, the Russian
Federation, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Switzerland, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
and Zambia. Therefore, those 29 States are not eligible
for election.
Members will also recall that there remains one
seat to be filled from among the Western European and
other States.
I should like to remind members that, as of
8 July 2013, the following States will continue to be
represented on the Commission: Algeria, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Botswana, Brazil, Colombia,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, Fiji, Gabon, Georgia,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Italy, Jordan,
Kenya, Mauritius, Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay, the
Philippines, Spain, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,

the United States of America and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. Therefore, those 30 States are
also not eligible for election.
The General Assembly will now proceed to the
election of one member to replace those members
whose terms of office will expire on 7 July 2013.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
the election shall be held by secret ballot and there shall
be no nominations.
I should like to recall, however, paragraph 16 of
decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to this election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The President: With regard to candidatures, I
should like to inform members that, for the one seat
from among the Western European and other States, the
Group has endorsed Canada.
Since there is one candidate from the regional
Group and one seat to be filled from that Group, may
I take it that the General Assembly wishes to declare
Canada elected for a six-year term of office beginning
on 8 July 2013?
It was so decided.
The President: I would now like to draw the
attention of members to document A/67/572, in which
the Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic
to the United Nations informs the President of the
General Assembly that, according to the agreement
among the members of the Group of Eastern European
States to rotate their membership in the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law among
themselves, the Czech Republic shall relinquish its
seat in favour of Belarus on the last day prior to the
beginning of the forty-sixth session of the Commission,
in July 2013.
As a result, a vacancy has occurred and a new
member must therefore be elected to fill the unexpired
term of office of the Czech Republic that will commence

12-649399

A/67/PV.56

on 8 July 2013, the first day of the forty-sixth session of
the Commission.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to declare
Belarus a member of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law for a term of office
beginning the first day of the forty-sixth session of the
Commission, on 8 July 2013, and expiring on the last

10

day prior to the beginning of the forty-ninth session of
the Commission in 2016?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 110.
The meeting was adjourned at 11.05 a.m.

12-64939
