S/PV.7463

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7463rd meeting

Tuesday, 16 June 2015, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-18020 (E)
*1518020*

S/PV.7463

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 4.30 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At the outset, Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi
will make a joint statement on behalf of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities; the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counterterrorism; and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). Following that joint statement,
the Council will hear briefings by the Chairs of those
three Committees.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the Chairs of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities; the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
concerning counter-terrorism; and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
concerning the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, I have the honour to inform the Security
Council of the continued cooperation among those three
committees and their respective Groups of Experts,
in accordance with the Council’s request under its
resolutions 2083 (2012), 1963 (2010), 1977 (2011) and
prior resolutions.
Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
and the risk of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction on the part of non-State actors continue
to pose a grave threat to international peace and
security. In order to address that grave threat, the
Security Council has stressed the importance of
close and effective coordination among the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee, the Anti-Terrorism Committee
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). Since the last time the Council received
updated information, the three Committees have

2/23

16/06/2015

continued to cooperate on dissemination carried out
within the frameworks of their respective mandates;
have strengthened their cooperation with international,
regional and subregional organizations; and have
conducted joint visits, increased their exchange of
information, coordinated their activities with respect to
travel and planning, and established a common focal
point. I would like to provide more detailed information
on the areas of increased cooperation.
Dissemination activities and country visits are
important tools that enable the three Committees to
fulfil their respective mandates. Since November 2014,
the three Groups of Experts have been represented in
more than a dozen workshops and other activities of
dissemination; at least two of those Groups participated
in additional meetings. Since the previous briefing (see
S/PV.7331), the three Groups of Experts have continued
to cooperate within the context of official visits to
Member States. For example, in April, the Monitoring
Team and the Group of Experts of the 1540 Committee
joined the follow-up visit to Uzbekistan by the Executive
Directorate of the Anti-Terrorism Committee on behalf
of that Committee. In May, the Group of Experts of the
1540 Committee accompanied the Executive Directorate
of the Anti-Terrorism Committee on a specific visit to
Italy that took place on behalf of the Anti-Terrorism
Committee. Joint participation in country visits
continues to contribute to improving cooperation and
exchange of information among the three Expert Groups
and ensures that the Groups transmit a single message
and present a unified position to Member States. As
a means for strengthening cooperation, the Groups of
Experts continued to coordinate their country visits
and dissemination activities.
The Executive Directorate of the Anti-Terrorism
Committee and the Expert Group of the 1540 Committee
share a focal point in the Caribbean that works with
Member States in the region to strengthen dialogue
with both Committees and to increase awareness and
understanding of the provisions of resolutions 1373
(2001), 1540 (2004), 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014). At the
institutional level, that also encourages inter-agency
support for national implementation initiatives,
coordinates the delivery of technical assistance based
on States’ specific needs and acts as an early-warning
mechanism. The focal point submitted a progress report
to the Counter-Terrorism Committee on 18 December
2014.

15-18020

16/06/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

In February 2015, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2199 (2015) to stem the financing of terrorists
through the illicit oil trade. The resolution has made a
major contribution to consolidating international efforts
to counter the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) and Al-Nusra Front. However,
the level of reporting has thus far been insufficient.
Therefore, the 1267 Committee urges Member States to
submit, as soon as possible, reports in conformity with
paragraph 29 of the resolution and to continue to report
in conformity with paragraph 2.
With regard to cooperation with international,
regional and subregional organizations, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
1267 Committee Monitoring Team continued their
close cooperation in countering money laundering and
the of financing of terrorism, in particular by freezing
terrorist assets. It should be highlighted that the
Monitoring Team represented the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate at the twenty-first
plenary meeting of the Middle East and North Africa
Financial Task Force held in Oman in April. As a
recurring practice, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Monitoring Team provide
joint comments on draft legislation relating to the
finance-related provisions of resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1373 (2001), upon requests by Member States. In that
context, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Monitoring Team provided joint
comments to Tanzania and Uganda concerning their
respective draft laws on the implementation of the
two resolutions’ asset freezing requirements and the
implementation of financial measures.
The three Expert Groups are all counter-terrorism
implementation task force entities. In that regard,
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
continues to provide a platform for enhanced cooperation
by the three Expert Groups, not only among themselves
but also among over 30 United Nations organizations,
agencies and programmes concerned with various
aspects of counter-terrorism. The Monitoring Team
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate have also continued their leading roles in
their respective Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force working groups. The 1540 Committee
Group of Experts participated in the Working Group
on Border Management Relating to Counter-Terrorism
and the Working Group on Preventing and Responding
to Weapons of Mass Destruction Attacks. The three
Committees have close cooperation on issues related to

S/PV.7463

border management. As Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force Working Group on Border
Management Relating to Counter-Terrorism, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
presided over the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force Experts Meeting on Coordinated Border
Management held in Lyon in May 2015. The experts
from the Monitoring Team and 1540 Committee Group
of Experts attended the meeting and contributed to the
discussion of the templates developed by the Team in
cooperation with the Stimson Center on coordination of
border management. Discussions among the three Expert
Groups included future participation and cooperation
of the Working Groups on border management in order
to better coordinate a comprehensive manner to help
national border management agencies carry out their
duties more effectively.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate also worked closely with the Monitoring
Team in providing comments and suggestions to the
Working Group on tackling the financing of terrorism,
regarding its capacity-building initiative on asset
freezing, pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373
(2001). This month, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Monitoring Team will
deliver a joint presentation on the financing of foreign
terrorist fighters to the Financial Action Task Force
plenary meeting.
Exchange of information among the Expert Groups
continues to be carried out on a regular basis. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
regularly shares with the other two groups the monthly
reports submitted by its Executive Director to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, including information
on its recent missions, country visits and technical
assistance activities. As a new initiative, the three
Expert Groups have shared their respective working
calendars of events and discussed ways of improving
the effectiveness and efficiency of country visits and
capacity-building potential, with a view to improving
cost efficiency. The experts of the 1540 Committee
prepare informative notes on the Committee’s outreach
events and post them on its website for the sake of
transparency and sharing of information.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Monitoring Team routinely rely
on and reference each others’ reports and analyses.
For example, on 18 February 2015, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate’s report

15-180203/23

S/PV.7463

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

on the prosecutorial challenges associated with
bringing terrorists to justice, adopted by the Security
Council, was quoted in the Monitoring Team’s report
on foreign terrorist fighters, while the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate referenced
the Monitoring Team’s work in its report on foreign
terrorist fighters.
The Security Council’s presidential statement of
19 November 2014 (S/PRST/2014/23) requested that the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
prepare within 180 days an analysis of the gaps in
Member States’ use of advance passenger information
and make recommendations to expand its use. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
closely consulted with the Monitoring Team in
preparing that report.
In April 2015, the Monitoring Team attended an
expert briefing organized by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate on the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. The three Expert Groups continue
to hold joint meetings when appropriate — whether
involving the heads of each team or the Expert
Teams — in order to prepare for relevant outreach
activities and exchange information on themes specific
to countries or regions.
The work of the three Committees, when taken
as a whole, presents opportunities for additional
synergies, which, once fully realized, would have a
multiplier effect on achieving outcomes. It should
be possible to achieve such improved results while
also respecting the independence of the respective
Expert Groups and their mandates. On the basis of
current coordination and joint cooperation, each of
the three Committee’s staff and Expert Groups are
committed to advancing cooperation in a number
of areas. As previously mentioned, those include but
are not limited to the holding of meetings among the
three Committees at the committee level and/or among
chairing countries; increasing engagement in on-site
visits to States, at their request, in order to facilitate the
implementation of each of the resolutions; coordinating
a common regional approach to engage with Member
States with geographical and political similarities;
and coordinating on key thematic areas of interest to
all Committees in order to benefit from sharing of
information, experience and effective practices. They
also include improving coordination in implementing
projects within the framework of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, particularly through

4/23

16/06/2015

the various thematic working groups; coordinating
approaches to donor States and assistance providers,
and the joint evaluation of outcomes; considering the
possibility of developing joint assistance packages for
States at their request and where necessary; enhancing
joint interaction, particularly with non-reporting States,
in their fulfilment of their reporting obligations under
the relevant resolutions; cooperating on input into the
1540 Committee’s 2016 comprehensive implementation
review, as required under resolution 1977 (2011); and,
in cooperation with other United Nations counterterrorism entities, enhancing the work between the
Al-Qaida Monitoring Team and Executive Directorate
on measures that can improve the implementation of
resolution 2199 (2015).
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council, for the opportunity to make
this joint statement on behalf of the three Committees.
The President: I thank Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Van Bohemen.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): At our
joint Council briefing in May 2014 (see S/PV.7184),
Ambassador Gary Quinlan — the then Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities — raised the issue
of the evolving nature of the threat posed by Al-Qaida
and its affiliates, including the group’s localization
and globalization and its new generation of leadership.
Since then we have seen that threat develop dramatically
through the rapid territorial gains and brutal tactics of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), also
known as Daesh, as well as, to a lesser extent, of the
Al-Nusra Front. That has been further intensified
by the presence of foreign terrorist fighters and the
growing influence of Al-Qaida associates in Libya.
In today’s briefing I will outline how the threat from
Al-Qaida and its affiliates has evolved over the past
year, as well as describing the Committee’s response,
the ways in which Member States can engage with it,
and its upcoming work.
Over the past year we have witnessed a marked
increase in ISIL’s use of digital media to promote its
messages, in order both to shock and intimidate and
to recruit others to its cause. Despite the role that
digital media has played, direct social contact has also
remained a key factor in recruitment. The human cost

15-18020

16/06/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

of Al-Qaida and ISIL-related attacks is immense and
tragic, not only in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic,
but also in parts of Nigeria, Libya, Yemen, Afghanistan,
Somalia and further afield. Many attacks are on innocent
civilians and even on places of religious worship, such
as those that resulted recently in the deaths of 25 people
at Friday prayers in a mosque in Saudi Arabia. While
the peoples of Syria and Iraq are most at risk, no State
is immune to the threat of terrorism.
In response to the evolving threat from Al-Qaida
and its affiliates, the Council has adopted various
resolutions expanding the work of the Committee
and its Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, for example, in relation to oil and financing. In
addition to its regular reporting, the Monitoring Team
has submitted reports to the Committee on ISIL and
the Al-Nusra Front (S/2014/815) and on foreign terrorist
fighters (S/2015/358). It is also due to submit a report
to the Committee by 12 July on the implementation
of resolution 2199 (2015), regarding ISIL and oil
interdictions, and to report on the threat in Libya
by 27 September. The Monitoring Team’s workload
continues to increase, presenting challenges for its
resources, and we want to commend it for its dedication
and the quality of its work.
The growing terror threat has led to an increase
in designations of individuals and entities associated
with Al-Qaida. Between June 2013 and May 2014,
six individuals and entities were designated, while
between June 2014 and May 2015, that number rose
to 41. More than half of the listings were related to
the issue of foreign terrorist fighters. There has also
been an increase in Member States’ use of the assetsfreeze exemptions, with five granted between June
2014 and May 2015, as opposed to one in the previous
period. We welcome further designations by Member
States. I would like to emphasize that listings should
be strategic, targeted and implementable. We want the
sanctions to have a practical effect, and to focus on
targeting individuals and entities that can be disrupted.
The Monitoring Team can assist Member States in
preparing listing and exemption requests.
The sanctions list is a living document that must be
kept up-to-date, relevant, fair and transparent. There
are three ways the Committee does that. The first is
through its triennial review, which considers whether
listings, especially those that have not been reviewed
for three years, are still relevant and implementable.
The Committee is in the process of finalizing the 2014

S/PV.7463

triennial review, and I would like to thank the Member
States that have provided information for the review,
since obtaining responses from all the Member States
that have designated individuals and entities has been
a challenge. We urge all Member States to engage with
the Committee on the 2015 triennial review, which we
will be undertaking shortly.
The second way is through the delisting
requests submitted to the independent Office of the
Ombudsperson by designated individuals and entities.
The Ombudsperson plays an integral role in ensuring
that the Committee’s procedures are fair and transparent
and that the list dynamically reflects the threat posed
by Al-Qaida and its affiliates. The Ombudsperson
continues to have a significant caseload and role.
Since the Committee’s last briefing to the Council, six
individuals and entities have been delisted and three
retained, following the Committee’s consideration
of reports submitted by the Ombudsperson. There
are currently 10 petitions received through the
Ombudsperson that are under various stages of
consideration. Thirdly, the Monitoring Team regularly
updates the list based on information provided by
Member States, and we encourage them to keep the
Monitoring Team informed.
For sanctions to be effective they must be clear,
targeted and implementable. Several initiatives
have been taken in that regard. Earlier this year, the
Chair produced a procedural note clarifying the
reporting requirements of resolution 2199 (2015),
adopted in February with the aim of stemming the
financing of terrorists through the illicit oil trade.
While the resolution has made a major contribution to
consolidating international efforts to counter the threat
posed by ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front, the level of
reporting has so far been insufficient. The Committee
therefore urges Member States to submit their reports
required under paragraph 29 of the resolution as soon
as possible, and to continuously submit those reports
required under paragraph 12. We also look forward to
the Monitoring Team’s assessment, in cooperation with
other United Nations counter-terrorism bodies, of the
impact of the measures, and to proposals for improving
their implementation. In February, the Monitoring
Team also produced three explanation-of-terms papers
on the sanctions measures, which are available on the
Committee’s website.
Work is also being done to standardize the format
of all United Nations sanctions lists and to update the

15-180205/23

S/PV.7463

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Committee’s website to make it more user-friendly.
The Committee is mandated, with the Monitoring
Team’s assistance, to consider issues of possible
non-compliance with sanctions measures, and has
received complaints from Member States. On 24 April
the Chair held an open briefing for interested Member
States that included discussion of the implementation
issues. I encourage Member States to share any queries
and concerns with the Committee and the Monitoring
Team. We stand ready to assist.
As for the Committee’s future activities, the
Monitoring Team will be presenting reports on Libya
and the impact of resolution 2199 (2015). The Committee
is currently discussing the recommendations of the
Monitoring Team’s seventeenth report, and we hope to
have those agreed on shortly. I also plan to continue
to hold regular open briefings on the work of the
Committee for all interested Member States.
I would like to take this opportunity today to note
there will be a changing of the guard in the roles of the
Ombudsperson and Monitoring Team, and especially
the Coordinator. Both are crucial to the Committee’s
work and the ability of the regime to respond effectively,
fairly and transparently to the evolving threat posed by
Al-Qaida and its affiliates. I would like to thank the
Ombudsperson, Kimberly Prost, and the Monitoring
Team, including its Coordinator, Alexander Evans, for
their tireless efforts, and to wish them the very best in
their future endeavours.
To conclude, I want to re-emphasize that the 1267
Sanctions Committee relies on cooperation from
Member States so that Al-Qaida and its affiliates are
designated, sanctions are implemented and the tragic
toll of terrorism is prevented.
The President: I thank Ambassador Van Bohemen
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Murmokaitė.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Allow me to make
a brief statement on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to provide an overview of the developments
in the work of the Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED).
As I reported on 29 May (see S/PV.7453), the
Committee, with the support of CTED ande as
mandated by paragraph 24 of resolution 2178 (2014),
has undertaken a wide range of actions to address the
threat of foreign terrorist fighters and is in the process

6/23

16/06/2015

of producing a series of new tools designed to facilitate
its dialogue with Member States on the implementation
of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), as well
as aimed at analysing measures specific to resolution
2178 (2014). The Committee has dedicated much of its
efforts in 2015 to identifying principal gaps and good
practices that stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
It submitted to the Council three relevant reports: on
challenges in prosecutions related to foreign terrorist
fighters (S/2015/123), on the implementation of
resolution 2178 (2014) by some Member States affected
by foreign terrorist fighters (5/2015/338) and on the use
of advance passenger information (S/2015/377). I would
like to inform the Council today on the ways in which
in recent months the Committee has more broadly
revitalized the way it works in order to maximize the
speed and effectiveness of its responses to new and
urgent challenges.
In the 13 years of its existence, the Committee
and CTED have accumulated a vast database of
information and analysis about the implementation of
counter-terrorism measures in all Member States. Since
2005, the Committee has visited more than half the
membership, and many Member States more than once.
That has enabled the Committee to track the progress
of implementation over time. In its recent visits,
particularly since September 2014, the Committee was
able to address measures related to the implementation
of resolution 2178 (2014) in order to gain a better
understanding of the practical measures undertaken
by Member States to stem the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters. Those on-site assessments, especially in the
most affected regions, have proved to be of great value
to the Committee in carrying out its mandate.
The Committee’s goal this year has been to adopt
measures by which this unique store of evidence can
be swiftly and responsively leveraged and utilized to
facilitate useful and sustainable technical assistance
where and when it is needed. It aims to produce not
an assessment or critique of the shortfalls of Member
States, but rather a detailed road map of concrete
measures to be taken by Member States and close
partners to help them build their capacities to resist the
threat of terrorism. The Committee needs to take such
measures not in the least because of the tasks that the
Council has assigned to it in its presidential statement
of 29 May (S/PRST/2015/11).
To that end, the Committee has for the first time
adopted a risk-based approach, where appropriate,

15-18020

16/06/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

aimed at facilitating capacity-building tailored to each
Member State’s needs. The huge diversity of Member
States, in terms of their size and population, the nature
of the various threats posed by terrorists to particular
Member States, as well as the Member States’ relative
capacities and vulnerabilities to address those threats,
makes a one-size-fits-all approach impractical.
Member States should develop a response to the threat
of terrorism based on their own particular national
security concerns, rather than on a fixed template that
might have little relevance to their situation.
In the same context, the Committee has been
reinforcing its direct outreach to Member States. For
instance, on 4 June, as Chair of the Committee, together
with the Vice-Chairs and CTED, I held a meeting here
in New York with the representatives of five Central
Asian countries, which was also attended by the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
the Department of Political Affairs. Earlier this year,
from 2 to 6 February, I conducted a high-level political
mission to Mali and the Niger, together with CTED and
the participation of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sahel and the Special Representative of
the Chair of the African Union for Counter-Terrorism
Cooperation.
Throughout its engagement, the Committee has
consistently recalled the position of the Council
that all measures taken by Member States to combat
terrorism must comply with all their obligations under
international law and that Member States should
adopt such measures in accordance with international
law, in particular international human rights, refugee
and humanitarian law. The Committee is also taking
steps to communicate more effectively to the wider
membership the outcomes of its dialogue with Member
States, international and regional organizations and
various other stakeholders. It has therefore increased
the number of open briefings, with three scheduled in
this month alone — on Thursday, 18 June, on the use of
advance passenger information, in collaboration with
the International Civil Aviation Organization and the
International Air Transport Association; this morning,
on crisis management in the aftermath of a terrorist
attack, with speakers from NATO, INTERPOL and the
World Health Organization; and on Friday, 19 June,
on the adoption of the new Additional Protocol to the
Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of
Terrorism.

S/PV.7463

The Committee’s close relationships with various
stakeholders have always been one of its great
strengths. Aiming to convene with them to lead the
formulation of integrated and coordinated responses on
important issues, this year, the Committee is working
on preparations for two special meetings — one on
stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, to be
held in Madrid next month, the first meeting outside
New York since 2011, and a second on preventing
terrorists from exploiting the Internet and social media
to recruit terrorists and incite terrorist acts, to be
held in November. Earlier this year, on 19 February,
the Committee launched a global research network
developed by CTED with a view to enhancing its
analytical capacity and engagement with leading think
tanks and research institutions.
The Committee recognizes that its effectiveness
rests not just on what is done but when it is done. To
that end, it has been implementing measures to act
more rapidly in its dialogue with Member States,
and thus improve its responsiveness to their needs
without sacrificing the quality of that dialogue or the
opportunity for the States to consider carefully their
responses to the Committee’s outreach. One example is
the Committee’s request that CTED present an overview
immediately on return from its follow-up visits. In the
course of 2015, CTED has reported pro tempore to the
Committee on visits to Oman, Tunisia, Turkey and
Uzbekistan, while the Committee looks forward to the
productive dialogue it continues to have with each of
those Member States. The Committee will continue
to take the necessary measures to ensure a practical,
responsive and dynamic approach to its dialogue with
all Member States, with a view to ensuring the effective
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005)
and 2178 (2014).
The President: I thank Ambassador Murmokaitė
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this briefing on the work
of the Committees established uprsuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). We welcome
the briefings of Ambassador Gerard Van Bohemen,
Raimonda Murmokaité and Mr. Román Oyarzun
Marchesi as the respective Chairs of those subsidiary

15-180207/23

S/PV.7463

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

bodies. We wish to thank them for their work and
leadership. We are also grateful to Ambassador Román
Oyarzun Marchesi for the joint briefing. We also
welcome the coordination of effort among the three
various teams.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is convinced
that the fight against terrorism must be conducted
within the framework of international cooperation and
in accordance with existing international and regional
instruments and the norms of international law, with
full respect for the sovereignty of States, human rights
and fundamental freedoms. Acts of extreme violence
perpetrated by terrorist groups in the countries of
Africa and the Middle East have intensified. Terrorism
continues to be a serious threat to international peace
and security. It is therefore necessary to implement
measures prohibiting the funding, transfer of weapons
and training of terrorist groups and non-State actors,
pursuant to the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions.
Venezuela reiterates its emphatic rejection of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, which
constitute a flagrant violation of international law,
including international humanitarian law and human
rights. My country wishes to reiterate its concern
about the nature and actions of non-State actors.
They are a constant threat and source of violence,
and in most cases they become terrorist groups. The
Security Council must take strong measures to prevent
the training, financing and supplying of weapons to
non-State actors. Also, we regret that resolution 2220
(2015) does not include an explicit prohibition of the
transfer of weapons to non-State actors. We urge the
Council to rectify that matter.
In the fight against terrorism, we must act with
a deep political sense. Beyond the combat operations
against these elements, the international community
must overcome the root causes of the crisis we are
experiencing today. The humanitarian tragedy in
Syria, Yemen and Libya, among other places, and the
actions of Boko Haram, Al-Qaida and the Al-Nusra
Front, the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria and its
associated groups call for the international community
to provide preventive, systematic and strong responses
to counteract the phenomenon.
We believe that the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011), concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, is an important tool in the fight against
8/23

16/06/2015

terrorism. We wish to reiterate the concern expressed
by the Committee with regard to the military power
and capacity of armed groups in their advance in Syria,
Libya, Iraq and Yemen. We also express our concern
about the unilateral action taken by some countries,
which, on the grounds of combating terrorism,
conduct illegal actions of targeted killings, arbitrary
arrests, torture and bombings, which often lead to
civilian casualties and are outside of international
law. Terrorism should be fought from the perspective
of multilateralism and in cooperation with the States
concerned.
We also believe that it is particularly important to
strengthen the role of the Ombudsperson in facilitating
due process. We believe that this mechanism should
be strengthened so as to have greater transparency.
We thank Ms. Kimberley Prost for the independence
and professionalism with which she has carried out
her work throughout her mandate. We hope that her
successor will soon be appointed.
In recent months, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
concerning counter-terrorism, has focused, with
the assistance of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), on ensuring the
implementation of the provisions set out in resolution
2178 (2014), concerning foreign terrorist fighters, and
on identifying best practices and the gaps that Member
States face in combating this problem. Foreign terrorist
fighters now number 25,000 individuals, including
women and young people, and come from at least 100
countries. A demonstration of this is the important
reports issued by the Committee on the challenges of
prosecuting foreign terrorist fighters and on ensuring
effective border control in countries in conflict areas.
The special meeting that the Committee will hold in
Madrid on 27 and 28 July, on how to stop the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters, is a positive initiative that
contributes to a comprehensive approach to this global
problem, and we fully support it.
Resolution 2178 (2014) marks a milestone in
addressing the phenomenon of terrorism, and we call
for its effective implementation. It encourages Member
States to adopt a series of legal and political actions,
in strict compliance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, to stop the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters. We also deem it necessary
to fully implement other relevant resolutions on the
subject, such as resolution 1373 (2001), prohibiting the

15-18020

16/06/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

financing of terrorism, and 1624 (2005), prohibiting
incitement to join terrorist groups. There should be
an assessment of the progress achieved this year,
which marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1624 (2005) and the establishment of CTED.
With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), on measures to prevent the
acquisition of weapons by terrorist groups, Venezuela
would like to draw attention to the process of the
ongoing comprehensive review, which aims to assess
the work done by this subsidiary body since 2011 and
which should conclude in November 2016. We wish to
make the following comments and recommendations in
that regard.
The intergovernmental conference to be held in
June 2016 with the participation of Member States of
the General Assembly should be understood as a key
component and its results should be part of the review.
Looking forward towards the review process and as
a general practice, the Committee should expand its
outreach activities throughout the headquarters of
the bodies responsible for disarmament at the United
Nations, namely, New York, Geneva and Vienna.
As part of the review process, we should consider
in particular the Committee’s work in the area of
international assistance and technology transfer.
Ways to optimize the matching of donor and recipient
countries should be considered. The priorities of the
countries requesting assistance should be the basis for
cooperation. In that regard, Venezuela recalls that in
previous years there was discussion of the possibility
of holding an international conference to promote
international assistance and technology transfer in the
scope of the 1540 Committee. We fully support that
initiative and would like to know if it is still being
considered.
Finally, in recognizing the importance of resolution
1540 (2004) in the efforts to prevent the acquisition
of weapons of mass destruction by terrorist groups,
Venezuela believes that eliminating and controlling
these weapon systems, in particular nuclear weapons,
is the best guarantee to prevent non-State actors from
obtaining those weapons of destruction. We regret that
the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons held in
May was unable to adopt a final document, owing to
the negative attitude of some countries with regard to
realizing the commitment agreed upon in 1995 on the

S/PV.7463

convening of the conference on a Middle East zone free
of weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I shall now speak in my capacity as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). Instead of reading out the long
and detailed report being circulated in the Chamber
now, I will give a brief summary highlighting its main
ideas.
I do not need to explain to anyone the proliferation
risks we face today. Now more than ever, non-State
actors and terrorist groups are prepared to use chemical
and biological weapons and even nuclear weapons and
extreme violence. The global threat affects us all, and
all States must comply with resolution 1540 (2004). All
States are threatened.
I have not been Chair of the 1540 Committee for
very long — only since 1 January. However, I assure
the Council that my Mission’s team, in cooperation
with all Security Council members, has tried to do its
best. I will highlight five relevant aspects of the 1540
Committee since the last report was presented (see
S/PV.7319).
First is the system of reporting. At present, 174
States have submitted their reports. In other words,
90 per cent of Member States have submitted the basic
reports on their structures for the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. However, despite the
importance of the basic reports, it is crucial that States
also submit the so-called additional reports, which are
voluntary and make it possible for us to get a more
detailed and more realistic idea of what is happening in
the area of non-proliferation. It is also very important
that States carry out the so-called national action plans,
which are completely voluntary, but nonetheless very
useful.
Secondly, I would like to underscore the national
focal points, which resolution 1540 (2004) provides for.
They are absolutely fundamental to our work. A training
course for national focal points has been provided so
that they may better carry out their functions.
Thirdly, we are trying to improve the system of
assistance to strengthen the national capacity of States
that request assistance to raise the levels of compliance
with resolution 1540 (2004). We are working with
regional and international organizations to that end.

15-180209/23

S/PV.7463

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Fourthly, with regard to outreach, it is important
that the 1540 Committee maintain direct contact with
Member States. We are working as well to encourage
the participation of the 19 States that have not yet
presented their regular reports. We have stepped up
contacts with regional and international organizations
to that end. One good example is the recent visit I made
as Chair of the 1540 Committee to Vienna, where I
met senior officials of the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, among other agencies.
Lastly, with regard to transparency, transparency
and outreach are vital for the effective implementation
of the resolution. The Committee is therefore looking
for better ways of using social networks, social media
and other means of communication. For example,
we now issue quarterly Chair messages to the entire
network related to the 1540 Committee.
I should now like to touch upon the comprehensive
review of the status of the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). I reiterate that the full text of my statement
that has been distributed contains a much more detailed
explanation.
First, as Chair of the 1540 Committee, I have taken
good note of the interesting comments and observations
made by the delegation of Venezuela. In the opinion of
the Committee, the comprehensive review should be
retrospective. Above all, however, it also should look
towards the future. It should be based on an analysis
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) on
the basis of the review carried out in 2009. The aim
should be to improve effectiveness and implementation
on the part of Member States. It is important to note
that, on 28 April, the Committee agreed on a modalities
document — which is available on the website — that
details the comprehensive review process. Let me
highlight a few highlights of the process.
First, the Committee will analyse the data included
in the reports presented by States and provide an
overview on the status of the implementation of the
resolution and the major implementation trends since
2009. That analysis will make it possible for us to
introduce improvements.
Secondly, the Committee will look into its role in
matchmaking and requests and offers assistance, while
considering ways to ensure that such assistance is
provided promptly.

10/23

16/06/2015

Thirdly, as part of the comprehensive review
process, we will seek ways of improving the Committee’s
cooperation with international organizations related to
the scope of the 1540 Committee’s work. When it comes
to regional organizations, we should identify better
ways to support them in order to set up networks of
focal points for the 1540 Committee — as I mentioned
earlier, for example, by instituting training courses.
Lastly, the review should also focus on the work
of outreach using publications and other means of
communication in a timely fashion. We are preparing
a work calendar for the review prior to December 2016,
which will of course include opportunities to hear the
views of all Member States, as well as for the holding of
consultations with international organizations and civil
society. I call on all Council Member States, as well
as non-Member States, to contribute to this important
process.
In conclusion, I wish to thank all those who provided
support to the Committee and made it possible to carry
out its programme of work, either through voluntary
and financial contributions — such as by Andorra,
Kazakhstan, Norway, the Republic of Korea and the
United States of America — or by organizations such
as the European Union and private foundations such as
the Carnegie Corporation of New York. I also wish to
give very special thanks to the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs for its constant support.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to the thank Ambassadors Gerard van Bohemen
of New Zealand, Raimonda Murmokaitė of Lithuania
and Román Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain — respectively
as Chairs of the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities;
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning Counter-Terrorism; and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), on non-proliferation — for their briefings. We
welcome their leadership as Chairs of those Committees.
While it is true that everybody is concerned
about putting an end to terrorism, it is also true that
the best way of achieving this is not to contribute to
it. We think that, in order to eliminate terrorism it is
important, among other things, to settle conflicts and to
destroy terrorist safe havens and cut off their supplies,
especially in terms of arms and ammunition. Chad,
which yesterday experienced three deadly attacks in

15-18020

16/06/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

its capital, condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. It calls upon the Security Council
to take urgent measures against the illicit provision
of arms and ammunition to non-State actors, and to
terrorist groups in particular.
With regard to the threat posed by Al-Qaida and
its affiliated persons and entities, this is constantly
growing. Organizations, such as the so-called Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusra Front,
Boko Haram and others are conquering whole swaths
of territories. The flow of foreign terrorist fighters
recruited through the Internet and social networks to
go to Iraq, Syria, Libya and other countries it taking
on a very worrying dimension, while the human cost
of the attacks perpetrated by those groups is enormous.
Several welcome actions have been taken into order to
curb the terrorist threat. In that regard, I should like
to welcome the adoption of resolutions 2161 (2014),
2170 (2014), 2178 (2014), 2195 (2014), 2199 (2015), 2214
(2015) and 2220 (2015). I also commend the fact that
the relevant Committees have submitted reports on
ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front and foreign terrorist fighters.
We very much look forward to the next report of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, because we
are particularly concerned by the presence of terrorists
groups linked to Daesh in the south of the country,
bordering Chad, and also by the terrorist threat in the
whole of the Sahel region.
It is also important to continue to list individuals and
entities that fall under sanctions. The Committee must
continue to update this list regularly. Nonetheless, we
commend the Committee for its 2014 triennial review
and we would encourage States to provide information
for the 2015 triennial review. We welcome the important
role of the Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberley Prost, the
Al-Qaida Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, as well as of the Coordinator, Mr. Alexander
Evans. We thank them all for their reports. We hope
that their successors will be selected and appointed
taking into consideration a geographical representation
as broad as possible, in line with article 101 of the
Charter of the United Nations.
With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
Chad welcomes the work done by the Committee in
response to the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters.
We take note of the three reports that the Committee to
the Council during this year and we would recommend it

S/PV.7463

to focus further on managing, controlling and securing
borders. We also note that since 2005 the Committee
has visited more than half of the Member States. Such
visits are crucial to following up the implementation
of anti-terrorist measures, in particular resolutions
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014). They help
to facilitate technical assistance and to reinforce the
capacity of States to counter the terrorist threat. That
is why we encourage the Committee to continue to
undertake country visits. Nonetheless, we would
suggest recruiting experts at the national or regional
levels, over and beyond those recruited in New York,
so as to avoid very costly trips for them. We welcome
the fact that the Committee has adopted an approach
based on risk that aims to strengthen and build capacity
based on the abilities of each State. We agree with the
Chair of the Committee to recommend that each State
should design its anti-terrorist strategies based on its
own security problems.
In addition to country visits, we also encourage highlevel visits. In that regard, we welcome the trip made
by the Chair of the Committee to Mali and the Niger,
along with the Executive Director of the Committee,
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to the
Sahel and the African Union Special Representative for
Counter-Terrorism Cooperation. In future, it would be
desirable if those Committee members who so request
could participate in such missions in their respective
geographical areas. We encourage the holding of special
meetings away from New York, following the example
of the one to be held in Madrid in July 2015, and we
propose the organization of another such meeting in
Africa in coordination with the African Union.
With regard to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
concerning the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, we take note of the progress in the
implementation of that resolution since November
2014 and of the submission by the Committee to the
Council of its review of such implementation for 2014
and its programme of work for 2015. We welcome the
efforts of Member States to implement the resolution
and note that 174 countries, or 90 per cent of States,
have presented reports to the Committee on steps they
have taken in that regard. In addition, a large number of
States have submitted voluntary national action plans
for such implementation.
Much, however, remains to be done for the universal
implementation of the resolution, and we therefore

15-1802011/23

S/PV.7463

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

encourage the Committee to enhance the role of the
national focal points and to improve its system for the
facilitation of assistance to States. We also encourage
the organization of country visits and workshops
and cooperation with international and regional
organizations. We hope that the comprehensive review
of the implementation of the resolution, expected at the
end of 2016, will give impetus to such implementation,
and note in that regard that the Committee has already
agreed on four themes for the production of the review
and that a work plan is under development.
With regard to cooperation and coordination among
the three Security Committees established to combat
terrorism and their Expert Groups, it is essential to
fight together against threats to international peace and
security resulting from terrorist acts and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors. We
note in particular the participation of the Expert Groups
in various workshops, communication activities,
country visits, cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations and exchanges of
information since November 2014.
We welcome the establishment by the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the Group of Experts supporting the Committee
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1540 (2004) of a shared focal point for the Caribbean,
and the cooperation regarding terrorist financing and
the freezing of terrorist assets between the Executive
Directorate and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1526 (2004), concerning Al-Qaida.
In that regard, we welcome the joint observations they
made to Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania
during the preparation of those countries’ laws on the
implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373
(2001), particularly in relation to the freezing of assets
and the implementation of financial measures.
Lastly, Chad would like to thank Ambassadors Van
Bohemen, Oyarzun Marchesi and Murmokaitė, and
assures them of its cooperation with the Committees
that they chair. We encourage the three Committees to
enhance their cooperation and coordination. Chad calls
upon all States to work in good faith to combat violent
extremism and terrorism.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): At the outset, on behalf of
the Angolan delegation, I would like to commend the
Malaysian presidency for the initiative of convening

12/23

16/06/2015

this meeting with the Chairs of the three Security
Council subsidiary organs responsible for countering
terrorism, whom we welcome.
The holding of this meeting less than a month
after the 29 May debate on the threat posed by foreign
terrorist fighters (see S/PV.7453) is a reflection of
our collective commitment to combating the threat
posed by terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Terrorism is a global threat. It affects all continents and
peoples. Contemporary terrorism is the most evil and
sinister product of globalization. We are aware that a
global effort such as the one conducted by the United
Nations in cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations is absolutely needed to
counter terrorism more effectively.
Specifically on our continent, Africa, terrorism is
spreading extensively and dangerously: Boko Haram
in Nigeria and in the Lake Chad Basin; Al-Qaida and
affiliates in the Maghreb; Ansar Al-Sharia and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Libya;
Al-Shabaab in Somalia; the myriad terrorist groups
affecting the Sahel region; and terrorists in the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Mali. A disturbing situation has emerged in
Africa, with terrorists threatening peace and stability
all over the continent.
As underlined in the briefing by the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, the
human cost of Al-Qaida, ISIL and other terroristrelated attacks is immense and tragic, be it in the
Middle East, in Africa, in Central Asia, in the Far
East or in Europe. The Security Council has devised
appropriate responses to this threat by expanding
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) and its Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team through the reporting on
oil and the financing of terrorism, ISIL, the Al-Nusra
Front and foreign terrorist fighters.
As terrorism grows, the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
has increased the number of individuals and entities
it has designated as associated with Al-Qaida. The
observation by the Chair of the Committee that listings
should be strategic, targeted and implementable and
should have a practical effect and focus on targeting

15-18020

16/06/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

individuals and entities that can be disrupted is
appropriate for ensuring the sanctions’ effectiveness.
Sanctions alone, however, are not enough to win
the fight against terrorism. We must strengthen global,
international, regional and subregional cooperation,
reinforce national capabilities at all levels and devise
creative ways of conducting an ideological struggle to
fight extremism and youth radicalization, to denounce,
isolate, degrade and successfully defeat the threat
posed by terrorism.
Still concerning the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), we
share the concerns expressed by the Committee’s Chair
regarding the end of the mandates of the Ombudsperson
and the Monitoring Team Coordinator. We hope that
the changing of the guard will take place in a smooth
manner, in view of the crucial role of those mandates
in enabling the Committee to respond effectively to the
threat posed by Al-Qaida and affiliates.
We recognize the role that the United Nations
has assumed globally, its outstanding leadership in
the effort to combat terrorism through the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council on the issue, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) and Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate.
The recent ministerial-level open debate on terrorism,
and specifically on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2178 (2014), adopted in September
2014, and the steps taken by Member States and the
international community to prevent the threat posed by
foreign terrorist fighters, was an important instance in
Security Council action and international cooperation
to counter this most undesirable development in
international life.
We encourage and support the Security Council’s
efforts to foster closer cooperation and coordination
among the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), their respective Expert Groups and the main
specialized agencies on counter-terrorism, such
as the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate,
the Monitoring Teams and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.
To conclude, the risk of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction to non-State actors poses a serious
threat to international peace and security. We encourage

S/PV.7463

and support the Security Council’s efforts to strengthen
cooperation and effective coordination between
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and the overall framework established
to counter terrorism. We express our support for the
press statement on the comprehensive review of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1540
(2004).
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I welcome this
opportunity to review the Council’s subsidiary bodies
on counter-terrorism, weapons of mass destruction and
the sanctions regime against Al-Qaida and its affiliates.
I thank our briefers for the comprehensive overview
they have just given and the hard work they do on
our behalf alongside their day jobs representing their
countries on the Council.
As so many recent terrorist atrocities have shown,
we now face threats to international peace and security
that our predecessors would scarcely have imagined
when writing the Charter of the United Nations,
70 years ago. Attacks like the one attempted against
tourists in Egypt just last week showed that our citizens
can now be targeted wherever they are in the world.
Such threats destroy lives and fundamentally challenge
our collective efforts to preserve stability and further
development across the globe. The work of the three
Committees forms a vital part of the global response.
Together, we can stop dangerous individuals from
travelling abroad to perpetrate those heinous acts.
We can freeze their assets and halt their financing of
terror, and we can help deny them access to an even
more dangerous arsenal of dirty bombs and chemical
weapons. The Committees and their United Nations
experts are therefore a crucial tool and a resource for the
Council. I reiterate the United Kingdom’s full support
for their work. Let me now address each Committee in
turn.
First, with respect to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, chaired by Raimonda, we welcome the
recent reporting by the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate on foreign terrorist fighters and other
issues. Such analysis helps all Member States
understand the global risk we face and builds our
collective will for global action. As we heard in last
month’s Council debate (see S/PV.7453), countering
extremists’ narratives is a major challenge for us all.
We welcome the Committee’s expanding focus on that
issue and trust that countering violent extremism will
remain a priority for the Committee in future. We look

15-1802013/23

S/PV.7463

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

forward to the Committee’s adding to the plan of action
to prevent violent extremism recently announced by
the Secretary-General. We hope it will include clear
metrics for success and quick-win capacity-building
ideas.
Secondly, with respect to the Committee that
Gerard chairs, let me reiterate support for the work
of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. That regime
remains a key tool for the Security Council to disrupt
the sickening activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Al-Qaida groups. But to do so, all States
need to fulfil their obligations under the terms of the
regime, and the list needs to remain agile to evolving
threats. We therefore commend the work of the Al-Qaida
Monitoring Team and the analysis it shared with the
Council, including its most recent in-depth report on
foreign terrorist fighters (S/2015/358). That report
gave the Council a valuable understanding of the sheer
scale of foreign terrorist flows: an estimated 25,000
fighters originating from over half the United Nations
Members. Fair and clear procedures for the sanctions
regime are also needed to keep the list effective and
current. We join the Chair in thanking Kimberly Prost
for her sterling service as Ombudsperson. Her work has
helped to maintain the legitimacy and effectiveness of
that important tool.
Thirdly, let me turn to non-proliferation and
resolution 1540 (2004), the Committee chaired by
Román. The threat of non-State actors, particularly
terrorists, acquiring weapons of mass destruction is a
nightmare scenario for us all. Today’s complex conflicts
and rapidly evolving technology make effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) an imperative
if we are to reduce the chance of that ever happening.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the 1540
Group of Experts and the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs for their tireless work in helping
States comply with the resolution. But more needs to
be done. We urge all States to approach the Committee
to offer or request support for national implementation.
And to those 19 States that have yet to provide a
national implementation report, let us be clear in our
call to them to do so.
We also look forward to starting work on the
comprehensive work of the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) under the leadership of Spain. We invite
all United Nations States Members to consider how
the Committee’s work can be strengthened, including

14/23

through implementation, monitoring,
matchmaking and outreach.

16/06/2015

assistance,

I was pleased to hear today’s briefing on the
growing cooperation among these three important
subsidiary bodies. When resources are limited, joint
activities such as country visits can save money and
add value. We welcome further innovations such as
those in future.
Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): I thank Ambassadors
Murmokaitė, Van Bohemen and Oyarzun Marchesi for
their insightful briefings.
Nigeria notes with appreciation the wide range of
actions taken in the past six months by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
concerning counter-terrorism, with the support of other
United Nations counter-terrorism bodies, particularly
the Executive Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. Such efforts have bolstered international
capability and capacity to fight the menace of terrorism.
Indeed, the three reports rendered by the Committee
this year will not only enhance ongoing efforts by
Member States in the implementation of resolution
2178 (2014), but will also help combat the disturbing
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.
Nigeria remains steadfastly committed to United
Nations counter-terrorism efforts. That is why President
Mohammedu Buhari, in his capacity as the Chair of the
African Union Peace and Security Council, on 13 June
underscored Nigeria’s commitment to comprehensively
address the scourge of global terrorism. He also
provided assurances that the campaign against the
menace of the Boko Haram insurgency would be
conducted in consonance with extant human rights and
humanitarian law.
We welcome the country visits undertaken by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, which have not
only provided vital information but have also ensured
effective gap assessments. Indeed, we expect that they
will contribute immensely to the work of the Committee.
We look forward to the Committee’s proposed followup visits in October.
With regard to the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, we reiterate the need for all States
to continue to take resolute and effective measures
to prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their means of delivery, in
consonance with the essence of resolution 1540 (2004).

15-18020

16/06/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

In our collective quest for the maintenance of
international peace and security, we must intensify
our efforts to ensure that non-State actors, including
terrorists, are prevented from acquiring weapons
of mass destruction. We believe that the goal of
non-proliferation will be incrementally attained when
requests for assistance are matched by commensurate
offers. The decision of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to strengthen its
cooperation with other Committees, as well as with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
will no doubt enhance the achievement of its mandate.
A multidimensional approach, as exemplified in the
collaboration with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, will serve as a viable means for
achieving the objective of the resolution.
In our view, reporting remains a vital element of the
Committee’s work. As it commences its comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), we expect that concrete steps will be taken to
achieve the goal of promoting the universality of the
submission of first reports by States that have yet to do
so. In addition, we want to encourage the Committee
to explore other forms of assistance that would
ensure reporting under the resolution. That would be
accelerated by the continuing collaboration between
its Group of Experts and the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs. Through regional offices, it
is possible to engage and assist Member States on the
submission of their initial reports.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): Allow me,
at the outset, to thank the Ambassadors of Spain, New
Zealand and Lithuania for their briefings and for the
leadership of the Committees they respectively chair.
Terrorism remains an extremely present threat, as
we are reminded by the all too frequent attacks that are
currently taking place. I am especially thinking about
the terrible attacks in N’Djamena yesterday, which we
condemn in no uncertain terms, and wish to assure
our colleagues in Chad of our complete support in this
challenge.
As emphasized by the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, last year was characterized by
the proliferation of crises linked to Al-Qaida and its
affiliates, the emergence of Daesh, the ongoing actions
of Boko Haram, the spread of radicalization, which the

S/PV.7463

phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters illustrates, and
the situation in Libya. The Committee remains fully
mobilized on those topics through the consideration of
reports of the Monitoring Team requested by Security
Council resolutions.
While the threat remains at a very high level, it is
crucial that the sanctions list continues to best reflect
terrorist threats. We would therefore encourage all
United Nations States Members to continue to submit
listing requests to the Committee. Furthermore,
we encourage the members of the Committee to
take very seriously requests from Member States
noting allegations of violations. Violations of the
sanctions regime harm its effectiveness and clout.
The Committee has a responsibility to implement the
regime, and therefore cannot simply say it has received
the information. It must act. France is determined to
work for respect for the sanctions regime.
For the list to be credible and to be up to date with
regard to the threat, the delisting mechanism must be
effective and must respect the fundamental rights of
the persons listed. The establishment by resolution
1904 (2009) of the Office of the Ombudsperson in that
mechanism was, in that connection, an unprecedented
step by the Council to improve procedural guarantees.
I would like to commend the exceptional work of the
Ombudsperson of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee,
Ms. Kimberly Prost, who was able to give this function
the stature that it requires. We deeply regret her
departure and wish her much success in her future
career.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism has a
difficult task. Facing a multifaceted threat, it must be
able to adapt its work in order to continue to best inform
States of new threats. In that regard, we welcome the
fact that the Committee closely monitors new threats
linked to terrorism and regularly organizes public
meetings in order to draw the attention of all Member
States to those threats. With regard to combating
foreign terrorists fighters, it is particularly useful to
see the Committee working on the issue of travellers’
data, that is, the advance passenger information
system. Moreover, it is important that the Committee
continue its work in the fight against violent extremism
and its prevention. In addition, the Committee has
the responsibility to review the way in which States
implement not only resolution 1373 (2001), but also

15-1802015/23

S/PV.7463

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

16/06/2015

many other resolutions— in particular resolutions 1624
(2005) and 2178 (2014).

the crucial fight against the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.

It is crucial for States to accept visits by the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate in order to
audit their systems in the fight against terrorism. That
is in fact in their own interests. France recently received
a visit by the Executive Directorate. It enabled them not
only to take stock of our national system in this area, but
also to identify good practices. In the past few months,
France adopted new legislation aimed at curbing the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters. Based on
those evaluations, technical assistance programmes
need to be implemented by the United Nations for
Member States. Therefore, we deem it crucial for the
Executive Directorate to continue to work closely with
other United Nations bodies responsible for combatting
terrorism in order to ensure the realization of this type
of project.

Ms. Sison (United States of America): The United
States would like to thank the Chairs of the three
Committees, the Ambassadors of Spain, Lithuania and
New Zealand, for their briefings.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their delivery vehicles, as well as the risk of these
falling into the hands of terrorist groups, continues to
present a real danger to international peace and security.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) plays a key role in combating that danger.
The 1540 Committee is at a pivotal point with the
commencement of the overall review of the Committee,
which will have to be completed by the end of 2016.
Next year will be doubly important for reinforcing the
international non-proliferation architecture, with the
holding of the Nuclear Security Summit, in anticipation
of which France has already made proposals.
Much progress has been made since the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004). An overwhelming majority of
Member States have already translated the provisions
of the resolution into their domestic legislation and have
taken measures to decrease the risks of proliferation. We
also commend the efforts made by the Committee and
the Group of Experts to put States requiring technical
assistance in contact with those able to provide that
assistance — a matter that France considers particularly
important.
Much remains to be done. After more than
10 years of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
there are many lessons still to be learned in order to
improve our collective work. We have confidence in
the comprehensive review process that began a short
while ago, and today we mark that with the issuance
of a press statement. The goal is to make the work of
the Committee more effective, and thus to intensify
16/23

I would like to start with some observations on the
Committee established pursuant to resolutionin 1540
(2004). We congratulate Spain for its active leadership
role since assuming the Chair in January — particularly
its focus on planning for the comprehensive review.
The fact that 174 countries have submitted national
reports since the resolution came into effect, in 2004,
is a strong testament to the global effort to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring and using weapons
of mass destruction. We believe that the Committee’s
efforts have prompted States to take measures that will
lead to improved implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).
The United States views monitoring the status
of implementation as the most important task of the
Committee, as it creates a solid foundation on which
depend all the rest of the work of the Committee and
our efforts to foster the full implementation of the
resolution through effective assistance efforts. In that
regard, we appreciate the work of the Committee and
its Group of Experts to revise the matrices of all United
Nations States Members, which is nearly complete. We
welcome the response to the Committee’s efforts to
increase its direct engagement with States, which we
believe has produced an increase in submissions of new
and additional 1540 national implementation reports,
particularly in the form of national action plans and
effective national practices.
Since the last Council briefing on this topic (see
S/PV.7331), the United States has continued to strengthen
its efforts to combat proliferation. Notably, the United
States has moved towards the ratification of four
important international non-proliferation instruments,
namely, the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material, the International Convention for
the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, and
two protocols to the Convention for the Suppression
on Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime
Navigation. We urge all Member States to cooperate
with the 1540 Committee in supporting the review. With
regard to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), the United States remains unwavering
in its support for the NPT and for achieving the peace
15-18020

16/06/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

and security of a world without nuclear weapons. The
lack of a consensus final document at the latest Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty does not change
that central fact or the role the Treaty will continue to
play in promoting global security.
Turning to counter-terrorism, I must stress that,
despite the significant blows to Al-Qaida’s leadership,
terrorist threats persist around the world. We are also
deeply concerned about the evolution of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the emergence of
groups that have pledged allegiance to ISIL in Libya,
Egypt, Nigeria, Afghanistan and elsewhere, and the
tens of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters who
exacerbate conflicts and then return to pose a threat to
their home countries. Against that backdrop, resolution
2178 (2014) has special importance, because it created
a new legal and policy framework to counter foreign
terrorist fighters.
As part of our ongoing follow-up, we look forward to
the special high-level meeting of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) technical meetings
that Spain will host in Madrid in late July. We expect
the meetings to highlight effective ways to prevent
recruitment; improve border controls and information
sharing; criminalize, prosecute or rehabilitate foreign
terrorist fighters; and boost momentum for providing
technical assistance where it is needed.
The United States welcomed the announcement
that later this year the Secretary-General would present
to the General Assembly a plan of action for preventing
violent extremism, which we hope will establish the
important role the United Nations can play in that
area. For the United Nations to successfully counter
such threats, the various parts of the Organization’s
system have to be able to work well together. We also
welcome the efforts of CTED, the close partner of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
of the Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida
and associated individuals and entities, to focus on its
core mandate of providing analyses and assessments of
counter-terrorism capacity-building gaps and serving
as an essential facilitator for matching donors with
recipients. In that context, we urge CTED and the
Monitoring Team to work closely with the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, which has a
central role in coordinating efforts with the 34 United
Nations counter-terrorism entities and INTERPOL

S/PV.7463

in helping to build Member States’ counter-terrorism
capacity.
That leads me to the important role of the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee. Bolstering implementation must
be the Committee’s first priority. We have to prevent
ISIL and other terrorists from travelling internationally,
acquiring weapons and raising money to fund acts
of terrorism. As part of that, the Committee and its
Monitoring Team must continue to explore ways to deal
with non-compliance. We are therefore encouraged that
they are continuing to engage with States in identifying
situations where sanctions are not being implemented.
When the issue of non-compliance involves a lack
of capacity, we should support efforts to strengthen
Member States’ legal and technical capacities. When
the cause of non-compliance is a lack of political will,
the Committee’s Chair can be helpful by engaging
States — privately, if necessary — in order to educate
them on the usefulness of that tool for their national and
regional counter-terrorism strategies.
In addition, we would also like to thank the
outgoing Ombudsperson, Kimberly Prost, for her five
years of dedicated, active and outstanding service, her
integrity and her emphasis on due process. We are also
grateful for the Monitoring Team’s important work
and particularly appreciative of the many efforts of
its outgoing Coordinator, Alexander Evans. The Team
has done a superb job of documenting and analysing
challenges from ISIL and foreign terrorist fighters, and
has provided actionable recommendations for tackling
them.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking the Chairs of the three
Committees for their briefings, which illustrated the
very constructive role they play in the fight against the
threat that terrorism poses to international peace and
security.
Despite all the international community’s efforts,
including those of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
that threat is growing, and in recent years we have
seen the emergence of groups affiliated with Al-Qaida,
as well as of dissident organizations such as Daesh.
They now control large expanses of territory and are
a threat to international peace and security, putting in
jeopardy all the efforts deployed by the international
community and the United Nations. We must therefore
be able to transparently assess the work being done in
order to understand the course we should take in the
future. Needless to say, that should in no way detract

15-1802017/23

S/PV.7463

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

from the achievements of previous years, but we must
be aware of the dangers coming from unconventional,
non-traditional sources. We must make effective
decisions that accord with the Charter of the United
Nations and with international law in order to deal with
this phenomenon.
Concerning the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, we
would like to emphasize its central role and that of the
sanctions system. The Committee plays an important
part in reducing the threat posed by Al-Qaida as well as
in implementing the various relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 1989 (2011), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004). In that regard, we stress the
importance of including on the list all those meeting
the criteria outlined in resolution 1989 (2011), ensuring
countries’ full respect for the sanctions system and
keeping the sanctions list properly updated and
ensuring its fairness and transparency. That can be
done by continually reviewing listed countries and
the delisting requests submitted to the Ombudsperson.
Besides that, there is the updating of the work of
the Committee’s Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, which depends on the cooperation
of the various countries concerned. In that context, I
would like to commend the role of the Monitoring Team
and the Office of the Ombudsperson.
Concerning the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the military
capacity of terrorist organizations, the increase in their
financing sources and their control of large areas of
territory all render their use of non-traditional weapons
very real and possible, so it is crucial that countries
fully comply with the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004). We welcome the fact that the resolution is
scheduled for a comprehensive review. We have great
expectations for the review and its examination of the
gaps in the resolution’s implementation. It is vital that
we make use of that analysis to strengthen the role of
the Committee and to fill those gaps.
Jordan considers the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) extremely important, particularly in the
context of the current conditions in the Arab region. At
the beginning of this month we hosted a workshop for
17 Arab countries and 11 representatives of regional and
international organizations, as well as representatives
of civil society, in a demonstration of my country’s
willingness to ensure the review’s success and to help

18/23

16/06/2015

other Arab States to confront the challenge of terrorism
and terrorist organizations’ ability to access weapons
of mass destruction.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism, and its
Executive Directorate (CTED) plays a very important
part in fighting terrorism. I would specifically like
to highlight the work of CTED with regard to foreign
terrorist fighters. In that context, the meeting to be held
in Madrid at the end of July is very important. The
Committee’s role should be to help assess countries’
ability to implement the resolution and to assist them in
strengthening their counter-terrorism abilities. We call
on CTED to adopt such a strategy and to report to the
Committee on the assistance programme it administers.
I would now like to share some thoughts on the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. The fight
against terrorism calls for a joint effort. Many countries
that wish to implement resolution 1373 (2001) are
hampered by a lack of capacity. Providing assistance
and filling the gaps for those countries should become
a comprehensive part of the Committee’s work. Such
work should be strengthened, and we should not forget
the Committee’s role as a catalyst so that international
and technical organizations are encouraged to provide
assistance to the countries that require it.
We reaffirm the importance of cooperation and
coordination among the three Committees. We warmly
welcome the provisions to improve coordination among
them as described by the Chair of the 1540 Committee.
While they have the necessary political support for
their roles, they sometimes lack sufficient financial
resources to provide the necessary assistance. It will
be essential to bolster the capacity of the Committees
and their executive prerogatives with the provision of
financial resources.
Fourthly, the Committees should maintain ongoing
relationships and cooperate with the countries most
seriously affected by terrorism by strengthening links
with the permanent delegations, conducting visits and
meeting with the authorities of those countries.
Fifthly, we must respond in a comprehensive way
to the challenges that terrorism poses. Terrorist groups
may have different persuasions, but they share the same
obscurantist way of thinking. Therefore, whether they
intend to or not, they help each other. We must focus on
all terrorist organizations for that very reason.

15-18020

16/06/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Lastly, Jordan will continue playing its pioneering,
central role in the fight against terrorism. We have
responded to the phenomenon with all the means at our
disposal, and we have strengthened our cooperation
with the Security Council Committees and all the
relevant United Nations bodies.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, Ambassador
Van Bohemen and Ambassador Murmokaité for their
briefings. The Non-Proliferation Committee, the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and the CounterTerrorism Committee have made positive efforts in
carrying out their respective work under the leadership
of the three Ambassadors, for whom China expresses
its appreciation.
Today, the world faces severe challenges in
combating terrorism. Regional conflicts provide
the breeding ground for terrorists and extremist
organizations with new forms of terrorist tactics.
Terrorism is the common enemy of all humankind. The
international community should work closely together
to crack down on it. Concerning what to do next, I
would like to emphasize the following points.
First, international counter-terrorism operations
require that the United Nations and the Security Council
fully play a leading role and adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the relevant
countries, make extensive efforts to develop consensus
among Member States and carry out coordinated and
consistent actions. Regardless of what form it takes,
when or where it occurs and whom it targets, we should
take a tough position on combating terrorism. There
should be no double standards and nor should terrorism
be seen as being linked to any specific ethnic group or
religion.
Secondly, today the international non-proliferation
process faces new and complex situations. More
non-State actors are engaging in proliferation activities.
In terms of international non-proliferation efforts, we
still have a long way to go. Faced with new challenges,
the international community should tighten control on
the source of the problem, eliminate the root causes
of such proliferation and take a balanced approach to
address security and development. Countries should
be committed to implementing resolution 1540 (2004)
in a comprehensive and balanced manner to prevent
non-State actors, especially terrorists, from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction, and countries should step

S/PV.7463

up international security. China hopes that, through
the review process, the Committee will further raise
countries’ awareness to implement the resolution and
promote a more important role for the Committee in
international cooperation, assistance and other areas.
Thirdly, China has noted that the number of
foreign terrorist fighters has continued to increase in
spite of the measures to stop them. They have been
inflicting more and more harm, and their participation
has intensified regional conflicts and made it more
difficult to resolve problems. When foreign terrorist
fighters return to their own countries, they constitute a
serious threat to the security and stability of their home
countries and regions. The United Nations and the
relevant international organizations should establish
a counter-terrorism database as soon as possible to
share information resources so as to create conditions
to effectively contain the transnational flow of foreign
terrorist fighters.
Fourthly, a new task and challenge in our fight
against terrorism is the need to crack down on terrorists’
use of the Internet. The international community
should take effective measures to respond to terrorist
groups’ use of the Internet to post violent audio and
video content, disseminate extremist ideas, recruit,
finance, incite, plan and carry out terrorist activities.
All countries should effectively implement the relevant
resolutions of the Council and strengthen their
regulation of the Internet. We welcome the CounterTerrorism Committee’s plan to host a special meeting
on the subject in November. We hope that the meeting
can result in devising new ideas and measures.
Fifthly, China has consistently asserted that
the international fight against terrorism requires a
comprehensive approach aimed at eliminating root
causes while addressing the symptoms, including in
the political, security, economic, financial, information
and ideological areas. The international community,
while actively responding to new forms, developments
and trends of terrorism, should also adopt effective
measures to help regional countries advance their
socioeconomic development, appropriately address
regional conflicts and promote equal dialogue among
diverse civilizations, religions and ethnic groups, so
as to eliminate the recourses and breeding grounds for
terrorism.
China is against terrorism in any form, and it
has actively participated in international counterterrorism cooperation and strictly implemented the

15-1802019/23

S/PV.7463

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

relevant Council resolutions. In November 2014, China
held a symposium on strengthening international
cooperation to prevent and counter terrorists’ use of the
Internet. In the second half of 2015, China will host a
training course for Asian countries with the focus on
resolution 1540 (2004), and it is maintaining effective
communication with the Non-Proliferation Committee
on relevant arrangements. China stands ready to work
with members of the international community and to
make a positive effort to advance international counterterrorism coooperation in the joint effort to maintain
world peace and security.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Chairs of the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the Non-Proliferation Committee for their respective
briefings.
Since the last joint briefing (see S/PV.7184) of those
Committees to the Council in May 2014, the emergence
of the terrorist group calling itself the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Levant, the expansion of the Al-Nusra Front
and the challenge posed by foreign terrorist fighters
forced the Council to resolutely react to those threats.
We welcome the Council meeting (see S/PV.7272) held
on 24 September 2014, which led to the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), which provides
for the implementation of a series of measures to deal
with foreign terrorist fighters. The success or failure of
the international community against this scourge will
depend on the efficient and effective cooperation of all
stakeholders. In that regard, we fully support the work
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate, and we are committed to the forthcoming
high-level conference in Madrid to stop the recruitment
and flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
The effective fight against terrorism requires trust
at all levels, which must be cultivated by sharing best
practices and information to detect and dismantle
terrorist-financing sources, such as the trafficking and
illegal sale of oil and other natural resources, as well
as the destruction and trafficking in cultural property,
among others.
In this task we should not lose sight of respect for
human rights and the rule of law. We emphasize the
role played by the Office of the Ombudsperson in
incorporating due process in the sanctions regime of
the Al-Qaida Committee, as well as the independence
of the Ombudsperson’s work. Chile has reiterated

20/23

16/06/2015

that the post of the Ombudsperson should exist in all
sanctions committees.
We must continue to respond quickly to new
challenges while maintaining what we have done well,
for example, in the Non-Proliferation Committee with
regard to non-State actors.
The comprehensive review to be held next year
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) will
be key to determine its progress. We see room for
improvement in the dialogue with Member States. It is
therefore important to identify deficiencies and areas
requiring further attention.
Before concluding, I will make a few comments.
First, we are concerned about the excessive
workload of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida Committee. As the
product of different resolutions, the Team must invest
enormous human resources and work hours to respond
to an increased demand for documentation, diverting
its attention from the task originally entrusted to it.
Secondly, greater synergy in the work of these three
Committees is required, as well as greater dialogue
with Member States to facilitate cooperation and the
necessary assistance to enhance national capacities.
Moreover, we are also concerned about the possible
effect of the widespread use of the term “terrorism” and
the fact that some international actors label opponents
or the political opposition as terrorists.
Finally, terrorism and violence will not be defeated
by military means alone. As noted by President Michelle
Bachelet to the Security Council (see S/PV.7272), we
must address its root causes. Undoubtedly, that is a
long-term preventive task that we must undertake
without delay.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation is grateful to the
Chairs of the Security Council Counter-Terrorism
Committees for their solid work during the reporting
period. The reports issued by those bodies make an
important contribution to strengthening international
counter-terrorism cooperation under the auspices of
the United Nations. That cooperation is particularly
pertinent today, given the unprecedented growth of
contemporary terrorist threats.
The epicenter of terrorist activity is currently
Iraq and Syria, where radicals from the Islamic State

15-18020

16/06/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

in Iraq and Syria (ISIS), the Al-Nusra Front and
other groups associated with Al-Qaida are operating.
They are carrying out heinous acts of barbarism
and are desecrating centuries-old cultural sites and
undermining the very foundations of States. Attempts
by ISIS to gain a foothold in Afghanistan and Libya,
where it has already done terrible things to Egyptian
Coptic Christians and Ethiopians, are also worrying.
We welcome the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Al-Qaida Commitee in the area
of countering the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters. Resolution 2178 (2014) focuses on the Security
Council’s approach to combating that type of threat.
We are convinced that the key to eradicating terrorism,
including the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon, may
be found in combatting radicalization and the spread of
extremist ideology. Particular attention should be paid
to curbing the use by terrorists of modern information
and telecommunication systems and technologies. We
are in favour of expanding the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC), as well as that of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), in that area in line with the above-mentioned
resolutions.
Curbing the financing of ISIS and Al-Nusra
Front through the illegal trade in oil, precious metals
and cultural artifacts in the area of Syria and Iraq is
an important area of cooperation between United
Nations counter-terrorism bodies. Resolution 2199
(2015) establishes a clear mechanism for ensuring
accountability in implementing its provisions.
However, the mechanism is not currently functioning
at full capacity and, given the urgency of the problem,
that is of serious concern.
We strongly urge Member States to regularly report
steps taken to implement resolution 2199 (2015) to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). First and foremost, with regard to cases of
illegal oil transactions, we trust that the forthcoming
report of the Committee’s Monitoring Team on the
implementation of the resolution will contain specific
and realistic proposals to increase the effectiveness of
the implementation of this important Security Council
resolution.
We urge the CTC to continue monitoring the
implementation of the basic Security Council resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). Priority should be given
to States that are most subject to terrorist threats, inter
alia, when planning country visits. We must renew the

S/PV.7463

comprehensive reviews of the implementation of these
resolutions.
The counter-terrorism capacity of States should
be strengthened through targeted technical assistance.
CTED’s experience and methods for coordinating
technical assistance, as well as the trust it has earned
from States, puts CTED in a unique position. We
expect that the joint work of CTED, the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force Office and the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre in the area
of technical assistance, based on the provisions of the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/11) of 29 May,
will be effective.
The sanctions list of the 1267 Committee is one of
the most effective tools for combatting terrorism, and it
should appropriately reflect the threats stemming from
Al-Qaida. The responsibility of the Ombudsperson,
enshrined in resolution 2161 (2014), should ensure
the greatest level of transparency for the Committee’s
work. We trust that the new expert who will assume
that position will meet the advertised professional
requirements as much as possible and will scrupulously
assess the potential risks linked with delisting and
carefully consider the opinions of interested and
affected States.
The 1540 Committee, headed by the Permanent
Representative of Spain, plays a leading role in
coordinating international efforts in the area of
non-proliferation. In our view, the main aim of the
Committee and its Panel of Experts is to continue
to ensure a decrease in the number of countries that
have not submitted their first national reports on the
implementation of this important resolution. Another
very important aspect of its work is to carry out
a comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). We agree that there is a need
to analyse the Committee’s experience in the area of
cooperation with all organizations involved in the
process, as well as the outreach programme for States
and civil society. The purpose of the review should be
to evaluate the effectiveness of such activities.
We should also focus attention on the advisability
of having a differentiated approach to countries
depending on the effectiveness of their implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). There is also a need to
focus attention on those that need real assistance.
Recommendations should be targeted so as to enable
more efficient use of the by-no-means-unlimited
resources of the 1540 Committee.

15-1802021/23

S/PV.7463

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

We consider it important to further strengthen
contacts between the subsidiary organs of the Security
Council and specialized agencies and mechanisms, so as
to expand the network of counter-terrorism cooperation
under the auspices of the United Nations. To that end,
we note the cooperation between the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the 1267 and 1540 Committees with the
international conference of heads of law-enforcement
agencies and security services held by the Federal
Security Service of the Russian Federation. We also
welcome the participation of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate in the World Bank meeting on
the international database on combating terrorism. We
would like to see a continuation of the practice of holding
briefings among the heads of those conferences and
representatives of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
The United Nations has developed a solid
international legal framework in the area of counterterrorism and has created a set of effective tools.
However, successful implementation will be possible
only though coordinated and voluntary inter-State
cooperation, without politicization, double standards,
opportunistic approaches or differentiating between
“good” and “bad” terrorists. It is such cooperation that
we in the Russian Federation insist upon.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malaysia.
I join earlier speakers in thanking the Chairs of the
three subsidiary bodies for their respective presentations
to the Council. Malaysia reaffirms its commitment
to and support for the work of the subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council, including the important
work undertaken by the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities; the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism; and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
We wish also to place on record our appreciation of
the important role played by the 1267/1989 Monitoring
Team, the Group of Experts, the Ombudsperson, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and other actors for their important
contributions to and support for the Committees.
Malaysia’s location, which straddles global shipping
routes, and our status as a trading nation requires a
clearly defined approach to the implementation of

22/23

16/06/2015

resolution 1540 (2004). In living up to its commitment,
Malaysia has put in place the necessary legal and
policy framework, anchored in the Strategic Trade Act
2010. In order to ensure effective implementation at
the domestic level, the Government held nationwide
outreach programmes, including with the private
sector and enforcement agencies. This approach
resulted in an increased awareness of the progressing
non-proliferation obligations, as well as higher levels
of compliance from the private sector. As such, we
see the merit in similarly targeted outreach activities
by the Security Council Committees related to the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
Malaysia has also undertaken initiatives at the
regional and subregional levels to complement and
strengthen international non-proliferation mechanisms.
As current Chair of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), Malaysia, together with Canada
and New Zealand, hosted the 2015 ASEAN Regional
Forum Intersessional Meeting on Non-Proliferation
and Disarmament. The two-day meeting, concluded in
Kuala Lumpur earlier today, provided an opportunity
for ASEAN and its partners to discuss, inter alia, the
way forward following the 2015 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, international non-proliferation
mechanisms and capacity-building in the area of WMD
threat reduction.
In that regard, I am encouraged by the fact that
the Chairs of the three Committees have underlined
their commitment to coordinating on common regional
approaches by taking into consideration geographical
and political similarities. Malaysia has officially offered
assistance through the 1540 Committee to other Member
States. We will consider such requests in the areas of
legal and regulatory infrastructure, implementation
and resources for fulfilling the provisions of the
resolutions. In that connection, we will support efforts
to streamline the matchmaking mechanism between
donor States and assistance providers so as to ensure
the effective delivery of such assistance.
With regard to the work of the 1267/1989
Committee, my delegation joins others in thanking
Mr. Alexander Evans, coordinator of the Monitoring
Team, and the Team as a whole for bringing more
energy and substantive focus to the Committee’s work.
We wish Mr. Evans all the best and look forward to
working with his successor. Like others, we, too, look
forward to receiving the report on the implementation

15-18020

16/06/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

of resolution 2199 (2015). We note the increasing
volume of listing and delisting requests addressed to
the Ombudperson and the Focal Point for delisting. We
hold the view that increased resort to those mechanisms
indicates increased awareness and confidence in the
sanctions mechanism.
Given the Ombudsperson’s role in balancing
security and human rights concerns, Malaysia continues
to believe that there is scope to explore the possibility
of extending such role and mandate for other sanctions
Committees. On the Ombudsperson’s mandate, it is
important that the Council agree on the way forward in
appointing Ms. Prost’s successor.
In noting the excellent support for and cooperation
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) by CTED,

S/PV.7463

Malaysia commends the focus and concerted efforts
initiated by the CTC geared towards the implementation
of resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015),
on preventing the flow of foreign terrorist fighters,
including the upcoming special meeting in Madrid to
be hosted by Spain. We continue to believe that sharing
information, to the extent possible, on the work of the
sanctions Committees constitutes an important step
towards building trust and confidence in the United
Nations sanctions regime as a whole. In that regard, we
remain supportive of the practice of open briefings by
the Committee Chairs.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

15-1802023/23
