S/2015/819

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 October 2015
Original: English

First report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 7 of resolution 2233 (2015)
I. Introduction
1.
In paragraph 7 of its resolution 2233 (2015), the Security Council requested
that I report every three months on progress made towards fulfilling the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The present report covers
key developments related to Iraq and provides an update on the activities of the
United Nations in Iraq since the issuance of my report dated 13 July 2015
(S/2015/530).

II. Summary of key political developments pertaining to Iraq
A.

Internal developments
2.
During the reporting period, the Government of Iraq began implementing
widespread reform measures to strengthen its democratic institutions and to address
economic and budgetary problems by strengthening State institutions, reducing
public expenditures, countering corruption and initiating economic reforms. The
political leadership of Iraq continued consultations and steps to promote initiatives
on national reconciliation at various levels and also continued to exert efforts to
engage some Sunni leaders in the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). In the Kurdistan region of Iraq, following the expiration of the
presidential term of Masoud Barzani, political parties were locked in intensive
negotiations to reach agreement on the President’s term and powers, while also
continuing the drafting of a constitution for the Kurdistan region of Iraq.
3.
Partners participating in the international anti-ISIL coalition continued to
support the fight of the Government of Iraq against the terrorist group. During the
reporting period, neither side made significant gains. ISIL remains in control of
large swathes of territory in the west and north of the country, where it continues to
inflict civilian casualties, cause massive displacement and perpetrate systematic
human rights violations that may amount to war crimes and/or crimes against
humanity.

15-17917 (E)

*1517917*

281015

S/2015/819

B.

Political situation
4.
In July, when the country was experiencing record high temperatures and
repeated electricity cuts, popular demonstrations erupted to protest the poor delivery
of services in Baghdad and the southern governorates. By early August, the
demonstrations had grown in strength and numbers. The protests have recurred each
Friday and are led by civil society groups and young people, who are demanding
better services, better governance and an end to government corruption and
mismanagement. The protesters’ demands for reform gained momentum when, on
7 August, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani urged Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi to take
decisive action against corruption, improve the Government’s performance, reduce
public sector expenditure and publicly name officials who are impeding reforms.
5.
On 9 August, Prime Minister al-Abadi announced a reform plan to address the
economic and social needs of Iraq, counter corruption and strengthen democratic
institutions. The plan included downsizing the Government to reduce public
expenditure and improve State performance, abolishing the posts of Vice-President
and deputy prime ministers as well as a number of senior officials in various
ministries, reducing their salaries, protecting services, and judicial reform. The
reform plan was unanimously endorsed by the Council of Ministers just hours after
the Prime Minister’s announcement. On 11 August, the Council of Representatives
unanimously approved Prime Minister al-Abadi’s first package of reforms and its
own reform package to complement the Prime Minister’s measures. The Council of
Representatives also stated that the reforms should be in conformity with the
Constitution of Iraq and other laws.
6.
Following the endorsement by the Council of Representatives of the reform
packages, Prime Minister al-Abadi began reducing the number of Government
personnel. On 16 August, he ordered the immediate abolishment of his deputies’
posts, the reduction of the Council of Ministers from 34 to 22 members and the
dissolution of the Ministries of Human Rights, Women’s Affairs, and Municipalities
and Public Works. He also ordered the merging of Ministries with similar
specialized functions: Science and Technology with Higher Education and Scientific
Research; Environment with Health; Municipalities and Public Works with Housing;
and Tourism and Antiquities with Culture. On 20 August, the Prime Minister
announced a 90 per cent reduction in the number of personnel dedicated to
providing protection for Government officials. On 9 September, he announced the
dismissal of 123 senior officials from their posts. They were to either retire or have
their administrative status adjusted.
7.
The Prime Minister also took steps to formalize the abolition of the posts of
the Vice-Presidents. On 20 August, he ceased the payment of their financial
entitlements and on 15 September, the Council of Ministers submitted to the Council
of Representatives a draft law to abolish their posts. All three Vice-Presidents
publicly stated that they considered the abolition of their posts unconstitutional.
8.
The Government took steps to initiate inquiries into allegations of political
corruption. On 15 August, the Presidency of the Council of Representatives referred
to outstanding cases of corruption against staff in the Ministries of Defence and
Commerce concerning the award of arms contracts. The day before, the Chairman of
the Integrity Commission, Hassan al-Yassiri, had announced that travel bans had
been instituted against those under investigation for corruption.

2/18

15-17917

S/2015/819

9.
As part of national reform efforts aimed at cutting public expenditure, on
9 September, the Prime Minister authorized the reduction of salaries and pensions
for the three presidencies, ministers’ advisers and managers. To diversify sources of
national income amidst declining world oil prices, on 25 August, the Council of
Ministers approved the allocation of 5 trillion Iraqi dinars ($4 billion) to revitalize
agriculture, industry and the housing sector, encourage investment and create job
opportunities. The Council of Ministers also allocated funds to the Ministry of
Electricity to equip power stations with adequate fuel in order to alleviate the
electricity crisis.
10. Leadership changes were also effected at the governorate level amidst
demands by local protesters for efficient service delivery and improved State
performance. On 28 August, Governors Ibrahim al-Miyali of Muthanna and Ammar
al-Midani of Qadisiya resigned after protesters called for them to step down. On
14 September, the Muthanna Provincial Council elected Falah al-Zayadi (State of
Law Coalition) as the new Governor. On 17 September, President Fuad Masum
issued a decree endorsing the election of Luay al-Yassiri (State of Law Coalition) as
the Governor of Najaf after the former Governor’s appeal against his dismissal for
financial misappropriation was dismissed by the local administrative court on
24 August. On 5 October, the Ninewa Provincial Council elected Nawfal Hamady
Sultan al-A’akoob as the new Governor to replace Atheel al-Nujaifi. The latter’s
dismissal by Parliament was upheld by the administrative court in Ninewa on
28 August.
11. The Legislature also took steps to strengthen accountability and openness in
governance through the initiation of public inquiries into the fall of Ramadi and
Mosul and through the enactment of legislation. On 16 August, Prime Minister
al-Abadi announced that he would request that military commanders identified by
the investigation committee as having abandoned their positions in Ramadi be
court-martialled. On 17 August, the Council of Representatives voted to refer the
parliamentary investigation committee’s report on the fall of Mosul to the General
Prosecutor. On 27 August, the Council of Representatives unanimously adopted the
Political Parties Law, which will provide greater openness in the operation of
political parties.
12. During the reporting period, the ruling bodies of Iraq took further steps to
reinvigorate the country’s national reconciliation agenda. On 4 July, the Committee
of Religious Endowments and Religious Affairs of the Council of Representatives
launched its initiative for national reconciliation entitled the “Ramadan document”
to complement the objectives set out in the national political agreement and the
ministerial programme. The main goal of the initiative is to empower
representatives from all components, State and religious institutions, community
leaders and the media to promote the principles of national reconciliation. In early
July, the Implementation and Follow-Up Committee for National Reconciliation of
the Office of the Prime Minister shared with the three presidencies its action plan
entitled the “Baghdad document”. The document is aimed at garnering commitments
from all components inside and outside Iraq, including groups outside the political
process, to advance an inclusive national reconciliation process. On 23 August, the
Prime Minister issued an executive order for the formation of a committee and
subcommittees tasked with implementing national reconciliation in the Baghdad
Belt area by monitoring human rights abuses, addressing public complaints and
disputes between local communities, establishing communications mechanisms with

15-17917

3/18

S/2015/819

residents to ascertain their concerns and promote community reconciliation.
On 5 and 18 September, the Implementation and Follow-Up Committee for National
Reconciliation held consultations with local residents and community leaders to
identify their main areas of concern. Other initiatives to advance a broad and
inclusive reconciliation process were also announced by Iyad Allawi, the Office of
the Presidency, the Association of Muslim Scholars and the Iraqi Communist Party.
13. At the same time, the Sunni political leadership of Iraq made efforts to
promote national reconciliation initiatives at various levels. In a bid to aid
community reconciliation and achieve a balanced political representation in mixed
governorates, Parliamentary Speaker Salim al-Jubouri held discussions with the
head of the Badr Organization, Hadi al-Ameri, on a draft law on peaceful
coexistence in Diyala. On 19 August, an Anbar liberation conference was held in
Baghdad under the auspices of the Speaker as part of efforts to engage Sunnis in the
fight against ISIL and prepare for post-liberation in Anbar. As part of efforts to
strengthen unity among Sunni leaders, including those outside the political process,
in early August, the Speaker’s Office submitted to Iraqi Forces Coalition Members
of Parliament a road map on national reconciliation entitled “Sunni Vision for the
Iraqi State”. On 30 August, the Sunni Endowment Council held a conference on
combating violence and extremism. Participants included political, tribal,
community and intellectual leaders. They released an outcome statement, which
included calls for Muslim unity and the rejection of sectarianism.
14. Most of the priority legislation that would aid national reconciliation,
however, remained pending in Parliament. Votes on the national guard law were
postponed on 30 August and again on 7 September owing to disagreements between
parliamentary blocs over its provisions. Additionally, no progress was made towards
the enactment of a general amnesty law since its first reading on 5 July. Meanwhile,
the National Reconciliation Committee of the Council of Representatives separated
the Justice and Accountability and Banning of the Baath Party Act into two bills on
25 July. While the Council of Representatives concluded, on 30 July, the first
reading of the draft law on the banning of the Baath Party, dissolved entities and
parties, and the activities of racism, terrorism and takfir (charge of unbelief), no
voting took place on legislation that would revise de-baathification measures. On
15 September, the Council of Ministers decided to withdraw and review all draft
laws submitted to the Council of Representatives by the previous Government. This
amounted to some 80 draft bills, including the draft anti-terrorism law of 2005.
15. Following the expiration of the presidential term of Masoud Barzani on
19 August, the political parties of the Kurdistan region of Iraq held eight rounds of
talks on the issue of the presidency between 18 August and 8 October. The
Kurdistan Democratic Party of President Barzani is seeking an extension of the
presidential term with the current presidential powers and an election by direct vote,
while the Gorran Movement, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, the Kurdistan Islamic
Union and the Kurdistan Islamic Group propose that the Regional Parliament elect
the president. Inter-party talks were continuing at the time of reporting.
16. On 19 August, the Kurdistan Region Constitutional Drafting Committee
formally requested the Kurdistan Regional Parliament to extend its mandate after
holding consultations for 90 days and approving 74 articles of a new draft regional
constitution. The Turkmen and Assyrian Christian members of the 20-member

4/18

15-17917

S/2015/819

Constitutional Committee continued to boycott the Committee, citing its rejection of
their party’s proposals on minorities.
17. During the reporting period, differing views between Baghdad and Erbil
persisted with respect to the implementation of the agreement of 2 December 2014
on energy exports and revenue-sharing. In July, the Kurdistan Regional Government
called for a new agreement that would better address the needs of both sides.
Following those calls, federal Oil Minister Adel Abdul-Mahdi visited President
Barzani in Erbil on 26 July in an attempt to reach common ground. The political
leadership in Baghdad and Erbil continued to express their commitment to political
dialogue to resolve their differences.

C.

Security
18. The security situation in Iraq remained highly volatile throughout the reporting
period. Conflict and armed violence were largely concentrated in contested areas in
Anbar, Ninewa and Salah al-Din Governorates. The Government of Iraq and the
Kurdistan Regional Government continued to focus their military operations on
consolidating territorial gains made against ISIL and on gradually recovering areas
remaining under ISIL control with the increased support of the international coalition.
19. In Anbar, the Iraqi security forces, the popular mobilization forces and
affiliates, aided by international coalition air strikes, undertook military operations
to dislodge ISIL from its strongholds and safe havens in the province, mainly in and
around Ramadi, Fallujah, Garma and Hit. The role of local Anbari forces
participating in the operation to retake Ramadi, which was captured by ISIL in
mid-May, was augmented by 6,000 Sunni tribesmen, who underwent military
training in July. The first contingent of 1,000 Sunni tribesmen who had completed
training was deployed to the front lines in late July to join the Government’s
military campaign against ISIL. Meanwhile, Government forces retained control of
the town of Haditha and held on to the strategically important Haditha dam.
Although ISIL launched daily attacks against the Iraqi security forces in the town of
al-Baghdadi, Government forces and affiliates continued to retain control of the
area. In an attempt to cut off a vital financing resource for ISIL, on 16 July, the
Ministry of Interior announced the closure of the Trebil border crossing between
Anbar and Jordan, at which ISIL had been imposing a tax on each truck entering
and exiting the province.
20. In Salah al-Din, the Iraqi security forces and popular mobilization forces
retained control of the city of Tikrit and surrounding areas. Armed clashes between
Government forces and affiliates and ISIL continued throughout the reporting
period, particularly in Samarra, Tikrit and Baiji. From 1 July to 12 September, ISIL
launched 27 suicide vehicle-borne attacks in Baiji, resulting in substantial casualties
to security personnel. Armed clashes continued between Government forces and
ISIL within the perimeter of the Baiji refinery, which is still under ISIL control.
21. Peshmerga forces, supported by the popular mobilization forces and
international coalition air assets, continued to exert pressure on ISIL positions in
Sinjar and Ninewa. On 11 September, the Peshmerga, aided by the popular
mobilization forces, retook 11 villages from ISIL in the area of Daquq, south of
Kirkuk, followed by 12 villages west of Kirkuk on 30 September. Recaptured areas,

15-17917

5/18

S/2015/819

including the Khabbaz oilfield, key infrastructure and road junctions remained
under Peshmerga control.
22. Baghdad continued to be afflicted by acts of violence and terrorism, almost on
a daily basis. The deadliest attack occurred on 13 August, when a bomb was
detonated at a market in the Jameela area of eastern Baghdad, reportedly killing at
least 45 civilians and wounding 72 others. During the reporting period, there was a
re-emergence of the use of under-vehicle improvised explosive devices, with
52 such attacks killing 43 civilians and wounding 68 others. Unidentified bodies
continued to be found on a daily basis in the city and its outlying areas. In many
cases, the mode of killing suggested sectarian or political motivations. Abductions
also continued to occur in and throughout the city. On 2 August, 10 Palestinians
were abducted in eastern Baghdad and, on 2 September, 18 Turkish workers were
abducted, reportedly by an armed group, in eastern Baghdad and released several
weeks later. On 9 September, the acting Deputy Justice Minister, another senior
official of the Ministry of Justice and four security guards were abducted in northeastern Baghdad. The security guards were reportedly later released.

D.

Regional and international developments
23. During the reporting period, the Government of Iraq continued to pursue its
efforts to strengthen its relations with its neighbours, other countries in the region
and the broader international community. High-level Iraqi Government delegations
paid official visits to Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kuwait and Turkey
as part of continuing efforts to enhance cooperation in the fight against ISIL, seek
support in alleviating the economic and humanitarian situation, promote the national
reconciliation agenda and support the Government’s reform programme. These
developments took place amidst the signing, on 14 July, of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, which is intended to ensure that the nuclear programme of the
Islamic Republic of Iran remains peaceful. The senior political leadership of Iraq
welcomed the agreement and stated that its full implementation would contribute to
regional and international peace and security. In early July, Iraq’s new Ambassador
to the Islamic Republic of Iran, Rageh al-Musawi, arrived in Tehran.
24. Iraq continued its efforts to normalize relations with member States of the
Gulf Cooperation Council. During a meeting with his Iraqi counterpart on 22 July,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah al-Khalid al-Hamad
al-Sabah, reaffirmed his Government’s commitment to bolstering bilateral ties with
Iraq. Saudi Arabia reaffirmed its intention to reopen its embassy in Baghdad and a
consulate in Erbil. Iraq appointed its new Ambassador to Saudi Arabia on
20 September. Iraq’s relations with Qatar became strained after the latter’s initiative
to host meetings of some Iraqi Sunni leaders in Doha on 2 and 3 September in an
effort to engage them in the Baghdad-led national reconciliation process. In a
statement on 6 September, the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs said that it had not
been consulted by the Government of Qatar and underlined that the sovereignty of
Iraq must be respected. On 11 September, Qatar announced the appointment of its
new resident Ambassador to Iraq in preparation for the upcoming reopening of its
embassy in Baghdad. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Ibrahim al-Jaafari,
described the announcement as a positive sign.

6/18

15-17917

S/2015/819

25. Following the suicide bombing on 22 July in Suruc, Turkey, claimed by ISIL,
and the assassination of two police officers in Ceylanpınar, Turkey, claimed by the
Kurdistan Workers Party, the Government of Turkey confirmed on 25 July that it
had carried out air strikes targeting ISIL in the Syrian Arab Republic and the
Kurdistan Workers Party in northern Iraq in response to the terrorist attacks. The
same day, the Prime Minister of Turkey spoke to Kurdistan Regional Government
President Barzani and the President of Turkey spoke to President Masum about
those counter-terrorist operations. On 27 July, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Turkey stated that his country was respecting international law and the Charter of
the United Nations in conducting air strikes in the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq
while being very careful about avoiding civilian casualties.
26. On 1 August, Prime Minister al-Abadi called upon the Government of Turkey
to respect the sovereignty of Iraq and, on 5 August, Minister for Foreign Affairs
al-Jaafari underlined that his Government had not granted Turkey authorization to
carry out air strikes within Iraq’s territory. In a statement on 13 September, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq condemned all terrorist attacks against Turkish
civilians and personnel, but described any incursion into Iraqi territory as a
violation of Iraq’s sovereignty. The Kurdistan Regional Government called for a halt
to the confrontations and urged for the continuation of the peace process.
27. The international community continued to work with Iraq on formulating a
response to combat violent extremism. Minister for Foreign Affairs al-Jaafari, along
with the Deputy Secretary-General and my Special Representative, participated in
the International Conference on the Victims of Ethnic and Religious Violence in the
Middle East, held in Paris on 8 September. The Conference brought together
representatives from 56 countries and 11 international and regional organizations.
Participants adopted the Paris Action Plan, a road map guiding the international
community’s response in protecting communities targeted and threatened for ethnic
or religious reasons in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic by ISIL and other terrorist
organizations.
28. The situation in Iraq and counter-terrorism efforts were also part of the
discussions at the 144th ordinary session of the Council of Foreign Ministers of the
League of Arab States, held on 13 September. Meanwhile, the Global Coalition to
Counter ISIL continued to discuss ways to support the Government of Iraq. On
30 July, a small group meeting of the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL was held in
Quebec City, Canada, and attended by Minister for Foreign Affairs al-Jaafari and
my Special Representative. Coalition partners emphasized that stabilization and
national reconciliation were interlinked and praised the United Nations for its
stabilization efforts, including, in particular, the establishment by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) of the Funding Facility for Immediate
Stabilization in Iraq.
29. In late September, Prime Minister al-Abadi confirmed that the Government of
Iraq was sharing intelligence with the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Russian
Federation, the Syrian Arab Republic and others in the fight against ISIL and that it
hoped that the various countries and coalitions would coordinate closely in their
support to Iraq.

15-17917

7/18

S/2015/819

III. Update on the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the United Nations country team
A.

Political activities
30. During the reporting period, UNAMI continued to work in close partnership
with the Government of Iraq to support its efforts to strengthen inclusive political
dialogue and governance. My Special Representative met with a wide range of
interlocutors to follow up on the implementation of the national political agreement
and ministerial programme, including efforts to advance the national reconciliation
agenda.
31. My Special Representative and Deputy Special Representative for Political
Affairs also paid numerous visits to the Kurdistan region to urge Kurdish interlocutors
to resolve the deadlock over the Kurdistan Regional Presidency and to support
dialogue with the federal Government on energy exports and revenue-sharing.
32. On 7 September, a seminar on the theme “Devolution as part of national
reconciliation” was held in Baghdad. The seminar, which had been jointly organized
by UNAMI and the Office of the Prime Minister, was attended by more than
120 Government officials and civil society leaders, who discussed how the devolution
of powers could support national reconciliation in Iraq and shared perspectives and
approaches to federalism. UNAMI, in collaboration with the Implementation and
Follow-Up Committee for National Reconciliation, organized a conference on the role
of public opinion-makers in supporting political and community reconciliation, which
was held on 16 September. More than 100 prominent media, academic and civil
society figures participated. Recommendations included developing media strategies
to promote social and cultural reconciliation and means through which opinionmakers can positively contribute to the advancement of national and societal
reconciliation. An ad hoc committee was established from among the participants to
follow up on the implementation of the recommendations. Additionally, on
19 August, UNAMI conducted a joint mission to Diyala with the Implementation
and Follow-Up Committee on National Reconciliation of the Office of the Prime
Minister to discuss national and community reconciliation objectives with local
authorities, community leaders and returnees.
33. To promote support and cooperation with the Government of Iraq, my Special
Representative also engaged with representatives of Iraq’s neighbours and States in
the region. He visited Jordan on 14 and 15 July and Turkey on 18 September. At the
invitation of the Government of Qatar, he joined the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Qatar in addressing, on 4 and 5 September, a series of meetings among Iraqi Sunni
leaders to discuss means of unifying the Sunni community behind Iraq’s national
reconciliation process. My Special Representative delivered key messages to the
participants, including urging for their support for the unity of Iraq and the national
reconciliation process, respect for the Constitution and the political process, and
their outright rejection of terrorism and ISIL.
34. My Special Representative also reached out to Iraq’s minority communities to
explore means of enhancing the protection and promotion of their rights, meeting
Sheikh Sattar Jabbar al-Hillo, spiritual leader of the Sabean-Mandaean community,
and Yazidi spiritual leader Baba Sheikh at Lalish Temple in Sheikhan (Dohuk
Governorate). In preparation for the aforementioned International Conference on the

8/18

15-17917

S/2015/819

Victims of Ethnic and Religious Violence in the Middle East, held in Paris on
8 September, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs took part in a
United Nations brainstorming session organized by the Department of Political
Affairs of the Secretariat and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) on the topic “Victims of ethnic and religious
violence in the Middle East”, held in Paris from 20 to 22 July.
35. UNAMI continued its efforts to promote women’s rights in Iraq in support of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). With the State Ministry
of Women’s Affairs and the Kurdistan Region High Council of Women’s Affairs, it
jointly organized a two-day national conference on the theme “Empowering women to
address the impact of terrorism”, held in Erbil on 3 and 4 August. Key Government
officials, religious leaders, civil society representatives and representatives of the
international community participated. Recommendations from the conference
included the need to accelerate efforts to release women and girls abducted by ISIL
from captivity and provide comprehensive services for women affected by conflict.

B.

Electoral assistance
36. During the reporting period, UNAMI continued its engagement with Iraq’s
electoral and legislative institutions. On 13 September, my Special Representative
met with the Board of Commissioners of the Independent High Electoral
Commission to discuss priority areas for the continuation of electoral assistance,
taking into consideration the recommendations of the 2015 electoral needs
assessment mission. Following consultations, UNAMI and the Independent High
Electoral Commission agreed on focus areas of electoral support, including election
results management, voting processes for internally displaced persons, database and
voter registry, a legal framework, the registration of political parties and gender.
UNAMI is now in the process of recalibrating technical assistance capacities to
fulfil the identified requirements.
37. UNAMI also continued to follow up on the progress in discussions between
the Independent High Electoral Commission and the Kurdistan Independent High
Electoral Commission in defining their respective roles and responsibilities. The
chairpersons of the two electoral institutions separately informed my Deputy
Special Representative in August that progress had been made in defining a
memorandum of understanding between the two electoral management bodies.
38. On 13 June, the Kurdistan Regional Presidency issued a decree scheduling the
presidential election on 20 August. During its briefing for the diplomatic community
held in Erbil on 19 August, the Kurdistan Independent High Electoral Commission
reiterated its earlier statements that it needs at least 180 days from the day funds are
released and the electoral law is passed to organize an election in the region. On
8 September, the Chairperson of the Kurdistan Independent High Electoral
Commission requested the support of UNAMI in establishing the Commission’s
data entry centre, setting up its election results management system and conducting
capacity-building workshops.
39. On 26 July, the Independent High Electoral Commission announced the receipt
of a new request from citizens of Basra to designate the province as a region.
Following an audit of the names and signatures in support of the request against the
Commission’s voter registry for Basra, the Commission announced on 18 August

15-17917

9/18

S/2015/819

that the valid names and signatures reached the two per cent required threshold for
the first step of the process, as provided in the Law on the Formation of Regions
(Law No. 13 of 2008). A total of 57,933 Basra citizens signed the request, 46,212 of
whom matched the Commission’s voter list, or 2.6 per cent of Basra’s 1,741,599
registered voters. Pursuant to that, the Commission prepared and submitted to the
Council of Ministers an operational plan and budget for the process. To date,
however, there is no budgetary allocation to fund succeeding activities.

C.

Human rights developments and activities
40. Ongoing armed conflict, acts of violence and terrorism continue to take a
grave toll on civilians in Iraq. From 13 July to 16 September, UNAMI recorded a
minimum number of 4,785 civilian casualties (1,739 killed and 3,046 wounded),
bringing the total number of civilian casualties in Iraq since the beginning of 2015
to at least 18,457 (6,123 killed and 12,334 wounded).
41. UNAMI received numerous reports alleging serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law perpetrated against civilians in an apparent
widespread and systematic manner, in particular by ISIL. The reports include
attacks directly targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure, killings, abductions,
rape and other forms of sexual violence, forced recruitment of children, wanton
destruction and looting of civilian property, and denial of fundamental rights and
freedoms. Members of minorities, women, children, people with disabilities and the
elderly remain particularly vulnerable. It is estimated that up to 1,500 women and
children, mostly from the Yezidi community, remain in captivity by ISIL.
42. The deadliest direct attack against civilians took place in Diyala Governorate
on 17 July as celebrations of Eid al-Fitr commenced. A vehicle laden with
explosives was detonated in the market of Khan Bani Saad Subdistrict, killing at
least 108 civilians (including 3 police officers) and wounding 167 others (including
7 police officers). At least 20 people, mainly civilians, were reported missing and
have, to date, not been found. ISIL claimed responsibility on social media for the
attack. A similar attack took place on 10 August when a suicide bomber driving a
vehicle laden with explosives targeted a crowded market just outside Baquba City,
killing at least 61 people and wounding at least 88 others, including 4 children. ISIL
also claimed responsibility for that attack.
43. ISIL continued to abduct, kill and punish those opposed to its ideology and
rule. This included religious leaders, former public sector employees, journalists,
lawyers, academics and students, former election candidates, members of the Iraqi
security forces and the popular mobilization forces, and persons associated with
political parties that oppose it. Examples include the public execution in Ramadi in
July of eight civilians accused of cooperating with the Iraqi security forces; the
abduction of 53 employees of the Independent High Electoral Commission in Mosul
on 24 July, 28 of whom were killed the following day; the public execution of the
Imam of the Hamid Mosque in Mosul for allegedly criticizing the terrorist group;
and the public execution of a journalist in Mosul in August. Also in Mosul in
August, ISIL posted a list of over 2,000 names of individuals whom it claimed to
have executed. ISIL also murdered four journalists and executed five persons
alleged to have been associated with the Mutahidoon Alliance (including three
female Mutahidoon Alliance candidates).

10/18

15-17917

S/2015/819

44. ISIL also continued to abduct civilians and destroy buildings of cultural and
religious significance. In the aftermath of an improvised explosive device attack
targeting ISIL members in Hawija District of Kirkuk on 18 August, ISIL abducted at
least 90 civilians in Hawija between 2 and 7 September. On 22 August and
12 September respectively, ISIL also demolished two Syrian Orthodox churches in
Mosul.
45. ISIL continued to impose strict travel restrictions within its areas of control,
including Mosul, Hawija and Shirqat. Trade in and out of Mosul is still very limited,
as ISIL requires merchants to identify a sponsor and provide property as surety
when travelling in order to ensure their return. ISIL also shut down most Internet
services in Mosul around mid-August. Four families (at least 20 people) died from
starvation and dehydration while fleeing ISIL through the Hamrin Mountains in
Salah al-Din Governorate on about 15 July. On 19 and 20 July, an undetermined
number of families were reportedly abducted by ISIL in the Hamrin Mountains.
ISIL also reportedly killed civilians accused of smuggling people out of areas under
its control.
46. UNAMI also continued to receive reports alleging that pro-Government armed
groups and militias had perpetrated human rights violations. Members of the Sunni
Arab community were targeted in particular, primarily in Diyala. On 12 August,
approximately 50 members of the Sunni Arab community were abducted in Baquba
District, Diyala Governorate; at least 17 of the bodies were found in the Diyala
River later the same day. Many of the abductions reportedly took place at or near
checkpoints manned by Iraqi security forces and associated forces. On 1 September,
militia members allegedly abducted at least 40 persons of Sunni Arab origin near
Balad District, Salah al-Din. The fate and whereabouts of the abductees are
unknown. Reports were also received of persons in Peshmerga uniform destroying
homes and structures in Sunni Arab-inhabited areas in Jalawla, Diyala Governorate,
on or around 16 August.
47. The country task force on monitoring and reporting, co-chaired by UNAMI
and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), documented 96 incidents of
violations against children during the reporting period. The United Nations has
noted a decrease in the number of reported incidents owing to lack of access to the
affected populations and increased displacement. Killing and maiming continued to
be the most documented violation, with 331 reported cases of child casualties
(135 killed and 196 wounded). Fighting between the parties to the conflict
reportedly claimed the lives of 63 children, while terror attacks killed 72 children
and wounded another 99, mostly in Diyala and Baghdad.
48. ISIL continues to recruit children in Ninewa, particularly in Mosul and Tal
Afar, and in Anbar. ISIL posted pictures and videos on social media showing boys
being trained and boys perpetrating crimes, including killing, maiming and/or
torturing civilians. ISIL also reportedly killed some of its underage fighters. On
18 August, ISIL murdered 18 juveniles in Mosul for having fled the front line in
Anbar. In addition, the continued recruitment and use of children by affiliates of the
popular mobilization forces in conflict areas, Baghdad and Basra remain of grave
concern. Children are also reportedly participating in combat operations alongside
the popular mobilization forces in Anbar and Ninevah.
49. On 12 August, the Kurdistan Regional Government executed three persons
convicted in April 2014 of the abduction and murder of two girls. They were the

15-17917

11/18

S/2015/819

first executions to have taken place in the Kurdistan region of Iraq since the
Kurdistan Regional Government introduced an informal moratorium on the
implementation of the death penalty in 2008. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights expressed his deep disappointment at this
development later in August and urged the Kurdistan Regional Government to
recommit to and formalize its unofficial moratorium on the use of the death penalty.
50. Iraq continues to be proud of its culture of freedom of expression and aims to
set an example for the region. However, during the reporting period, UNAMI again
received an increasing number of reports of demonstrators and journalists being
harassed or assaulted by unidentified persons. UNAMI also received reports of
journalists being harassed by security forces or persons associated with them during
public demonstrations against corruption and poor public services in Baghdad on
7, 14 and 21 August. Two media professionals were assaulted during a similar
demonstration in Karbala Governorate on 14 August. On 17 July, security forces in
Basra reportedly fired on demonstrators, killing one protester and wounding three
others, and on 22 August, unidentified armed men attacked protesters in front of the
Basra Provincial Council.

D.

Camp New Iraq and Camp Hurriya
51. The relocation of the remaining Camp Hurriya residents to safe and secure
locations outside of Iraq remains the only durable and sustainable solution for those
residents. Funding for the United Nations on-site monitoring of camp activities is
set to expire in the coming months. Without further funding, human rights
monitoring will all but cease.
52. On 4 August and 14 September, my Special Representative reiterated the
commitment of the United Nations to the existing memorandum of understanding
between the Government of Iraq and the Organization during meetings with the
Government committee in charge of Camp Hurriya. He also gave assurances that the
United Nations would continue its human rights and humanitarian monitoring and
reporting.
53. My Special Adviser for the Relocation of Camp Hurriya Residents Outside of
Iraq, Assistant Secretary-General Jane Lute, paid an official visit to Baghdad on
14 September, during which she briefed the Government committee on progress in
relocating the residents and outlined measures to help to strengthen the process.
During the meeting, the Government agreed to continue to work with the United
Nations to find relocation opportunities and to reconsider permitting representatives
of the diplomatic community in Iraq to visit the camp. Meanwhile, the United
Nations will continue to explore ways to encourage States to assist the Government
of Iraq to relocate the remaining Camp Hurriya residents to safe and secure
locations outside the country.
54. Notwithstanding challenges throughout the relocation process, namely, the
group’s intermittent boycott of the process, momentum has been established. To
date, the humanitarian claims of all residents have been reviewed by the United
Nations and more than 800 individuals have found solutions either through
readmission or relocation to third countries. The current objective is to relocate an
additional 300 residents by the end of 2015, bringing the total number of residents

12/18

15-17917

S/2015/819

who have departed Iraq to 1,100. This figure represents more than one third of the
residents registered by the United Nations.

E.

Humanitarian assistance, reconstruction and development
55. Over 8.6 million people across Iraq, or nearly 25 per cent of the country’s
population, remain in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. This includes
3.2 million people displaced from their homes and spread across more than 3,400
locations. These figures reflect an increase of more than 400,000 persons in need
since my previous report, in addition to the 250,000 Syrian refugees already hosted
in Iraq.
56. Through the generous support of many donors, the United Nations, its partners
and the Government have continued to assist the most vulnerable across Iraq, with
an average of 2 million people receiving food, medical, shelter, water and protection
assistance every month. However, funding for the humanitarian response does not
match the ever-expanding needs in Iraq. It currently covers only 52 per cent of those
needs for the entire year and only 40 per cent of the funding requirements of the
highly prioritized appeal for the period from July to December 2015. United Nations
agencies and humanitarian organizations will soon be forced to suspend or terminate
hundreds of lifesaving programmes and activities owing to a lack of funds.
57. To ensure that vital food assistance continues, the World Food Programme
(WFP) has been forced to reduce the value of food vouchers and the size of food
rations. Approximately 300,000 displaced persons received food vouchers in August
and a reduced value voucher covering September and October requirements. An
additional 824,000 beneficiaries were supported through in-kind assistance.
Emergency assistance provided by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO) boosted the vegetable production for rural populations in
Sulaymaniyah, Kirkuk and Anbar, with particular attention to households headed by
women, benefiting 4,050 households.
58. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and partners continued
to monitor checkpoints to assist civilians, provided legal assistance to 76,400
internally displaced persons and assessed the needs of 127,000 persons. The
psychosocial programme of the International Organization for Migration (IOM)
delivered counselling sessions reaching 12,402 persons, with a majority of
beneficiaries from minority groups. UNICEF supported psychosocial services for
70,000 displaced and refugee children. The United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA) continued to support women’s centres, which provided gender-based
violence information and services to 29,530 women and girls. UNFPA further
strengthened the capacities of 16 uniformed personnel to combat gender-based
violence. UNDP provided financial assistance to six court-based legal aid help desks
in Baghdad, Basra, Erbil, Sulaymaniyah and Dohuk and six legal assistance centres
within refugee and internally placed person camps in Erbil and Dohuk.
59. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
continued to provide shelter for 113,000 internally displaced persons in 17 camps
across Iraq, built three new camps and completed the renovation of 122 collective
centres and 1,250 family shelter units. In August, the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme handed over to local authorities prefabricated shelter units
and infrastructure facilities, housing 1,824 internally displaced persons in Bahirka

15-17917

13/18

S/2015/819

Camp, Erbil. IOM assisted 65,382 displaced individuals through the distribution of
10,725 seasonal non-food kits, 658 tents and 345 caravans. As at late September
2015, UNICEF, WFP, IOM, UNFPA and nine non-governmental organization
partners had delivered combined lifesaving assistance through the rapid response
mechanism to an estimated 3.6 million recently displaced and vulnerable people,
including in hard-to-reach areas of Anbar, Salah-al-Din, Diyala and Kirkuk.
60. UNICEF supported over 7,000 households through its emergency cash
assistance programme, UNHCR distributed cash assistance to 4,600 displaced
families, and IOM further provided 2,990 with transport.
61. UNICEF reached more than 78,000 children with routine measles vaccinations
and supported access to growth monitoring and nutrition services for 144,000
conflict-affected children. Aiming towards polio-free status, UNICEF, the World
Health Organization (WHO) and the Ministry of Health marked National Polio
Immunization Day from 4 to 8 October, targeting 5.9 million children under five
years old. While Iraq was removed from the list of polio-infected countries in May
2015, a joint UNICEF-WHO assessment mission in August could not establish the
non-existence of residual poliovirus circulation in Iraq, largely owing to the lack of
effective surveillance mechanisms in high-priority areas of Baghdad and Najaf.
62. Notwithstanding substantial investment by the Government of Iraq, the
damage inflicted to the health and water sanitation infrastructure rendered the system
so vulnerable that a major outbreak of cholera occurred in Najaf and Baghdad
Governorates in September. With the support of the United Nations, the Ministry of
Health was able to contain the outbreak, which as at 7 October had nevertheless
affected more than 1,200 people, who survived because of adequate treatment.
63. UNFPA supported 21 maternity units and 80 primary health-care units, leading
to 3,596 assisted deliveries. IOM supported 18,041 displaced persons, 820 host
community residents and 201 health-care professionals by facilitating access to
primary health care; building the capacity of the national health-care system;
providing supplies; and establishing mobile and static health-care clinics. With the
support of WHO and health cluster partners, 2,658,691 beneficiaries received health
care through medical consultations.
64. UNESCO provided secondary education to 14,500 internally displaced persons
in camps and host communities and built a prefabricated school in Sulaymaniyah on
23 August with a capacity for 500 students. UNESCO and the Iraqi authorities,
including Kurdish regional representatives, jointly coordinated and monitored the
final examinations of displaced students in public universities. In August, UNESCO
and UNICEF provided assistance to the education system, benefiting more than
25,000 displaced children and young people, and constructed prefabricated schools
for 15,000 displaced children.
65. UNDP supported the efforts of the Government of Iraq to stabilize areas
liberated from ISIL, particularly in and around Tikrit, through the Funding Facility
for Immediate Stabilization. Several infrastructure projects identified by local
authorities are under way in the sectors of water, electricity, health and education,
targeting 85,000 beneficiaries among the 133,000 people who have returned to
Tikrit. It is estimated that the previous population of Tikrit was 200,000. On
24 August, a cash-for-work project that through a UNDP partnership with local
non-governmental organizations employs 200 persons daily for public infrastructure

14/18

15-17917

S/2015/819

rehabilitation was begun. The United Nations Office for Project Services continued
the operation of the Information Centre, an inter-agency initiative funded by
UNHCR, WFP and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the
Secretariat. More than 850 displaced persons accessed the Information Centre to
receive information and advice on accessing humanitarian services.
66. FAO assisted 4,000 Syrian refugee households in Dohuk and Erbil with food
for livestock. UNFPA supported seven primary health-care facilities in refugee
camps, which assisted in 1,107 births. UNICEF leveraged specific support to cover
the salaries of Syrian refugee teachers and UNESCO provided secondary education
for 4,500 refugees. WFP assisted some 50,000 refugees per month with in-kind and
voucher support, following a comprehensive food security and vulnerability
assessment conducted in July. WHO ensured uninterrupted provision of medicine
and medical supplies in the camps and host communities.
67. From mid-September, UNESCO, together with the Ministry of Education,
began preparations for the establishment of the Iraqi National Curriculum Centre.
UNESCO also continued to provide technical assistance and capacity-building for
the conservation and management of cultural heritage in Iraq. Under the capacitybuilding programme of the Iraq-European Union-IOM Jointly Run Advanced
Assisted Migration Initiative, 1,063 officials were trained on the integration of
displaced population, the reintegration of returnees, land and property dispute
resolution and border management systems to combat irregular migration, and
10 assessments on labour migration and combating trafficking in persons were
conducted. The IOM community policing project facilitated discussions and created
training curriculums for police.

F.

Security and operational issues
68. Despite continued interest, the United Nations has yet to conclude its status of
mission agreement for UNAMI. The absence of such an agreement continues to
hamper the effectiveness of United Nations operations. Notwithstanding the volatile
security environment in Iraq, United Nations operations are ongoing. One locally
recruited UNHCR staff member abducted on 26 September was released on
3 October as a result of the efforts of the Iraqi security forces. Regrettably, no
progress has been made regarding the UNAMI staff member abducted on 26 April,
whose whereabouts remain unknown. I strongly urge the Government of Iraq to
undertake every effort to secure his release.
69. During the reporting period, UNAMI continued to support the activities of the
United Nations country team on a cost-reimbursable basis and the building of new
accommodation to increase the amount of living space. To address growing
passenger traffic between Baghdad and other hubs, especially Erbil, the Mission
added a 19-seater turbo prop aircraft to its fleet.
70. The Government of Iraq is continuously reviewing the security arrangements
in Baghdad, including those relating to the area known as the Green Zone. UNAMI
is monitoring the developments and maintains close contact with the relevant
authorities for ensuring that the safety and security of its personnel, premises and
operations will not be negatively affected by the changes implemented.

15-17917

15/18

S/2015/819

G.

Implementation of the recommendations of the strategic
assessment mission
71. In its resolution 2233 (2015), the Council requested that I report in further
detail on my recommendations to revise and prioritize the tasks of UNAMI. The
Mission has commenced a process towards implementing the priority activities in
full consultation with the Government of Iraq and in response to its needs and the
evolving situation in the country. I met with Prime Minister al-Abadi in New York
on 30 September and discussed, inter alia, how the United Nations could support his
reform agenda, including in the field of anti-corruption. We also agreed that the
Government of Iraq would include the Sustainable Development Goals in its
economic and environmental policies with the support of the United Nations and the
United Nations country team. Similarly, we agreed that the United Nations and the
Government of Iraq would cooperate on the development and implementation of the
United Nations plan of action on countering violent extremism.
72. In addition, my Special Representative and his deputies engaged with the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ibrahim al-Jaafari, and other high officials of the State.
The delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need continues to be a challenge,
given the acute financial constraints. The United Nations humanitarian system
continues its efforts to obtain the necessary support for urgent humanitarian actions.
73. My Special Representative has redoubled efforts to promote political dialogue
through a series of initiatives aimed at national reconciliation. In addition, given the
urgent need for greater mine action in Iraq, UNAMI has facilitated the work of the
United Nations Mine Action Service. Internal assessments have also been
undertaken to determine the areas in which rule of law assistance could be provided.
Furthermore, in order to enhance the overall effectiveness of such activities through
the collective effort of the United Nations presence in Iraq, the process of
articulating an integrated strategic framework has commenced. This process is
aimed at better situating the political, humanitarian, human rights and
developmental objectives and activities of UNAMI and the United Nations country
team, guided by a common strategic vision for Iraq anchored on an updated
situational analysis, in support of the Iraqi people and their desire for peace. Also,
the existing United Nations Development Assistance Framework will be revisited in
line with the evolving priorities of Iraq and the United Nations system, informed by
Security Council resolution 2233 (2015).

IV. Observations
74. Amidst an unstable security environment in an Iraq increasingly fraught with
economic, social and other structural challenges, the Iraqi people have peacefully
made their voices heard and called upon the Government to improve State
performance, governance and counter-corruption. Reforms that eliminate
corruption, streamline State institutions, bring much-needed expertise to the
Government and improve the delivery of services to the people of Iraq constitute
important steps to reinforce trust and confidence in the Government and the future
perspectives of Iraq and its people, with a positive impact towards strengthening
national unity and accelerating reconciliation. It is essential that the Government
capitalize on this opportunity and popular goodwill to implement meaningful

16/18

15-17917

S/2015/819

reforms. I therefore welcome the endorsement by the Council of Representatives of
these reforms and underscore that the path towards reforms in Iraq requires broad
political cooperation and consultations. Moreover, the Government must continue to
enable the Iraqi people to peacefully raise their voices to shape their future. To that
end, the Government of Iraq must do its utmost to ensure that the right of citizens to
freedom of expression and assembly is fully respected and protected.
75. It is vital that the Government of Iraq continue its fight against ISIL, for which
it needs increased and more effective support from countries in the region and the
broader international community, above all the international anti-ISIL coalition.
76. At the same time, the Government, political forces and civil society of Iraq
should not lose sight of the need to proceed with national reconciliation towards an
historic settlement. The Government’s reforms must therefore be accompanied by
continued efforts to promote an inclusive Iraqi political system and to counter
radical ideology. I urge the political leadership of Iraq and community and religious
leaders to work closely to align their efforts in that regard. I also urge political blocs
to reach agreement as soon as possible on legislation that will support the national
reconciliation process and Iraq’s political leadership to sustain its efforts to
strengthen support for the fight against terrorism.
77. It is vital that the political leadership of Iraq remain unified to address the
many challenges facing the country. I therefore urge political blocs in the Kurdistan
region of Iraq to reach, without further delay, a compromise on the presidency of the
Kurdistan Regional Government. I further reiterate my call upon Baghdad and Erbil
to remain committed to negotiations in an effort to reach soon a mutual understanding
on their joint agreement on energy exports and revenue-sharing, as well as a
comprehensive, fair and constitutional solution to all other outstanding issues.
78. I condemn in the strongest possible terms the ongoing killing, kidnapping,
rape and torture of Iraqis by ISIL, as well as its recruitment and use of children and
systematic destruction of irreplaceable cultural heritage. I remain appalled by the
ongoing targeting, by ISIL, of minority communities and those opposed to its
ideology, including the murder of election candidates and journalists. I urge the
Government of Iraq to do its utmost to bring those responsible to justice. I also
remind all parties engaged in the fight against ISIL that military operations must be
conducted with the utmost care to avoid civilian casualties and the violation of the
rights of civilians, in full respect for international law, including fundamental
human rights and humanitarian law. I further underscore the need for all relevant
parties in the region, while implementing counter-terrorism, peacebuilding and
conflict resolution activities, to take into account the protection of women and girls
at risk of sexual violence.
79. Conflict in Iraq continues unabated, causing mass internal displacement. Iraq
now has the third highest population of internally displaced persons in the world,
with 3.2 million people having been displaced since January 2014. The recent
arrival in Europe of tens of thousands of Iraqi refugees from across the region
confirms the dire humanitarian conditions that millions of Iraqis now face.
Hundreds of thousands could follow unless more is done to alleviate the suffering of
the more than 8 million Iraqis who need our help, including internally displaced
persons. Mindful of the forthcoming winter, a rapid investment to improve
conditions in the camps and in the communities generously hosting displaced
families regardless of their ethnicity and faith would provide an effective alternative

15-17917

17/18

S/2015/819

to what otherwise could result in a continuous outflow of Iraqis. With the conflict
intensifying, an additional 1.4 million people may need lifesaving assistance before
the end of 2015. However, humanitarian activities in Iraq continue to be severely
underfunded. Of the $498 million requested under the United Nations humanitarian
response plan for Iraq launched in June for the second half of 2015, only 34 per cent
has been funded to date. I therefore appeal to the regional and international partners
of Iraq to urgently contribute to the United Nations humanitarian response plan.
80. The stabilization and rehabilitation of liberated areas must remain a priority
for the Government of Iraq, particularly in the light of the alarming rate of Iraqis
fleeing war, persecution and poverty to seek refuge abroad. It is paramount that the
Government continue to implement measures to ensure the return of the displaced to
their places of origin by restoring and enforcing law and order in those areas and
rebuilding basic infrastructure. The United Nations remains committed to
continuing to assist through its good offices and the Funding Facility for Immediate
Stabilization.
81. Lastly, I should like to extend my thanks to my Special Representative, Ján
Kubiš, and the staff of the United Nations in Iraq for their tireless efforts in
supporting the Government of Iraq. They continue their dedicated support and
assistance to the Government of Iraq and to all the Iraqi people. I trust that
international partners, including Iraq’s neighbours, will continue to support my
Special Representative in the implementation of his mandate.

18/18

15-17917
