S/PV.6782

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6782nd meeting

Thursday, 7 June 2012, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wang Min . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Quintana
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Berger
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Ahmad
Mr. Madureira
Mr. Karev
Mr. Tladi
Mr. Afande
Mr. McKell
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 23 May 2012 from the President of the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991 addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2012/354)

12-36297 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1236297*

S/PV.6782

Letter dated 22 May 2012 from the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
1994 and 31 December 1994, addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2012/349)

2

12-36297

S/PV.6782

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory
of Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and
31 December 1994
Letter dated 23 May 2012 from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991 addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2012/354)
Letter dated 22 May 2012 from the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible
for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December
1994, addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2012/349)
The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Croatia, Rwanda and Serbia to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Judge Theodor Meron, President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia; Judge Vagn Joensen, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda; Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan

Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
documents S/2012/354 and S/2012/349, which contain,
respectively, a letter dated 23 May 2012 from the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, and a letter dated 22 May 2012 from
the President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.
I now give the floor to Judge Meron.
Judge Meron: It is an honour for me to appear
before the Security Council today to address the
Tribunal’s progress in completing its mandate as set
forth in the written report (see S/2012/354) recently
submitted to the Council.
I am pleased to report that the Tribunal has made
great strides in the implementation of the completion
strategy and in facilitating a smooth transition to
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. Reforms have been implemented in a number
of areas and have already positively impacted the pace
of our work, without sacrificing due process.
At the same time, the Tribunal still faces difficult
challenges, particularly with regard to staff attrition.
Valuable and long-serving employees continue to depart
for more secure employment opportunities. In addition,
our preparations for the transition to the Residual
Mechanism have called for the resolution of a multitude
of novel practical and legal questions.
As explained in my report submitted on 23 May,
most of the Tribunal’s ongoing trials are forecast to end
soon. Of the eight trials currently in progress, five are
expected to be completed by December 2012. However,
other trials, including those that involve the recently
arrested accused, namely, Karadžić, Mladić, and
Hadžić, will take longer to complete. It is anticipated
that the trials of Mladić and Hadžić may continue past
the indicated completion date of December 2014. The
Council may rest assured that the benches hearing those
cases continue to focus on innovative ways to minimize
potential delays while fully protecting the rights of the
accused.
In that respect, I note that due to efficiency measures
adopted in pre-trial proceedings, the Mladić case

12-362973

S/PV.6782

commenced on 16 May 2012, which is six months before
the anticipated start date forecast in last November’s
report (see S/2011/473) to the Council. While there has
been a short adjournment due to disclosure failures, that
delay is not likely to significantly impede the progress
of the case.
The Hadžić case is due to commence in October
2012, which is three months ahead of the anticipated
start date previously reported. During my last
presentation (see S/PV.6678) to the Council, I advocated
the reassignment of contempt cases to ad litem judges.
That reform, aimed at relieving the burden falling on
our permanent trial judges, some of whom were forced
to balance up to eight contempt cases alongside two
substantive cases, greatly helped us in moving those
substantive cases along. I would like to express my great
appreciation to the Council for supporting that reform. I
am pleased to report that the reassignment of contempt
cases has been one of the factors that have allowed cases
such as Hadžić to be trial-ready earlier than previously
anticipated.
The Tribunal’s Appeals Chamber is also making
great progress towards the completion of the cases on its
docket. For example, due to the adoption of innovative
measures, the hearing in the Gotovina and Markač case
was held more than nine months earlier than previously
forecast. Likewise, preparations in the Perišić appeal are
advancing very rapidly. While great strides have been
made in those cases, the complexity of issues involved
in one multi-accused case, coupled with translation and
staffing issues, has caused that case to suffer delays.
The bench in that case is taking all possible measures to
minimize further delays. With respect to future potential
appeals, it is anticipated that any appeals in the cases
of the lately arrested accused — Karadžić, Mladić, and
Hadžić — will fall under the competence of the Residual
Mechanism.
I would like to draw the particular attention of the
Security Council to the cases of Tolimir and Prlić et al,
in which trial judgements are expected by the end of this
year, and to the Šešelj case, in which a trial judgement is
now expected by March 2013. As members may recall,
during my last presentation to the Security Council,
I reported on measures I had adopted to reduce the
time required for translation in these cases by 50 per
cent. Those measures are still in place, but unforeseen
delays in the trials themselves have delayed the relevant
trial judgements. As a result, depending on when the
trial judgements are delivered and on the procedural

4

postures adopted by different parties, it is possible that
any appeals in some or all of those three cases will fall
within the jurisdiction of the Residual Mechanism, even
though the relevant translation times have been reduced
dramatically. If, however, appeals in those cases are
filed before the Appeals Chamber of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
based on current forecasts, that would lead the ICTY
Appeals Chamber and the Appeals Chamber of the
Residual Mechanism to operate in tandem until 2016.
I am frequently asked about the health of one
detainee, Mr. Vojislav Šešelj. I would underscore that
Mr. Šešelj, like all detainees, is entitled to and receives
the highest standard of medical care in the Netherlands.
I personally take great interest in ensuring that all
detainees receive the best medical care possible. While
medical information on individual detainees must of
course be, and remain, confidential, I can inform the
Council of my confidence that all possible measures are
being taken to ensure Mr. Šešelj’s health.
While the factors leading to delays are often beyond
my control, I can also assure Council members that I am
taking all possible measures consistent with principles
of due process and judicial independence to ensure
the completion of those cases, including the necessary
translations, as soon as possible.
Another reform that has benefited the Tribunal
during the reporting period is the waiver of the
prohibition on the direct hiring of interns maintained
by the Office for Human Resources Management of
the United Nations. The lifting of that prohibition has
already allowed the Tribunal to take steps to mitigate
the effects of staff departures in particular cases. While
the Tribunal is extremely grateful for the support
expressed for that reform during my previous visit to
the Council, I must emphasize that that measure is not a
panacea. Highly experienced and valued staff members
continue to leave the Tribunal in increasing numbers.
The Tribunal has made little progress in securing
support for the different staff retention measures that
it has presented to the United Nations over more than
half a decade. As set forth in my report, delays in
several ongoing cases can be directly attributed to staff
attrition. Given that unfortunate reality, the Tribunal can
only strive to ensure that staff departures do not unduly
impact the Tribunal’s completion strategy, and that they
do not place too onerous a burden on the remaining staff,
whose extraordinary commitment, diligence and talents
are fundamental to the Tribunal’s continuing success.

12-36297

S/PV.6782

I shall now turn to the Tribunal’s progress in
preparing for the transition to the Residual Mechanism.
I am very pleased to report to the Council that the
transition is proceeding smoothly, thanks in great part
to the Registrar of the Residual Mechanism and the
ICTY and to the Registrar of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). In accordance with
resolution 1966 (2010), the Residual Mechanism will
commence operations on 1 July with the opening of the
Arusha branch of the Mechanism.
In anticipation of that milestone, we have taken
a number of important steps, including swearing in
all judges. We have also circulated the draft rules
of procedure and evidence to the judges for their
consideration. I have every expectation that the rules
will be adopted without delay. Thanks to the constructive
cooperation of my colleagues, therefore, we have been
able to complete the swearing in of judges. We hope
that the rules will be adopted expeditiously. I note that
by deploying innovative processes to complete those
tasks, we have conserved United Nations resources
to the maximum extent possible. We have also been
advertising vacancies in order to recruit the necessary
staff. I wish to express my appreciation to the Office
of Human Resources Management for authorizing
the Registrar of the Residual Mechanism to transfer a
number of staff from the Tribunal and from the ICTR
to the Mechanism via a transparent recruitment process
that avoids the delays sometimes associated with the
Inspira recruitment system of the United Nations.
In early May, the first Coordination Council
meeting of the principals of the Residual Mechanism
was convened in Arusha, followed by a first ever joint
Coordination Council meeting between the principals of
the Mechanism and the principals of the ICTR. Those
meetings enabled us to reach a number of vital decisions
related to the orderly transfer of ICTR functions to the
Mechanism, such as the monitoring of cases referred to
national jurisdictions.
Thanks to those preparations, on 1 July the Residual
Mechanism will be ready to assume competence over
all judicial and prosecutorial functions identified in
resolution 1966 (2010) in relation to the ICTR, including
the protection of victims and witnesses, the tracking
of fugitives, the enforcement of sentences, contempt
proceedings, and the monitoring of rule ll bis transfers.
In addition, as Council members are aware, the
Residual Mechanism may soon be called upon to exercise

jurisdiction over the appeals, if any, in up to three ICTR
cases in which trial proceedings were recently delayed.
Appeals in those cases, originally budgeted for by the
ICTR, will require the assignment of an appeals bench
of Residual Mechanism judges and the support of legal
and administrative staff. They will therefore have
financial consequences for the Residual Mechanism not
previously foreseen. It is now understood that certain
other judicial activities provided for in the budget of the
Residual Mechanism will not occur. The funds budgeted
for those activities can therefore be used to support the
appeals, if any, in the ICTR cases. Nevertheless, the
overall cost to the United Nations will be greater than
formerly envisaged.
Finally, in accordance with resolution 1966 (2010),
the Tribunal continues to work with the countries of
the former Yugoslavia to facilitate the establishment
of information centres in the region. During the
reporting period, Croatia advised the Tribunal of its
commitment to the establishment of such a centre and
its identification of a building for that purpose. The
Bosnian and Croat members of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina have also recently indicated their
support for the establishment of information centres
in Sarajevo. The Tribunal is currently collaborating
with partner organizations, including the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute and
the Government of Switzerland in moving the project
to the next stage. The Tribunal is still awaiting word
from the Government of Serbia as to whether it wishes
to proceed with the establishment of information centres
on its territory.
The reporting period has been one of great
productivity on the part of the Tribunal, leading to
substantial progress towards the completion of its
mandate. That positive development is largely thanks to
the exceptional efforts of the Tribunal’s judges and staff
and to the implementation of management reforms. I
would emphasize once more the great challenges related
to the Residual Mechanism and the stellar work of all
those involved in facilitating a seamless transition to,
and smooth commencement of, the Mechanism. They
should be congratulated for their dedication.
By establishing the Residual Mechanism, the
Council has helped to guarantee that the closure of
the two pioneering ad hoc tribunals does not open the
way for impunity to reign once more, whether for those
whose trials or appeals before the ICTY and the ICTR

12-362975

S/PV.6782

will not have been completed or for those remaining
fugitives indicted by the ICTR who must still be brought
to justice. With the Residual Mechanism, the Council
has also helped to ensure that the rights of victims,
witnesses, persons whose cases have been referred to
national jurisdictions and persons tried or convicted by
the Tribunal and the ICTR will remain both respected and
protected, even after the two original ad hoc tribunals
cease to function. Furthermore, in creating the Residual
Mechanism, the Council has devised a means to protect
and, wherever possible, share the unprecedented body
of jurisprudence, evidence and other historic records
of the ICTY and the ICTR for generations to come. In
short, the success of the Residual Mechanism is not
simply important for the sake of that institution; the
Mechanism’s effectiveness is also crucial to safeguarding
the Tribunal’s own invaluable legacy.
On behalf of the Tribunal, I thank the Council for
its continuing support and for its commitment to making
sure that the very best traditions of international criminal
justice — which the Tribunal has helped to define for
nearly two decades — live on.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Judge
Meron for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Joensen.
Judge Joensen: I would like to begin by
congratulating the Permanent Representative of China,
the Council member which holds the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June. I wish you, Sir,
all the best for a successful tour of duty.
It is a great honour for me to address the members
of the Security Council as the new President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and to present the Council with the current update
on our completion strategy. I would like to express
the appreciation of the entire Tribunal to all of the
Governments of the Security Council for their continued
support as we draw ever closer to the completion of our
work. I would also like to congratulate the Permanent
Representative of Council member Guatemala, who has
taken over as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
I am happy to report to the Council that since the
last report (see S/2011/731) the Tribunal has undergone
a significant shift with respect to both judicial and
administrative activities. As we near the completion of
all trial work, judicial and legal activities have become

6

more focused on requests for referral of cases to Rwanda,
and administrative energies are increasingly spent on
downsizing and providing the support necessary for the
opening of the Arusha branch of the Residual Mechanism
next month. However, none of that has taken away from
the core of our work, which is to complete all trial and
appellate proceedings in a fair and expeditious manner.
In December 2011, in line with projections since
2010, the final multi-accused trial judgement was
delivered in the Karemera et al. case, marking the most
expeditious judgement delivery in a multi-accused case
and showing that efforts to improve efficiency in recent
years have been effective in many cases. During that
same month, the Appeals Chamber upheld the decision
to refer the first ICTR case to Rwanda for trial. After
finalizing the arrangements for monitoring, Jean
Uwinkindi was transferred to Rwanda in April 2012. A
further three cases of fugitive accused have already been
referred to Rwanda. The Prosecutor has also requested,
or will request, three more referrals of fugitive cases,
all of which will be disposed of by next month. The
final three fugitives, for whom evidence preservation
will be concluded this month, are slated for trial by the
Residual Mechanism upon arrest. The Prosecutor will
provide further details on fugitive referral applications
and tracking during his presentation.
Five trial judgements were projected for delivery
during this six-month reporting period. Of the five,
all but one will have been delivered by the end of this
month. Owing to unforeseeable fair-trial requirements,
including the necessary continuation of the evidence
phase of the trial, judgement in the trial of Augustin
Ngirabatware — the final remaining ongoing ICTR
trial — is now expected by the end of 2012, and closing
arguments are scheduled for next month. Additionally,
just yesterday the Trial Chambers granted the application
for referral to Rwanda of the case against Bernard
Munyagishari, the final accused in pre-trial custody at
the Tribunal. I must note that the accused may appeal
that decision. If that happens, we hope to have a decision
from the Appeals Chamber in the next several months.
Therefore, based upon the current status of cases,
in stark contrast to the report delivered only six months
ago, I am happy to bring news that the Tribunal now
has a vastly reduced judicial workload. Due in no small
part to the continued hard work of our staff, nearly all
trial work is complete. Only one trial judgement in an
ongoing case will remain to be delivered in the second

12-36297

S/PV.6782

half of 2012. All appeal judgements remain on track to
be completed by the end of 2014.
It must be noted, however, that pursuant to the
transitional arrangements the responsibility for two
pending contempt of court/false testimony cases where
indictments have already been confirmed remains with
the ICTR. In the event of arrests in those cases, or if
the Munyagishari referral is not upheld on appeal, the
anticipated completion of trial work may need to be
pushed back.
I would also like to take this opportunity to provide
the members of the Council with an update on the status
of the three cases on which there remains some question
as to whether the appeals, if any, would be filed with
the ICTR or the Residual Mechanism. For the first two
cases, there is a possibility for the appeals to remain with
the ICTR. The third will certainly go to the Residual
Mechanism.
In the Nizeyimana case the judgements will be
delivered later this month; in the Nzabonimana case,
oral judgement was rendered last week and the written
judgement will be filed later this month. Whether the
ICTR or the Residual Mechanism hears the appeal in
those two cases will depend upon the dates that the
notice of appeal in each case is filed.
The parties have 30 days from the filing of the written
judgement to file their notice of appeal, if any. In both
cases notices of appeal could be filed prior to 30 June,
causing them to be heard by the ICTR. However, in both
cases the time limits for filing allow the parties to file
after 1 July, the date from which cases go to the Residual
Mechanism. For the third case, Ngirabatware, it is now
clear that the trial judgement will not be delivered before
30 June, so the appeal will certainly go to the Residual
Mechanism.
Next, I turn to an important recent request that I have
sent to the Security Council and the General Assembly
seeking the extension of the terms of office for the trial
judges on the Ngirabatware case and the President, to
correspond with our remaining work. The terms of the
judges on the Ngirabatware bench are required to be
extended until December 2012, or until judgement is
rendered, if earlier. My term is required to be extended
until December 2014, in line with the projected
completion of all judicial work. Those extensions are
critical to ensuring that we meet our remaining goals for
the completion of our mandate.

Next, I turn to staffing. In continuation of a recurring
theme in recent reports, staff recruitment, retention and
separation persist as ongoing challenges as we progress
in the completion process. Where recruitment is required,
the Tribunal has difficulty attracting suitably qualified
candidates, given the limited contractual security that we
as a closing institution can provide. The ICTR continues
to experience difficulties in retaining experienced staff,
who lack financial incentives to stay with the Tribunal to
complete their work, have few possibilities for upward
mobility and have reduced contractual security. They
have therefore been leaving the Tribunal to accept offers
of employment elsewhere, either within or outside the
United Nations system. Although we continue to work
within the resources available and to make significant
progress, staff retention always has the potential to
adversely impact the successful and timely completion
of our work.
The downsizing process that began in 20082009 continues with the proposed abolition of 212
posts during the 2012-2013 biennium. That will mean
an overall reduction of more than one third of the
authorized 2010-2011 levels. A fair and transparent
decision-making process concerning staff retention
during the downsizing process puts additional strain on
programme managers, who are thus required to perform
retention exercises in addition to their regular workload.
Moreover, their workload has already increased due to
restructuring plans, which require all retained staff to
perform an increasing range of functions.
We must express our gratitude to the Department of
Management, especially the Office of the Controller and
the Office of Human Resources Management, which
continue to provide the Tribunal with support to explore
and adopt additional measures and a common strategy
to address the challenges of downsizing and separation
of staff. That includes the implementation of the
previously planned establishment of the outplacement
office to assist Tribunal staff who have applied for
various positions within the United Nations system.
I now turn to the issue of relocating persons who
have been acquitted by the Tribunal. Both of my
predecessors in Office have brought to the Council’s
attention the persistent problem of finding countries
to receive acquitted persons. With the near completion
of all trial activities, I see it as a cornerstone of my
presidency to enhance my role in those efforts. In that
regard, I will be increasingly applying my energies to
persuading Member States to assist with relocation. I

12-362977

S/PV.6782

have already begun my work in that regard by lobbying
for our acquitted persons. I continue to do so today by
calling upon all members of the Council to do their part
in helping to ensure that we uphold the fundamental
right of freedom to live one’s life after being acquitted
by an international tribunal.

The Tribunals have finalized their coordinated
efforts and have submitted a draft Secretary-General’s
bulletin on information sensitivity, classification,
handling and access of the records of the Tribunals and
the Mechanism. We look forward to the finalization and
release of that important document.

I will now provide the Council with an update on the
role that the ICTR is playing in the preparations for the
Arusha branch of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. The Arusha branch of the
Mechanism will open its doors in less than one month.
From 1 July, many judicial and prosecutorial functions
will begin to be officially handed over to the Mechanism,
along with responsibilities for the Tribunal’s archives,
the protection of witnesses and numerous other functions
currently handled by the Tribunal.

As the remaining days of the ICTR become fewer
and the Residual Mechanism begins to take shape, we
will continue to ensure that knowledge gained and
lessons learned are put to good use, both for creating the
institution charged with continuing the residual functions
of the Tribunal and for sharing best practices for the
closure of international legal institutions. Moreover, our
efforts at capacity-building and education for the region
will remain strong, so that the Tribunal’s impact will not
only be one of challenging impunity, but also of helping
to improve the means for dispensing justice for an entire
region.

I am very pleased with the status of efforts to
ensure a seamless transition. I would like to thank
the President, the Registrar and the Prosecutor of the
Residual Mechanism for their tireless work in that
regard. It has been, and will continue to be, my honour
and privilege to do everything in my power to assist
them in that endeavour.
I would also like to express my deep gratitude to
the ICTR Registrar for all that he and his staff have
done to assist with making practical arrangements for
the coordinated provision of administrative and other
services to the Mechanism, in line with resolution 1966
(2010). Since January, the ICTR has been working on
the provision of a fully functional office space for the
Mechanism within the Tribunal’s current premises. The
Tribunal has also supported the Mechanism in staff
recruitment and financial and budgetary matters and
assisted the Mechanism in establishing its relations
with the host country. The ICTR Registry continues
to share information and know-how in the areas of
witness support and protection and the enforcement of
sentences, in order to facilitate the smooth transfer of
those functions to the Mechanism.
Efforts to prepare the Tribunal’s archives and
records for transfer to the Mechanism are well under
way, and coordinated efforts will increasingly continue
in the coming months. Wherever possible, we have
harmonized our draft retention schedules with those
of the ICTY and we have finalized guidelines on the
appraisal and disposal of records and the preparation of
records for transfer to the archives.

8

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Judge
Joensen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the Security
Council on the progress towards the completion of our
mandate.
A series of trials at the International Criminal
Tribunal for the formar Yugoslavia (ICTY) is now
approaching completion. By October, when the Hadžić
trial will begin, only three cases will remain at the
trial-evidence presentation stage. At the same time,
we are working diligently to prepare for the intense
appellate caseload anticipated. Five trial judgements,
involving 14 defendants, are expected by the end of this
year.
In this reporting period, further progress has been
reached in two of our most significant cases, namely,
Mladić and Karadžić. The Mladić trial commenced on
16 May with the Prosecution’s opening statement. That
long-awaited development took place less than one year
from the date of Mladić’s arrest. After Mladić’s 16-year
run from justice, the start of his trial was a significant
day for the Tribunal and for the many victims of the
alleged crimes.
In Karadžić, the Prosecution completed its evidence
presentation in just under the allocated 300 hours.
The Prosecution tendered more than 6,000 exhibits,
reflecting the magnitude of a case spanning crimes

12-36297

S/PV.6782

committed during the 44-month siege of Sarajevo, the
July 1995 atrocities in Srebrenica, crimes across 19
municipalities in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the taking
of United Nations personnel hostage. Coordinating
that volume of evidence, ensuring a seamless flow of
witnesses and keeping to the strict deadlines imposed by
the Trial Chamber was an onerous task. Hearings will be
held in June for the Trial Chamber to determine whether
Karadžić has a case to answer. If so, Karadžić will begin
presenting his case in October, allowing him a fair time
period to finalize preparations for his defence case.
As we approach the completion of our mandate, it
is increasingly important to use our resources flexibly.
We have overcome a period without regular budget
funds for the Mladić and Hadžić cases, unprecedented
demands on our document search and review capabilities
for defence disclosure purposes, and high rates of staff
departures at critical times. The attrition of staff that
had been forecast has become a reality, and there is
no mechanism in place for reversing the problem. We
cannot expect our staff to remain without appropriate
acknowledgement of their essential role in the Tribunal’s
work. Staff with knowledge of ICTY cases and relevant
professional skills will be needed beyond 2014, through
the completion of the last ICTY appeals before the
Residual Mechanism. Strategies must be put in place to
promote their continued availability.
The day-to-day cooperation provided by States of
the former Yugoslavia to the Office of the Prosecutor
fully meets expectations. With no more ICTY fugitives,
we can now largely focus on routine requests concerning
documents and witnesses in ongoing cases. Given our
busy case schedule in the coming months, we will
continue to rely on prompt and effective responses
to our requests from Croatia, Serbia, and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We look forward to the continuation of
our productive working relationships with regional
counterparts in the next reporting period.
There are two exceptions to the generally
satisfactory level of cooperation with States of the
former Yugoslavia, which are impacting on Tribunal
processes and on its legacy. First, we remain concerned
by Serbia’s lack of progress towards investigating and
prosecuting individuals who assisted ICTY fugitives
while at large. We raised that issue repeatedly over the
past few years, but we see little evidence of action. We
expect answers to our questions as to how fugitives like
Karadžić and Mladić were able to evade justice for so
many years, and whether State officials were involved

in aiding them. During my visit to Belgrade on 22 May,
the Serbian prosecutor for war crimes committed
to conducting more in-depth investigations into the
fugitive networks in the coming months. We await the
results as a matter of priority.
The second problematic area in terms of cooperation
with my Office is Bosnia and Herzegovina’s slow
progress in processing investigative materials
transferred as part of our completion strategy. Nine of
the 13 files transferred by my Office to the Office of the
Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina are still pending,
and we have not seen concrete evidence of progress
since 2008. Bosnia and Herzegovina must take steps to
resolve that situation.
The successful completion of the ICTY mandate
depends upon a successful transition from our work
to national war crimes prosecutions in the countries
of the former Yugoslavia. We have adopted strategies
for channelling our expertise in Balkans war crimes
prosecutions to national authorities. We have integrated
into our Office liaison prosecutors from Serbia, Croatia,
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, who serve as an interface
between international and national justice. We remain
grateful to the European Union for its continued
financial support for those programmes.
In 2011 alone, liaison prosecutors accessed more
than 150,000 pages from our evidence collection for
use in national proceedings. Regional requests for
assistance are also growing in number. We expect that
trend to continue beyond the closure of the ICTY. The
Residual Mechanism will need strategies to facilitate
those requests. We are working with our prosecution
counterparts at the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda to put effective Residual Mechanism structures
in place for responding to requests from national
authorities.
Even so, we see serious problems in the
implementation of national war crimes strategies,
particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where
thousands of serious crimes still require follow-up.
Unless it is made a top priority and more resources are
allocated, the national war crimes strategy in Bosnia
and Herzegovina will fail.
The successful implementation of national war
crimes strategies also depends on greater regional
cooperation, particularly between Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The proposed war crimes cooperation
protocol between prosecution offices in those two

12-362979

S/PV.6782

countries has still not been signed, almost one year after
the initial target date for signature. During my meetings
in Sarajevo in May, I received no satisfactory explanation
for the delay. Political support from all sides in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is needed to resolve the problem.
Finally, I want to say that recent comments made
by the newly elected President of Serbia, who denied
that genocide occurred in Srebrenica in July 1995, are
not acceptable. His statements contravene the legal and
factual findings of the ICTY and the International Court
of Justice. Such rhetoric is a backwards step, aggravates
the victims’ suffering and jeopardizes the fragile process
of reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Prosecutor
Brammertz for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jallow.
Mr. Jallow: The implementation of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) completion
strategy has gained significant momentum in the past
six months. The evidentiary phase of the cases of all
the current detainees have been concluded, pending two
judgements to be delivered in the course of this year.
My Office has also concluded the updating of the
case files of all fugitives, in respect of both pleadings
and evidence. We have also concluded the rule 71 bis
evidence preservation proceedings in respect of two of
the three cases concerned, that is, Kabuga and Mpiranya,
and are now scheduled to conclude in respect of the
third case — Bizimana — by the end of this month. That
exercise will greatly facilitate any trial work that will be
undertaken by the Residual Mechanism.
Litigation over the referral of cases has been a
significant aspect of the work of my Office during the
same period. We were successful in obtaining the referral
of five cases of indictees — two of them detainees and
the rest fugitives — to Rwanda for trial under rule 11
bis. The decisions on two of those cases or applications
are now pending, and I am planning to file one more
application — which would be the last one — shortly.
I also hope that by the end of 2012 all the cases of the
indictees that were earmarked for referral to national
jurisdictions will have been transferred to Rwanda,
leaving only the cases of the top three fugitives, that is,
Kabuga, Mpiranya and Bizimana, to be taken up; those
have been reserved for trial by the Residual Mechanism.
The success of the referral strategy to date has
been largely due to the commitment on the part of the

10

Government of Rwanda, with the support of the ICTR
and the development partners, to undertake extensive
law reform and capacity-building measures designed
to ensure a fair and effective trial within the Rwandan
legal system. I would like to commend the Government
of Rwanda for its cooperation in that respect and the
Governments of Canada, the United States and the
European Union for their support in the implementation
of those measures, whose purpose is to strengthen the
Rwandan legal system.
The referral strategy has not only brought dividends
to the Rwandan legal system; it has also made timely
and proper completion of the ICTR mandate a
probability. Equally important is the fact that the referral
decisions of the ICTR have facilitated the deportation or
extradition to Rwanda of suspected génocidaires from
national jurisdictions where prosecution or extradition
has hitherto been beset with technical difficulties. In
that way, the gaps in the struggle against impunity have
been closed.
The cases of Bucyibaruta and Munyeshyaka,
referred by the ICTR to France for prosecution,
continue to progress before the investigating judges
in that jurisdiction. The prosecution and management
of appeals have also been of paramount importance,
as the workload of the Office of the Prosecutor for
the biennium increased substantially. Following the
delivery of judgement in one multi-accused trial and in
one single-accused trial, namely, Karemera et al. and
Ndahimana, respectively, my Office has been litigating
33 appeals from final judgements and the sentences
returned in 12 cases. It has also been actively making
advance preparations for six potential additional appeals.
We anticipate that my Office will conclude its appellate
workload, including any possible appeals from the two
pending trial chamber judgements, well within the time
frame of the completion strategy.
If the pending referral applications are also
successful, the focus of my Office in respect of tracking
will shift to the three top-level fugitives earmarked for
trial by the Mechanism. However, we shall continue to
provide support to Rwanda for the tracking and arrest of
those fugitives whose cases have been referred to that
jurisdiction. It should be recalled that all States have an
obligation, pursuant to article 28 of the ICTR statute and
the orders of the ICTR Referral and Appeals Chambers,
to arrest such fugitives within their territories and
transfer them to Rwanda or other jurisdictions as may
be designated by the Chambers.

12-36297

S/PV.6782

Tracking of the top three continues to be a challenge,
with information at our disposal continuing to link
Kabuga with Kenya, Mpiranya with Zimbabwe and
Bizimana with various locations in the same sub-Saharan
region. It is imperative, in the interests of peace and
justice, that all States collaborate and support the ICTR
in the arrest of those fugitives and that the international
community, acting through the Security Council, bring
its influence to bear on the States that are harbouring
them. While those three cases are earmarked for trial
by the Mechanism, it may become necessary, should
the three continue to evade justice for a long time, to
consider at some stage the option of referring their
cases to the appropriate national jurisdiction for trial.
Also, given that the fugitives are suspected to be in the
East, Central and Southern African regions, my Office
is actively encouraging regional inter-State institutions
in the area to make the arrest of those fugitives a
priority within their regional efforts to strengthen the
maintenance of peace, security and justice.
In order to ensure a smooth and effective migration
of our records and archives to the Mechanism, my
Office is also currently working on the preparation and
archiving of its holdings, both in Kigali and Arusha,
and is consolidating the related archiving regimes and
security frameworks. The servicing of foreign requests
for assistance in investigations and trials has continued
as an important function over the reporting period. In
order to strengthen the efforts of Member States to
bring to trial the Rwandan suspects appearing on the
INTERPOL list, my Office has, during the reporting
period, provided assistance to 10 Member States in
respect of 44 such requests relating to the investigation
or prosecution of genocide cases within the national
jurisdictions. That assistance function will be taken
over by the Office of the Prosecutor of the Residual
Mechanism, Arusha Branch, from 1 July 2012.
With the appointment of all three principals of the
Mechanism earlier this year, efforts to establish the
Arusha Branch have moved quickly, thanks to the hard
work of its Registrar and the cooperation of both the
ICTY and the ICTR. Staff members at the respective
offices, the Tribunals and their principals have devoted
considerable time and energy to ensuring that the
Mechanism takes off as planned and functions effectively
from 1 July 2012. From that date, the Mechanism will,
we are confident, commence operations, focusing
on the tracking of fugitives, the provision of witness
management and support, the servicing of foreign

requests for assistance, preparations for possible trials
and the establishment of the Mechanism archives.
Recruitment of the core staff of the Branch is actively
under way. I expect to have a number of staff of the
Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism on board to
commence the operations by 1 July.
Meanwhile, with the declining workload of the
ICTR, we have intensified the separation of staff whose
services are no longer required. Within my Office, that
has resulted in a significant scaling down of staffing
in both Kigali and Arusha. It is no doubt a challenging
process, but one that is necessary given the impending
closure of the ICTR. We remain indebted to the staff
members, who have worked hard and over many years
to make the commitment of the United Nations and
the mandate of the ICTR to bring justice and peace to
Rwanda a reality, not only for the people of Rwanda but
for the rest of the world.
Finally, I would like to thank the Security
Council and its members, as well as His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, for my appointment as
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
a term of four years. I shall do my utmost to effectively
implement the letter and the spirit of resolution 1966
(2010) and the statute of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Jallow
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council. I request that Council members limit
their statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their
briefings with regard to the completion strategies of
their respective Tribunals. Their extensive briefings
today together with their reports (see S/2012/354 and
S/2012/349) reflect the tireless efforts undertaken by
both Tribunals to contribute to the global objective
of fighting impunity for the crimes considered most
heinous by the international community.
In particular, we would like to welcome Judge
Meron and Prosecutor Jallow, who are here in their
dual capacities, as they have spoken on behalf of both

12-3629711

S/PV.6782

the International Criminal Tribunals where they have
served and the International Residual Mechanism. We
congratulate Judge Joensen on his election as President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. We
wish all of them every success in their work.
Nineteen years after the establishment of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the
first international criminal tribunal since Nuremberg
and Tokyo, and the first established by the United
Nations, we are pleased that no indictee has escaped the
Tribunal’s justice. We also welcome the fact that this
year will see the trials of the last remaining fugitives
from the Tribunal, which is a success not only for the
Tribunal but for international criminal justice in general.
With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, we are pleased that the trials are being held
on schedule. We are concerned, however, by the fact that
nine people are still fugitives from justice. The Rwanda
Tribunal can carry out its work successfully only if it
receives effective cooperation from every State. We call
on all States, especially those of the Great Lakes region,
to step up their cooperation with the Tribunal and give
it all necessary assistance in apprehending and handing
over the remaining fugitives.
We acknowledge the considerable progress the
Tribunals have made in fulfilling their mandates.
We commend the fact that both Tribunals continue to
take every possible step to complete their proceedings
quickly while fully respecting and safeguarding due
process. On the one hand, we congratulate them on their
commitment to implementing their completion strategy
in spite of their large workload. On the other hand,
however, we are concerned about reports from both
Tribunals on their difficulties in retaining staff, which is
one of the chief obstacles to the timely implementation
of the strategy. We note that some measures have been
taken to deal with that, as indicated in paragraph 10
of annex I of the report of the Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (S/2012/354). We hope that such efforts will
continue in order to reverse the negative trend that the
Tribunals have suffered in the form of the large number
of staff members who have left in search of more stable
jobs, as well as to enable both Tribunals to fulfil their
mandates on time.
It is an honour for Guatemala to chair the Informal
Working Group on the International Tribunals. For our
part, at this critical stage, we will continue to offer the
Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism our full support.

12

As the Tribunals’ mandates draw to a close, the Residual
Mechanism will have a fundamental role to play in
ensuring that their legacy endures. We note the progress
made with the Residual Mechanism, which the Council
established under resolution 1966 (2010) and which
will begin functioning on 1 July. We are pleased with
the process under way for implementing the Residual
Mechanism and welcome the fact that both Tribunals
have been working together to ensure a gradual transition
to the Mechanism.
Finally, we believe that the Tribunals have had
an important role in strengthening the rule of law and
promoting long-term reconciliation and stability, and not
merely in the Balkans and Rwanda. Their jurisprudence
has had far-reaching effects and has been a source of
inspiration for national and international judicial bodies
everywhere, and particularly in the establishment of the
International Criminal Court. We hope that more steps
can be taken to preserve their legacies and to help pass
on the knowledge and experience they have gained to
other jurisdictions.
Mr. Kumar (India): Let me at the outset congratulate
Judge Meron on his assumption of the presidency of
the Residual Mechanism, in addition to his continuing
presidency of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I would also like to
congratulate Judge Joensen on assuming the presidency
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR). We have listened carefully to their presentations
and assessments of the work of the Tribunals. We also
appreciate the two Prosecutors’ briefings.
India welcomes the progress made by the Tribunals
in expediting their work. We are reassured by the opinion
of Judges Meron and Joensen that the preparations for
implementing the Residual Mechanism are on track, and
we have noted that the Arusha Branch of the Residual
Mechanism will begin its work on 1 July.
We are happy to see that the Council’s
recommendations, including those on hiring and
retaining qualified interns, made during the previous
reporting period (see S/PV.6678), have brought tangible
results and helped the Tribunals progress faster towards
implementing a completion strategy and launching the
Residual Mechanism.
We appreciate the fact that Judge Meron has
undertaken a variety of reforms to improve the
functioning of various sections of the Tribunal. As a
result, the trials of Mladić, Hadžić and Karadžić have

12-36297

S/PV.6782

gone forward many months ahead of their expected
schedules. Similarly, appeals in some cases have been
advanced significantly ahead of schedule. This is a very
positive sign and we congratulate Judge Meron on a
welcome development.
We are happy to note that the ICTR has completed
work at the trial level on 83 of 93 accused, while nine
remain at large. All the trials are on track and will be
completed by the end of the year.
We commend the efforts of the Prosecutors to
undertake outreach initiatives, including training aimed
at strengthening the capacity of national systems to
handle referred cases effectively, thereby preserving
the Tribunals’ legacy. We also note with satisfaction
the progress made in implementing the Residual
Mechanism. Any functional, operational or institutional
issue that may arise in the implementation of the
completion strategy or the Residual Mechanism should
be addressed by the Council, in consultation with its
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
It is critical that the Tribunals finish their work on
time. We have listened very carefully to the concerns
raised by the Presidents of the Tribunals about their
ability to keep up with their work while adhering to
the expected timelines until the close of business.
The Judges have pointed out that trials and appeals
continue to be affected by staffing shortages and the
loss of highly efficient staff members. We share their
concerns, especially on the need for retaining adequate
and experienced staff. Careful consideration should
be given to the Judges’ suggestions on how to address
those challenges. This is a practical issue that requires
pragmatic and innovative solutions. We stand ready to
work with other members of the Council to solve the
problem.
The Judges have also raised the issue of relocation
of those people who have been acquitted or have already
served their sentences. Some of them have been living
in safe houses in Arusha for the last five years. This
is an important humanitarian issue and needs careful
consideration.
We welcome the cooperation extended by all States
concerned with the Tribunals, which is vital to ensure
fulfilment of the Tribunals’ mandates as well as their
successful implementation of their completion strategy.
We appreciate Serbia’s sustained efforts in that regard
and request other States to continue to extend effective
cooperation, so that the remaining fugitives can be

located soon and surrendered to the Tribunals so as to
end impunity.
In conclusion, we believe that the two Tribunals
have admirably implemented their mandates. We believe
that the support of the Security Council is crucial at
this critical juncture in the life of the Tribunals. At the
same time, we urge both Tribunals to take all necessary
measures to keep the trial and appeal schedules on
track. That will pave the way for successful trials of the
remaining accused and a smooth implementation of an
efficient Residual Mechanism.
Mr. Berger (Germany): I would like to express
Germany’s full support for the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and for their invaluable contribution to the fight against
impunity for serious international crimes. We thank
Presidents Theodor Meron and Vagn Joensen, as well
as the ICTY and ICTR Prosecutors, Mr. Brammertz and
Mr. Jallow, for their most recent assessments and for
the efforts undertaken to ensure a smooth transition to
the International Residual Mechanism, as foreseen by
resolution 1966 (2010). I also congratulate Judge Meron
and Mr. Jallow for their respective appointments as
President and Prosecutor of the Residual Mechanism.
All 161 individuals indicted before the ICTY have
been apprehended, and we very much welcome the
anticipated conclusion of 32 of the remaining 35 trials
in 2012. At the same time, we recognize the reasons
that require the Hadžić, Mladić and Karadžić trials to
continue beyond 2012, not least so that the accused can
make fullest use of their rights to defend themselves.
Germany was extremely satisfied to see the
commencement of the Mladić trial on 16 May 2012.
Among the multiple counts of genocide, crimes against
humanity and violations of the laws or customs of war of
which both Mr. Karadžić and Mr. Mladić stand accused,
the 1995 massacre in Srebrenica will stand out forever,
both as a reminder of all the atrocities committed and
as a warning for future generations. Let me say that
I share the assessment made by the Prosecutor that
the denial of that genocide is not acceptable. We are
therefore grateful to the more than 300 witnesses in
the case against Karadžić and to the 387 witnesses the
prosecution intends to call in the Mladić case. Their
testimonies, which often add further hardship to the
losses and sufferings already endured, are indispensable
in fighting impunity, both past and present.

12-3629713

S/PV.6782

Cooperation by States continues to be of crucial
importance for the work of the Tribunals and for a
successful transition from the Tribunals to national war
crimes prosecutions. With regard to the ICTY, we note
with appreciation the prompt and adequate responses
from Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia
to the Tribunal’s requests for assistance, and we call
upon them to maintain that approach in the future. At
the same time, we note with concern the Prosecutor’s
appraisal that Serbia’s stated commitment to investigate
the networks that allowed some indicted fugitives to
evade justice for many years has produced very few
results. We are similarly concerned about the delays
encountered in the follow-up expected with regard to
investigative material transferred by the Prosecutor to
Bosnia and Herzegovina and by delays in war crimes
prosecutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would
also like to call upon the relevant authorities, notably
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, to overcome the remaining
obstacles so that the proposed protocol on the exchange
of evidence and information in war crimes between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia can be signed.
Turning to the ICTR, we welcome the progress made
towards completing all of the trial work foreseen in the
completion strategy report of 2011. Another positive
development is the first-ever transfer of an accused,
Jean Bosco Uwinkindi, to the Republic of Rwanda
for trial and the setting up of an adequate monitoring
mechanism for such cases. We commend Rwanda for
having strengthened its national legal system so as to
allow the adjudication of cases transferred from the
ICTR. Germany is confident that the newly launched
video-link facility at the Rwandan Supreme Court
in Kigali will contribute to the efficient and effective
delivery of justice.
It remains a matter of concern, however, that nine
accused and internationally sought persons still remain
at large, including the three highest ranking ones. We
understand that in a number of those cases referral
decisions have either been taken or are expected to be
taken. The apprehension of those fugitives, who have
been charged with genocide or complicity in genocide,
must nonetheless be a priority. Unfortunately, no
progress has been made in that matter since we last
discussed the issue in November. We therefore once
again call upon the international community, and in
particular concerned States in the region, to make sure
that all possible efforts are made in order to bring those
persons to justice.

14

As both the ICTY and ICTR are approaching the
transition to the International Residual Mechanism, we
note that preparations for a smooth handover are under
way, and we recognize the challenges and practical
difficulties encountered within the process. Some of
those challenges are of a particular nature, such as the
need to retain qualified staff to enable the Tribunals to
fulfil their functions until the last day. We appreciate
the measures taken to alleviate the situation, and we are
willing to look into practical proposals and steps on how
to address the issue.
We also look forward to the adoption of the Residual
Mechanism’s rules of procedure and evidence by the
judges, including a provision that ensures confidentiality
for information provided by the International Committee
of the Red Cross. Germany also looks forward to
extending its unwavering support for the ICTY and
ICTR to the Residual Mechanism as well.
Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by reiterating the United Kingdom’s continued
support for both the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). Their work
is essential in helping to tackle impunity and deliver
justice to the countless victims of atrocities in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
I would also like to express my thanks to President
Meron and President Joensen, as well as to Prosecutor
Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow. The reports (see
S/2012/349 and S/2012/354) and briefings we have
received were, once again, of the highest standard. I
congratulate President Meron and Prosecutor Jallow on
their appointments to the Residual Mechanism. Their
knowledge and expertise will be a tremendous asset as
it enters a crucial phase of its mandate, and will help
ensure a smooth and effective transition.
In respect of the ICTY, we note with appreciation
that the Serbian authorities have fully met the Tribunal’s
expectations in terms of providing trial-related
assistance. Such cooperation is essential. On the other
hand, there is no information on the various support
networks that allowed Mladić and Hadžić to evade
capture for so long. Investigating those networks is
important, and we agree with the report (see S/2012/354)
that the Serbian authorities must intensify their efforts
in that regard.
We welcome the positive trial assistance afforded
by Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. With regard to

12-36297

S/PV.6782

Croatia, we are aware that the Gotovina appeal is under
way and that a judgement is expected by the end of the
year. We hope that all sides will respect the process and
any verdict that is reached. The capture of Radovan
Stanković in January by the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina was welcome news. We do, however,
share the concern expressed in the report about delays
in processing domestic war crimes cases in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We encourage the authorities to address
those delays as a matter of urgency.
The start of the Mladić trial represents an important
milestone for the Tribunal, leaving only one trial yet
to begin, namely, that of Hadžić. The Mladić trial is a
powerful reminder that the age of impunity is over and
that those responsible for atrocities, like those that took
place in Houla in Syria, will be held accountable.
It is disappointing that judgement in the Karadžić
trial is now expected to be delivered five months later
than anticipated. While we understand the reasons
for the delay, we urge the Tribunal to do what it can
to prevent any further delays. The effective and timely
completion of trials will be increasingly important over
the coming months as the transition to the Residual
Mechanism nears.
We recognize that staff retention continues to
be an issue for both Tribunals. We are mindful of the
additional pressures that staff shortages can place on
existing members of staff. We very much welcome the
measures that have been undertaken to address the issue,
and we encourage the Tribunals to continue to prioritize
their resources as effectively as possible.
Moving on to the ICTR, we remain concerned that
nine fugitives are still at large. Apprehending those
fugitives is a priority, as justice cannot fully be done until
they are apprehended. We encourage all States Members
of the United Nations, especially Kenya and Zimbabwe,
to provide the ICTR with their full cooperation in order
to bring those fugitives to justice.
While it is unfortunate that the Ngirabatware trial
will not be completed before the commencement of the
Residual Mechanism, we are pleased to see that it is on
course to be completed soon, with the judgement to be
delivered by the end of the year. We recognize that the
ICTR has been working closely with the ICTY to ensure a
smooth transfer of activities to the Residual Mechanism.
That is essential, and we encourage both Tribunals to
continue that close cooperation in the coming months.

Mr. Tladi (South Africa): Allow me to congratulate
Mr. Hassan Boubacar Jallow, President Theodor Meron
and Mr. John Hocking on their respective appointments
as Prosecutor, President and Registrar of the Residual
Mechanism. I also wish to thank Judge Vagn Joensen and
Mr. Jallow, President and Prosecutor, respectively, of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), and
Judge Meron and Mr. Serge Brammertz, President and
Prosecutor, respectively, of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), for their
reports and presentations this morning.
As we approach the entry into force of the statute
of the Residual Mechanism on 1 July, it is important
that both the ICTY and the ICTR strengthen their
efforts towards finalizing their caseloads and ensuring
compliance with the completion strategy, as provided
for in the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
As has been noted, it is important, however, to ensure
that the need to complete the cases speedily does not
compromise due process standards.
In that respect, I wish to express my delegation’s
appreciation of the efforts made by both Tribunals,
amid immense challenges, to complete the cases on
their current dockets, while ensuring the maintenance
of due process standards. We have already observed
how the ICTY experience in referring cases to national
jurisdictions has contributed to alleviating some of the
caseload pressures. We firmly believe that referral to
domestic jurisdictions not only helps with easing the
caseload of the international Tribunals, and, in that
way, contributes to compliance with the completion
strategy, but also is important for building the capacity
of national jurisdictions in dealing with such crimes.
It is also important for ensuring that, where possible,
justice is done close to the victims of the crimes.
In our last statement (see S/PV.6678), we encouraged
the ICTR to consider making more referrals to domestic
courts with jurisdiction in the cases relevant to Rwanda,
in particular. We are pleased that several referrals
have already been made and that there are currently
applications pending for further referrals. We were also
pleased to hear this morning that referral has become
the focus of the ICTR. We continue to encourage the
ICTR to consider whether even more referrals could be
made.
While we continue to strongly support referrals
to domestic courts with the necessary jurisdiction, the
Tribunals should continue to monitor the handling of

12-3629715

S/PV.6782

such cases in order to ensure the proper administration
of justice, including adherence to human rights and due
process standards. We note with concern the challenges
cited by the Prosecutor of the ICTY in connection
with the functioning of the judiciary of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is imperative that all involved join
efforts to ensure the success of the referral system. The
success of referrals to domestic courts will ensure the
lasting legacy of both the ICTY and the ICTR.
A serious challenge facing the ICTR is, of course,
the apprehension of the remaining fugitives, as has been
noted several times this morning. We call on relevant
States Members of the United Nations to cooperate as
far as possible with the ICTR in the apprehension of
fugitives, as required by the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, as well as the Statute of the ICTR.
Both Tribunals are facing difficulties with respect
to staff retention. As they wind down their operations,
it becomes more difficult to retain staff. We, as a
delegation, stand ready to consider, within the financial
constraints of the Organization, of course, innovative
solutions that may be suggested by the ICTY and the
ICTR to deal with that challenge.
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I would like to join other
members of the Council in thanking our briefers this
morning, Judge Meron, President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge
Joensen, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), and the two Prosecutors,
Mr. Brammertz and Mr. Jallow, for their comprehensive
statements. Let me at the outset reiterate Pakistan’s
complete support for the important work of the two
Tribunals.
We note the progress in the completion strategies
of the ICTR and the ICTY during the period covered by
the latest reports (see S/2012/354 and S/2012/349). We
note that, during the past six months, the Tribunals have
continued to engage in trial and appeals proceedings, in
drafting judgements and in referring cases to domestic
jurisdictions. We appreciate that, during the reporting
period, the Tribunals continued to contribute to
procedural and evidentiary international criminal law in
a professional manner.
We also note the efforts made by the Tribunals with
regard to their work to ensure that the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals can
commence its activities on 1 July. We appreciate the
role of the Tribunals in the preparation of a joint budget

16

and the work on the rules of procedure of the Residual
Mechanism.
We recognize the difficulties in the assignment of
work to judges, in staff management and in the process
of winding down the work of the two Tribunals. The
recruitment of employees and the retention of staff
with an institutional memory of cases continue to pose
major challenges to the work of the Tribunals in the
completion process. We support the idea of providing
sufficient resources to the Tribunals in order to make
it possible for them to complete their work in a timely
manner. As the lack of experienced staff could cause
additional delays in the completion of the Tribunals’
work, it would be logical to consider innovative
strategies, such as retention incentives, as appropriate,
on a case-by-case basis.
While there are no outstanding fugitives under the
jurisdiction of the ICTY following the arrest of Mladić
and Hadzić in 2011, it is a matter of concern that there
are nine persons indicted by the ICTR who still remain
at large. We hope that, with the cooperation and efforts
of relevant Member States, the ICTR will be able to
arrest and hold accountable the remaining fugitives.
Their arrest would go a long way towards meeting the
completion strategy targets and to reducing the burden
of the Residual Mechanism.
The cooperation of Member States would also be
helpful in the referral of cases to national jurisdictions
and in the transfer of individuals who have been either
convicted or acquitted, or who have served their
sentences, to relevant countries where their family
members are located. We note that the ICTR President
and Registrar have been making efforts to find host
States for some acquitted persons who are under the
Tribunal’s protection. The issue of the relocation of
acquitted persons in particular has assumed urgency in
view of the imminent closure of the Tribunal. We call
upon all States that are in a position to do so to show
political will and to consider positively the Tribunals’
request for more support and cooperation.
In conclusion, I would like to note that, in our view,
it is essential to preserve the legacy of the Tribunals
on account of their contribution to the fields of
international humanitarian law and legal doctrine. The
decisions of the Tribunals have led to the jurisprudence
that will influence the fight against impunity and the
future of global justice. In that context, we note with
appreciation that the ICTR Legal Library has compiled

12-36297

S/PV.6782

a special bibliography containing all relevant literature
on the work of the Tribunal. The conference on the
global legacy of the ICTY in November 2011, which
was convened to study the impact of the Tribunal’s work
on international criminal procedure and international
humanitarian law, was also a step in the right direction.

struggle to abide by trial deadlines while maintaining
the process of winding down all court activity, requires
a distinct and more flexible interpretation of the United
Nations general administrative norms. We therefore
encourage flexibility on the part of the Secretariat, as
well as creativity on the part of the Tribunals.

Mr. Madureira (Portugal): I thank the Presidents
and Prosecutors of the Tribunals for their very useful
and comprehensive briefings here today. Allow me
also a special word to congratulate Judge Joensen for
his recent election as President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). I also wish to
extend our congratulations, through the President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Meron, to the elected judges of the
Residual Mechanism who were recently sworn in.

In short, Mr. President, we wish to recognize the
Tribunals for their hard work in performing their
invaluable role in ensuring accountability for the worst
crimes, in the most professional way and under difficult
circumstances. Both Tribunals have also made valuable
contributions to the establishment of the Residual
Mechanism, which we would like to recognize. They
have contributed to the ongoing drafting process of
the Mechanism’s rules of procedure and evidence, the
preparation of its budget, which was recently adopted,
and other necessary activities. I wish to commend the
Tribunals and the Office of Legal Affairs for their
contribution to the rather complex process that will
enable the Residual Mechanism to start performing its
functions fully from day one, that is, from 1 July.

We wish to commend, first of all, the Presidents
of the Tribunals and the Prosecutors for their efforts
in keeping the judicial work on track, in line with the
estimates of the completion strategy. Our appreciation
goes also to the judges and staff of the Tribunals for
their hard work to conclude the judicial activity of
the Tribunals within the time frame established by the
Council in resolution 1966 (2010).
The reports (see S/2012/354 and S/2012/349) of the
Tribunals and the briefings today in that regard reflect
the concrete progress made so far. They highlight the
fact that practical measures — such as using ad litem
judges for the trial of contempt cases, which was recently
put in practice — can produce considerable results in
terms of speeding up the judicial activity concerning the
principal cases. We therefore encourage the Presidents
of the Tribunals to continue to actively identify possible
ways of further promoting the better use of resources
with a view to improving the management of the time
devoted to particular cases, while naturally keeping
fully with the required principles of justice.
We understand that, as we approach the time when
the Tribunals will close their doors, such management
becomes more difficult. Indeed, both Tribunals continue
to share a grave concern owing to staff attrition
and recruitment difficulties. Creative, realistic and
cost-effective solutions to that issue need to be found and
implemented as a matter of urgency. We note some positive
developments in that regard — for instance, the waiver
of the six-month rule for applications for professional
posts, which has facilitated the contracting of new
personnel. The particular nature of the Tribunals, which

At this stage we would like to highlight three
aspects that continue to be of concern to us. First, we
can never overstate the importance of cooperation with
the Tribunals. While we welcome the fact that there are
no outstanding fugitives on the list of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
as well as the generally satisfactory assessment of
cooperation reported by the ICTY Prosecutor in his
report (S/2012/354, annex I), despite some concerns, we
wish to turn to the ICTR and highlight the need to locate
and arrest the remaining fugitives being sought by the
Tribunal. In that respect, we urge the continuation of
efforts on the part of the States concerned to facilitate
the arrest and transfer of those fugitives to that Tribunal
and to allow justice to be fulfilled.
Secondly, as mentioned before, as we approach
the end of the Tribunals’ work, bearing in mind the
projected number of convictions, we have to be prepared
for the increasing number of requests addressed by the
Tribunals to States to host convicted persons to serve
their sentences and the need to find appropriate and
prompt responses to such requests.
Finally, we need to encourage definitive solutions
to address the singular situation of acquitted persons —
referred to again by the President of ICTR. They remain
still today under protective measures in safe houses in
Arusha because they can neither safely return to their

12-3629717

S/PV.6782

communities nor find host countries willing or able to
accept them. That is an unsustainable situation with
human rights implications, and a prompt solution must
be found to it.
In conclusion, Portugal wishes to congratulate the
Presidents, Prosecutors and staff of the two Tribunals for
their work. They have laid the groundwork for the future.
They have helped to set up the Residual Mechanism and
are assisting the countries of the respective regions,
their judicial authorities and their civil societies to take
over the vital task of fighting impunity for the gravest
of crimes.
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in
French): I would of course like to thank the Presidents
and the Prosecutors of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and the Tribunals for
their reports (see S/2012/354 and S/2012/349).
With respect to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), the President and the Prosecutor
have described the considerable efforts that were made
in recent months by the entire staff of the Tribunal to
complete the trials under way. We thank them for that.
We would specifically like to highlight two key points,
namely, the preservation of evidence and the referral of
cases to national courts. With regard to the preservation
of evidence under rule 71 bis of the rules of procedure, we
are extremely pleased to see that this will help to support
the proceedings against the three fugitives — Félicien
Kabuga, Augustin Bizimana and Protais Mpiranya — in
the event that they are arrested one day.
With regard to the referral of cases to national
jurisdictions, we believe that this is in fact an important
element in the current transition. We thank the President
and the Prosecutor of the Tribunal for having come to
France in order to take stock, under French jurisdiction,
of the cases of Bucyibaruta and Munyeshyaka. French
authorities would like to assure the Tribunal that they
are giving those two cases the full attention they require.
There are two concerns that remain, particularly in
terms of cooperation. The Prosecutor just spoke of the
issue of arresting fugitives. We note that he has reiterated
a desire for increased cooperation from Kenya and
Zimbabwe, respectively, in the cases of arresting Félicien
Kabuga and Protais Mpiranya. Cooperation from all
parties with the ICTR is obviously a requirement under
Council resolutions. It would perhaps be important that
the Council remind the various parties of that obligation.

18

The second key point with regard to assistance to
the Tribunals is that of relocating persons acquitted by
the Tribunals or those who have served their sentences
after having been convicted. France is hosting several
individuals at the request of the Tribunals, and we
encourage — as the Tribunals and certain delegations
here present have done — other States to consider
hosting on their territory the persons concerned.
Lastly, on the issue of the ICTR, I wish to underscore
that France will, of course, support the extension of the
mandates of the judges and the President that has been
submitted to us by Mr. Vagn Joensen.
France is fully aware of the challenges facing the
Tribunals at this time. For example, we are asking the
ICTY not only to move forward towards the Residual
Mechanism but also to deal with very important cases
such as Mladić and Karadžić. We wish to underscore
that nothing should be done that could undermine the
capacity of the ICTY to ensure that justice is done in
such serious cases.
In terms of cooperation with the ICTY in
particular, questions remain, now that we have heard
Mr. Brammertz’s report, as to the reasons for the very
long period of time that elapsed prior to the arrests of
Mr. Karadžić and Mr. Mladić. In addition, in general
terms the low level of cooperation among the States of
the region with respect to the prosecution of mid-level
criminals is of concern. The members of the European
Union believe that cooperation with the ICTY and
regional cooperation continue to be important.
Lastly, I would also like to echo fully the comments
made by Prosecutor Brammertz and recall here that
the ICTY has held that the Srebrenica massacre was
an instance of genocide, and that this decision of
international criminal justice, as well as the duty of
respect for the victims, is binding on us all.
In conclusion, I should like to thank Guatemala,
in its capacity as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, the representatives
of the Tribunals and the Office of Legal Affairs of the
Secretariat for the efforts made to meet the transition
timetable set out in resolution 1966 (2010) and ensure
the smooth functioning of the Residual Mechanism.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for

12-36297

S/PV.6782

Rwanda (ICTR) for their thorough briefings. We were
pleased to take note of the efforts undertaken and the
progress made by both Tribunals with regard to the
implementation of their respective completion strategies,
which are aimed at finalizing their work and preparing
for a smooth and harmonious transition towards the
International Residual Mechanism, which is to take over
the residual functions of the criminal Tribunals.
We were also very pleased to learn that despite
the challenges encountered, the Mechanism will begin
operations on the date set out in resolution 1966 (2010).
That will allow us to resolutely continue consideration
of the conditions necessary to enable it to effectively
carry out its mandate.
We welcome the measures adopted by both
Tribunals, which, while ensuring due process, have
made it possible to streamline procedures and introduce
reforms aimed at accelerating the pace of their work.
The Kingdom of Morocco also welcomes the fact that
those measures have enabled the ICTY to begin certain
trials earlier than had been anticipated and to limit the
impact of challenges related to translation and lack of
staffing on the trial schedule.
As concerns the ICTR, the efforts undertaken have
led to the announcement of the completion of trial
proceedings prior to the end of 2012 and to encouraging
predictions indicating that all of the rulings will be
handed down during 2014. That should induce us to
maintain the same level of mobilization in order to
explore together ways and means of dealing with the
various difficulties related to the retention of skilled
personnel.
We hope that the relevant United Nations bodies
will give favourable consideration to additional
measures aimed at overcoming the difficulties related
to the downsizing process and at the completion of
the deliberations of both courts. The ongoing dialogue
between the two Tribunals, the Office of Legal
Affairs and the Council’s Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, which is chaired with skill and
competence by Guatemala, will, of course, remain the
best response to the potential practical or institutional
difficulties relating to the upcoming launch of the
Residual Mechanism.
In that context, we deem it necessary to underscore
the importance of cooperation on the part of Member
States and regional and subregional organizations with
both Tribunals, in accordance with their respective

statutes and, subsequently, with the Residual Mechanism.
Such cooperation should involve not only greater efforts
to arrest those fugitives still sought by the ICTR but
also an acceleration in communications and requests
for judiciary assistance from both Tribunals, as well as
support for efforts to relocate persons who have been
acquitted or served their sentences.
The referral of cases to national courts has
considerably facilitated the completion of the work
of both Tribunals and a smooth transition towards
the Residual Mechanism. The transfer to national
jurisdictions of cases involving intermediate or
lower-rank accused by the ICTY and the transfer of five
cases by the ICTR to Rwandan courts will contribute to
the consolidation of the principle of complementarity
and to the strengthening of the national judicial
institutions of the relevant countries.
The activities undertaken to raise the awareness of
younger generations with respect to the lessons to be
learned from the crimes prosecuted by both Tribunals
should continue. The contribution of the International
Criminal Tribunals to international criminal justice
must be recognized and preserved. The protection of
the legacy of the Tribunals has both a legal and a moral
value. In that context, it is important to continue to
ensure the accessibility of information relative to both
Tribunals, their mandates and their contributions to
fighting impunity and to strengthening the international
judicial system.
Mr. Quintana (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings, and we congratulate
them on the efforts that both Tribunals have made
to implement the completion strategies adopted by
the Council and ensure an expeditious transition to
the Residual Mechanism. Our thanks also go to the
delegation of Guatemala, whose work in chairing the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals has
considerably facilitated the progress that has been made
in this area.
My delegation is convinced that both Tribunals
have provided an invaluable service to the cause
of international justice and the maintenance of
international peace and security. We believe that in the
past few months in particular both bodies have worked
diligently to implement Council decisions relating to the

12-3629719

S/PV.6782

completion of their mandates. Of particular importance
is the compendium of administrative measures adopted
with a view to reducing the length of trials, which has
meant that several of them have been able to either begin
or conclude earlier than planned. We are therefore very
close to meeting our common objective of concluding
all Trial Chamber cases before the Tribunals before the
end of this year and to deal with all possible appeals by
the end of 2014.
In practical terms, we note that the Fifth Committee
has approved the budget for the first biennium of the
Residual Mechanism and that modest progress has been
made with regard to ensuring the retention of Tribunal
staff. In particular, we commend the Secretary-General
for his willingness to facilitate the hiring of trainees
or interns, who now have valuable experience in the
workings of both Tribunals that otherwise could have
been lost.
The Office of Legal Affairs also deserves
commendation here, since it is the determination of their
officials that has made it possible to have near-complete
versions of the various legal instruments required for the
functioning of the Residual Mechanism. That is the case
with respect to the Rules of Procedure and Evidence,
the Secretary-General’s bulletin on the archives of the
Tribunals and the Mechanism, and the headquarters
agreements for the host countries of the two branches of
the Mechanism, in Arusha and The Hague.

in particular, for those States responsible for ensuring the
arrest of the fugitives and for handing them over to the
Tribunal to fulfil their obligations under the resolutions
according to which that body was established.
The International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda constitute the primary vehicle
through which the Security Council has channelled the
will of the international community to end impunity
for atrocious crimes of international magnitude. We are
pleased to observe that the various bodies of the United
Nations are taking the necessary steps to guarantee the
efficient and orderly conclusion of the mandates of the
Tribunals and to ensure the appropriate functioning of
the Residual Mechanism established by the Council. We
will spare no effort to continue working towards that
end.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank Tribunal Presidents Meron and
Joensen, as well as Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow,
for their briefings today and their continued service. I
congratulate President Joensen on his recent election
as President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). We wish him success in his new role.

There are two aspects related to the Tribunal for
Rwanda that my delegation believes we should consider.
First, we are concerned by the situation of people who
have been exonerated by the Tribunal and who are
supposed to be relocated, because it has not been easy
to find countries willing to welcome them on their
territory. The President of the Tribunal has said that that
is a persistent problem that he is going to make vigorous
efforts to resolve. We believe that the Security Council
could support President Joensen with respect to that
matter by sending a clear signal that the fate of those
individuals is a concern for all of us.

The United States commends the Tribunal Presidents,
Prosecutors and Registrars for their dedication and
extensive preparations in setting up the Residual
Mechanism. We welcome the overall downsizing by
both the ICTR and the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) as trials end and as
remaining functions are gradually transferred to the
Residual Mechanism. We also appreciate efforts by the
ICTY, the ICTR and the Residual Mechanism to share
resources and to enact cost-saving managerial and
administrative measures. Those include double-hatting
staff members, sharing common administrative support
services, embedding translators into legal support teams
and using video-teleconferencing technology. We are
aware of the challenges posed by high staff attrition,
and are grateful to the judges and staff members who
are performing multiple functions across multiple trials.

Secondly, in contrast with the Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, some of those accused by the Tribunal for
Rwanda have yet to be captured even though there is
relatively exact information on their whereabouts. We
believe that, consistent with their clear intention to close
that chapter in the history of hatred and violence in that
region of Africa, the Council should reiterate its call for
all States to cooperate effectively with the Tribunal and,

The Council must be flexible to ensure that both
Tribunals are able to administer justice expeditiously
yet fairly. When the Council adopted resolution 1966
(2010) and set 31 December 2014 as the requested
date for the completion of all remaining work by the
Tribunals, we did not have the benefit of knowing when
indicted individuals would be arrested. Today, we are
pleased that all ICTY fugitives have been apprehended,

20

12-36297

S/PV.6782

including the re-apprehension, in January, of convicted
war criminal Radovan Stanković. We recognize,
however, that trial and appeal schedules will be difficult
to accurately predict and that flexibility in assigning
cases is important in that regard.

strategy. We welcome the news that the ICTR is close to
completing all trial work as projected in the November
2011 completion strategy. Indeed, the ICTR’s vastly
reduced judicial workload reflects the court’s strong
leadership and the dedication of its staff.

Turning to the ICTY, we welcome the reported
cooperation of Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina in providing access to documents, archives
and witnesses in response to requests for assistance
from the Office of the Prosecutor. We look forward to
Serbia concluding and acting upon investigations into
who was involved in, and responsible for, sheltering
Ratko Mladić, Radovan Karadzić and other notorious
ICTY fugitives in Serbia over the course of so many
years. Such cooperation is essential to completing
ongoing trials and appeals. As the nations of the
Balkans make further progress towards European Union
accession and Euro-Atlantic integration, their record of
cooperation with the ICTY and with each other, as well
as their progress on domestic justice and accountability
initiatives, will be critical.

As the ICTY and ICTR draw to an end and prepare
to transition remaining functions to the Residual
Mechanism, they represent a strong legacy in the
international fight against impunity for those who
commit atrocities. The defendants convicted in tribunal
proceedings to date have been tried and found guilty
of some the most heinous crimes known to humankind,
including genocide, murder and rape, as crimes against
humanity. Thanks to the hard work of the Tribunals, the
world knows about those crimes, and perpetrators are
being held accountable for their actions. In addition,
there are now archives and public records that will be
accessible for generations to come, bringing to light
stories that would otherwise be lost or hidden in the
shadows. That information is critical to combating
the concerted efforts of those who seek to promote
an alternative historical narrative at variance with
judicially established fact. In addition to combating
impunity, the Tribunals’ contributions in the areas of
local capacity-building and education will help foster
long-term peace and reconciliation.

At the same time, the United States deplores
the statement made this week denying genocide in
Srebrenica. Genocide in Srebrenica is not a subjective
determination; it is a defined criminal act that the ICTY
has confirmed in final and binding verdicts in multiple
cases. It cannot be denied.
Turning to the ICTR, there are unfortunately still nine
ICTR fugitives at large. We call on all States Members of
the United Nations, particularly those in the Great Lakes
region, to help apprehend them. The apprehension of the
remaining ICTY fugitives demonstrates the international
community’s commitment to ending impunity for
those who commit mass atrocities. Those who harbour
fugitives obstruct the administration of justice, put
themselves in danger and only delay the inevitable.
We take note of the recent transfers of cases from the
ICTR to Rwanda and we welcome Rwanda’s willingness
to fairly adjudicate transferred cases. That is a positive
development, since international tribunals such as the
ICTR cannot last forever. Strengthening national legal
and justice sectors will help to promote the long-term
rule of law and stability in the region.
We applaud the ICTR’s efforts to create a robust
monitoring mechanism in cooperation with regional
organizations to ensure the fairness of trials at the
national level. Case transfers to competent national
jurisdictions will help fulfil the ICTR’s completion

As President Obama has said, “Preventing mass
atrocities and genocide is a core national security interest
and a core moral responsibility of the United States
of America.” We are committed to working with the
international community to do so. We can and we must
improve our individual and collective efforts to protect
populations from atrocities, including with measures
to enhance early warning, prevention, response and
accountability. We will continue to focus on concrete
outcomes that make a difference on the ground and to
help United Nations actors use planning and diplomacy
to prevent atrocities, not just to respond to them.
Mr. Afande (Togo) (spoke in French): The
Togolese delegation would like first of all to join
other delegations in thanking Judge Meron, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), and Judge Joensen, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
as well as Prosecutors Serge Brammertz and Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, for their briefings on the work of the
two Tribunals. We also congratulate Judge Meron on his
appointment as President of the soon to be operational

12-3629721

S/PV.6782

Residual Mechanism, as well as Prosecutor Jallow, who
will become Prosecutor of the Mechanism.
We welcome all four briefings from the principals of
the two Tribunals, detailing the Tribunals’ programmes
and plans as they work towards the completion of
their mandates, pursuing the fight against impunity
for perpetrators of crimes as defined in the statute of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the statute of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. We commend the Tribunals for
concretizing their mandate completion strategies in
many spheres, including investigation, trials at first
instance and in appeal, the transfer of cases to national
jurisdictions, witness protection, the preservation and
dissemination of archives and managing the Tribunals’
legacies. Their briefings have informed us about past
and future measures in meeting the administrative
and judicial challenges of realizing their completion
strategies.
We applaud the progress made ahead of schedule
by the ICTY on many cases on its judicial calendar, as
well as the fact that the ICTR has completed nearly all
of its cases at first instance. One of the Tribunals’ main
challenges lies in the issue of cooperation by States,
without which they cannot perform their functions. I
need not remind members of the importance of such
cooperation in many arenas, including the arrest and
transfer of defendants and the relocation of those
acquitted or who have served their sentences. Togo calls
on all States involved to redouble their efforts in those
areas, so as to achieve the completion of the Tribunals’
mandates and ensure a solid start for the Residual
Mechanism, which is to begin operations in Arusha on
1 July.
The Tribunals have had mixed success in transferring
defendants to national courts and jurisdictions.
Togo commends the ICTR for its recent progress in
transferring cases to Rwanda and for its initiative in
establishing a robust system for the oversight of cases
transferred to national courts so as to guarantee that
defendants receive fair trials.
Togo also commends the Tribunals for working
steadily towards completing their mandates, despite
the difficulty they face in retaining personnel. Togo is
prepared to work with other members of the Council,
as well as other relevant United Nations bodies, to find
flexible and comprehensive options for dealing with
that problem — a problem that, if allowed to go on

22

unsolved, could compromise the Tribunals’ ability to
complete their mandates on schedule. We believe that
the collective experience of the Tribunals’ principals
here today, in their respective roles, will be crucial
to ensuring a successful transition to the Residual
Mechanism, as well as the success of the Mechanism
itself.
We strongly support President Joensen’s untiring
commitment to the relocation of those who have
served their sentences or have been found innocent,
because, beyond the logistics of relocating them,
there are also human rights issues at stake. We believe
that, if prisoners who have served out their terms and
defendants who have been acquitted continue to be
subject to strict surveillance, then they are not enjoying
basic, fundamental human rights. We urge the Council
to reiterate its call on States to assist in the relocation of
former defendants.
Clearly, the Tribunals’ four principals here with us
today correctly gauge the weight of responsibility they
bear, which involves not only steering the transition
to the Mechanism but also, as they and we both know
with certainty, to press forward the fight against
impunity, even after the Tribunals have shut down, and
to consolidate the lessons learned and the advances in
jurisprudence acquired in the course of the Tribunals’
work.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the Presidents and
the Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their reports
(see S/2012/354 and S/2012/349) and their briefings.
Today’s briefings were of special importance, taking
place as they are in the month before the opening of
the Rwandan branch of the Residual Mechanism.
That Mechanism is the first of its kind in the history
of international criminal justice, and it will require
of both management and staff the utmost focus and
accountability. In our view, the Mechanism has been
established within parameters that will enable it to carry
out substantive work, including conducting trials and
appeals, and it has the requisite funding. Moreover,
the resources formerly devoted to the Tribunals can be
used to add to its financing, if its caseload requires. We
anticipate that the first appeals will be referred to the
Residual Mechanism in the near future. That will free
the Tribunals to focus on their remaining cases within
the timeframe set out in resolution 1966 (2010).

12-36297

S/PV.6782

Nevertheless, it is unclear whether resolution 1966
(2010) can be implemented. We are concerned by the
delays that have been predicted in proceedings by the
ICTY. We note the useful measures it has adopted to
accelerate its proceedings, thanks to which the cases of
Hadžić and Mladić are ready for trial ahead of schedule.
However, those measures have still not dramatically
improved the situation. Additional substantive measures
are necessary.
The situation in the ICTR is less troubling, although
we no longer hear promises of completing its activities
any earlier than scheduled. Our view is that, even if
appeals in the cases of Nzabonimana and Nizeyimana are
taken up by the ICTR, nothing will prevent the Tribunal
from meeting the schedule established in resolution
1966 (2010). Similarly, nothing prevents the taking of
a final decision on the transfer of the Munyagishari
case to the national jurisdiction of Rwanda, especially
given the recent transfer to Rwanda of a similar case
concerning indictee Uwinkindi.
With regard to cooperation on the part of States in
the relevant regions with the Tribunals, we note that in
the past several years, thanks to the efforts of national
authorities, the Tribunals have advanced considerably
in the prosecutions of individuals who have fled from
justice. Serbia demonstrated a high level of cooperation
in that regard when it transferred the last two fugitives
to the ICTY.
With respect to that case, Russia is surprised by the
ongoing attempts by the ICTY Prosecutor to pressure
Serbian authorities with regard to a matter initiated by
them, namely, to investigate the causes underlying the
ability of several indictees to hide for so long in Serbia.
We firmly recommend that the ICTY Prosecutor focus
on the issues that bear directly upon the purview of the
Tribunal. It is quite clear that Serbia is conducting a
national inquiry that will in no way impact the ICTY
trial nor the successful implementation of resolution
1966 (2010).
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
wish to thank the Presidents and the Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), for their comprehensive
briefings. We welcome the efforts of both Tribunals to
ensure due and full implementation of their mandates.
Significant progress has been registered in the
implementation of the completion strategies of the ICTY

and the ICTR during the reporting period. We note with
concern that, as in the previous reporting periods, the
difficulties in retaining qualified and experienced staff
remain an obstacle to the pace of the Tribunals’ work. In
the past six months the Tribunals have continued, under
difficult circumstances, to work professionally towards
establishing accountability for the worst crimes.
They have also made valuable contributions to the
establishment of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals.
We welcome the important measures implemented
by the Tribunals to ensure a smooth handover of judicial
functions to the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. We take note of the referrals by the
Tribunals of some cases to national jurisdictions. That
approach serves not only to reduce the overall workload
of the Tribunals, but also to strengthen the capacity of
national judicial systems and the enforcement of the
rule of law at the national level.
The cooperation of States with the Tribunals is a
crucial pillar for the latter’s effective work and constitutes
an essential component of regional ownership. It is
therefore important that States remain committed to
living up to their obligations to the Tribunals.
We are pleased to note that all fugitives accused
by the ICTY have been arrested and transferred to the
Tribunal. However, since nine fugitives indicted by
the ICTR still remain at large, the continued extensive
cooperation of the relevant States is needed.
In conclusion, we wish to commend the Presidents,
the Prosecutors and the staff of the two Tribunals for
their work and for the steady implementation of their
mandates. The continued support of the Security
Council is needed, as the Tribunals are in the process
of undertaking the necessary steps to keep the trials on
track.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.
First of all, I thank Judge Meron, President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY); Mr. Brammertz, Prosecutor of the
ICTY; Judge Joensen, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR); and Mr. Jallow,
Prosecutor of the ICTR, for their briefings. I also wish
to take this opportunity to congratulate Judge Meron
on his appointment as President of the International

12-3629723

S/PV.6782

Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, as well as
Prosecutor Jallow on his appointment as Prosecutor of
the Mechanism.
With respect to the work of the two Tribunals, I wish
to make the following points. First, the relevant Security
Council — resolution 1966 (2010) — requires that the
two Tribunals complete their work by the end of 2014.
That timeline must be complied with.
My delegation is delighted to learn that the ICTR
is expected to complete its work by the target date,
and welcomes the substantial progress it has made in
referring cases to Rwanda.
As for the ICTY, its compliance with the timeline
continues to face challenges. We encourage the ICTY,
under President Meron’s leadership, to continue to
implement relevant reform measures and to further
accelerate the pace of the trials of its cases. At the same
time, we are pleased to note that the reform measures
have already yielded initial results.
Secondly, international cooperation remains
critically important. We welcome the continuing
respective cooperation extended to the two Tribunals
by Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and other
States of the former Yugoslavia, as well as by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya and other
countries of the Great Lakes region. We call upon those
countries to cooperate with the two Tribunals on the
handover of persons who have been sentenced and on
the relocation of those who have been acquitted. We
hope that the relevant United Nations agencies will
continue to explore flexible and feasible ways to resolve
the difficulties encountered by the two Tribunals relating
to staff retention.
Thirdly, efforts must be made to ensure the
smooth transition by the two Tribunals to the Residual
Mechanism. The Rwanda Branch of the Residual
Mechanism will soon be operational, with the ICTY
Branch to be launched next year. To ensure the timely
and smooth functioning of the Residual Mechanism, the
two Tribunals, the United Nations Office of Legal Affairs
and the Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals have already accomplished a
tremendous amount of work. We hope that those bodies
will continue their efforts aimed at resolving outstanding
issues as soon as possible.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

24

Before giving the floor to representatives of
non-members of the Council, I wish to request all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than four
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Allow me, at the outset, to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on China’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of June, as well as to express our confidence in your
ability to guide the Council in fulfilling its many duties
and responsibilities in these challenging times.
I would like to express my appreciation to Presidents
Meron and Joensen, as well as to Prosecutors Brammertz
and Jallow, for their comprehensive reports on the
work of the Tribunals in the first half of the year (see
S/2012/354, S/2012/349), the status of the cases before
them and measures undertaken in the implementation
of the completion strategy. Croatia strongly supports
the diligent efforts of the Tribunals aimed at the smooth
transformation of those two unique international
institutions into a single body — the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
In that context, we welcome the recent appointment
of the Registrar, President and Prosecutor of the
Residual Mechanism, as well as the full establishment
of the Mechanism’s roster of judges. We congratulate
Mr. Hocking, Judge Meron and Prosecutor Jallow, as
well as all of the elected judges, on their appointments
and elections and express our full confidence in their
ability to successfully master the many challenging
tasks ahead of them.
Let me now turn specifically to the ICTY and its
activities. Croatia welcomes the significant results
achieved by the Tribunal to date and, in particular, the
fact that all indicted persons have been arrested and
transferred to the Tribunal. We expect swift and efficient
proceedings in the three remaining first-instance cases,
namely, Karadžić, Mladić and Hadžić, as well as the
effective handling of appellate activities.
In that regard, Croatia supports the Tribunal’s efforts
aimed at expediting the overall pace of proceedings
by introducing innovative reforms, including a waiver
on the direct hiring of interns, as well as retention
incentives. We welcome the continuous readiness of the
Office of the Prosecutor to provide relevant information
to support national investigations on war crimes as

12-36297

S/PV.6782

an important contribution to national efforts to end
impunity.
Over the reporting period, Croatian officials at the
highest level remained engaged in direct dialogue with
the Tribunal and the Prosecutor, while the Ministry of
Justice and the Office of the State Prosecutor continued
to nurture a close and intense working relationship with
the Office of the Prosecutor. Last month, Prosecutor
Brammertz visited Zagreb and met with the Deputy
Prime Minister for Home, Foreign and European
Affairs; the Minister of Justice; the State Prosecutor and
members of the Task Force.
We are pleased to note that in his report Prosecutor
Brammertz has recognized the full and unequivocal
cooperation of Croatia with the Office of the Prosecutor.
Furthermore, according to the report, it is the Office
of the Prosecutor’s intention to further rely on that in
order to efficiently complete the remaining trials and
appeals. We see that as an important recognition of our
steadfast efforts to establish efficient and comprehensive
cooperation with the Tribunal and its organs in all vital
areas. In that regard, I can only reaffirm our intention
to continue along that path until the very end of the
Tribunal’s mandate, and beyond in relation to the
Residual Mechanism.
As I said in my previous interventions, Croatia
continues to follow with particular attention the new
jurisprudence emerging from the Tribunal’s work and its
potential to shape future criteria for, inter alia, the lawful
use of force and the waging of legitimate military action.
In that context, we particularly welcome the Tribunal’s
attempt to further elucidate its impact and legacy,
including through engaging the most eminent scholars
and practitioners in the field of international criminal and
humanitarian law in thorough discussions and analysis
of these complex matters. Ensuing interpretations and
conclusions will have a serious impact on any future
conduct of hostilities, as well as noble efforts aimed at
preserving or fostering international peace and security.
With regard to regional cooperation, let me stress
that Croatia fully shares the view that cooperation in
the region concerning war crimes and related issues
is of crucial importance. At the same time, it is our
understanding that such cooperation should be carried
out with full respect for national jurisdictions and
generally accepted principles of international criminal
law, including basic principles of legitimate procedure
and evidence collection.

Let me conclude by saying that Croatia is deeply
committed to the process of reconciliation in the
former Yugoslavia. However, we firmly believe that
such reconciliation is possible only on the premise of
unambiguously established historical facts and their
accurate interpretation, and not on their misinterpretation
or denial, in particular in the cases of most serious
violations of international law, including genocide.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Allow me, at the outset, to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June.
My delegation wishes to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their reports on
the completion strategy of their respective Tribunals. I
also take this opportunity to congratulate Judge Vagn
Joensen on his election as President of ICTR and wish
him every success in presiding over the Tribunal at this
critical time.
The year 2012 has been a landmark year for the
Rwandan justice system. Eighteen years after the
devastating genocide perpetrated against the Tutsi, the
trust and cooperation between Rwanda’s national justice
system and its foreign and international counterparts
has reached new heights.
For the first time since the inception of ICTR, and
after years of application by the Rwandan Government,
the ICTR has transferred a case to Rwanda for trial. The
decision to transfer Jean Bosco Uwinkindi has already
paved the way for other transfers and extraditions of
cases back to Rwanda, particularly the case of Bernard
Munyagishari, whose transfer was decided on just
yesterday. Rwanda welcomes those developments and
expresses its gratitude to the Tribunal for its utmost
vote of confidence in Rwanda and its justice system. I
particularly want to thank the Prosecutor and his team.
Rwanda also commends the ICTR for the transfer of
three other case files to Rwanda. They concern persons
alleged to have committed genocide who are still at
large, namely, Fulgence Kayishema, Charles Sikubwabo
and Ladislas Ntaganzwa. Rwanda, with the support of
Member States, vows to make every effort to apprehend
those fugitives and to bring them to justice.

12-3629725

S/PV.6782

Rwanda welcomes the decision taken in January
this year by the Quebec Superior Court to extradite Léon
Mugesera to Rwanda, a genocide suspect well known
for his November 1992 hate speech against the Tutsi.
Our Government further welcomes the decision taken
in March by the appellate court in Rouen, France, to
extradite another genocide suspect, Claude Muhayimana.
Both decisions follow the 27 October 2011 ruling
of the European Court of Human Rights on the case of
Silvère Ahorugeze, which determined conclusively that
his extradition to Rwanda would neither violate article
3 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
and Fundamental Freedoms, prohibiting inhuman and
degrading treatment or punishment, nor article 6 on his
right to a fair trial.
Based on that jurisprudence, Rwanda encourages all
United Nations Member States to arrest and/or extradite
all genocide fugitives and suspects living within their
territory, in order to assist in the fight against impunity
for the most serious crimes.
Rwanda has always recognized the tremendous
job done by the ICTR Tracking Unit and welcomes
its transfer to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, starting 1 July. Rwanda also
commends States Members of the United Nations that
have arrested genocide fugitives over the past years.
We urge all Governments to continue their cooperation
with the Tracking Unit in arresting and transferring the
remaining fugitives, including the most wanted, Félicien
Kabuga.
The Government of Rwanda commends the work
done by the ICTR and ICTY in ensuring a digital
recordkeeping of archives and a successful transfer to
the Residual Mechanism. Rwanda is fully aware that the
location of ICTR archives is a sensitive issue, given that
various elements are at stake, such as the classification
of Governments’ documents, the protection of witnesses
and easy access by the public. For all those reasons,
Rwanda believes that the ICTR archives shall remain
the property of the United Nations.
Nonetheless, as has stated on many occasions,
Rwanda reiterates its request to host the archives in
Kigali upon the completion of the work of the Residual
Mechanism. That location would ensure easy access
for genocide survivors to records that constitute an
integral part of our history and which are vital to the
preservation of our collective memory — not to mention
the education of future generations. As the archives will

26

serve as a research centre for scholars and the broader
international community, they will support, inter alia,
the fulfilment of the mission of the United Nations to
promote peace and ensure the prevention of genocide.
Rwanda has come a long way in the past 18 years.
The international community has lent its unwavering
support to the country’s fight against impunity. After
nearly two decades of operation, the ICTR and the
Rwandan community-based jurisdictions — the Gacaca
court — are winding down this year. Thanks to both
jurisdictions and to tribunals in sister countries in Europe
and North America, thousands of genocide perpetrators
have been brought to book and thousands of survivors
have told their stories and contributed to the process of
truth, reconciliation and healing in Rwanda.
Together we must now ensure that the fight against
impunity does not flag. My Government reiterates its
continued commitment to supporting and expediting the
work of the ICTR and the Residual Mechanism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): At the outset, let me
welcome the President and Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
Judge Theodor Meron and Mr. Serge Brammertz,
as well as the President and the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
Judge Vagn Joensen and Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow. I
would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Judge Joensen on his assumption of the presidency of
the ICTR, and Judge Meron, Prosecutor Jallow and
Registrar Hocking on their new appointments within
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.
With respect to Serbia’s cooperation with the ICTY,
it is my pleasure to inform the Security Council that
the assessments of my Government and the ICTY’s
Prosecutor in his report (see S/2012/354) are once again
in accord. Since the arrest of Goran Hadžić, in July
2011, there is no longer a single ICTY accused person
at large. All of the indictees believed to be in Serbia
were arrested by Serbian authorities and transferred to
the Tribunal.
With regard to access to documents, archives and
witnesses, I am pleased to say that Serbia’s cooperation
has been impeccable for a long time and that the level
of success achieved in those areas has been maintained

12-36297

S/PV.6782

during the reporting period. New requests for assistance
from both the ICTY Office of the Prosecutor and the
defence teams for the accused are being received
on a daily basis and dealt with without delay. We
completely agree with the Prosecutor’s assessment that
“the cooperation provided by the Serbian authorities
continued to fully meet expectations” (S/2012/354,
annex II, para. 48). We believe that the defence teams
would give the same assessment with regard to their
cooperation with Serbian authorities.

(S/25704) to the Security Council that the enforcement
of sentences should take place outside the territory of
the former. That is why we continue to reiterate that the
Republic of Serbia is ready to share the responsibility
with other countries on that issue. We believe that Serbia
and other countries of the former Yugoslavia willing
to do the same should be allowed to sign agreements
on enforcement of sentences with the Tribunal. Serbia
would like to express its expectation that the Security
Council will consider our initiative.

In his May 2012 report, the Prosecutor also paid
attention to the issue of the investigation of fugitive
networks. Although that question does not fall within
the competence of the ICTY, my Government agrees
that the issue has certain weight. Since the fugitive
issue has been quite a burden for Serbia for a number of
years, it is important for us to find out who harboured
fugitives. Despite our belief that fugitive harbouring
is predominantly an internal issue, my Government
has shared information on the ongoing domestic
investigation into the issue with the ICTY Office of the
Prosecutor in good faith, and will continue to do so.

By virtue of its efforts and the results obtained,
Serbia has contributed to the achievement of international
justice, further normalization of the situation and
improvement of relations between the States of the
Balkans, while making significant contributions to the
process of strengthening confidence in the work of
national and international institutions.

Serbia is confident that the full level of cooperation
achieved with the ICTY will continue in the coming
period and that that will ensure a smooth transition
to future cooperation with the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
I would like to repeat that Serbia is willing to
continue to cooperate with the Security Council’s
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals on
the issues raised by the archives of the Tribunal. Serbia
maintains the position it expressed to the Security
Council in October 2008 and reiterates its readiness
to actively participate in all future discussions on the
matter. Serbia is also willing to share its experiences in
cooperating with the ICTY and the results of its domestic
war crime trials with other countries and international
stakeholders.
My Government will continue to work on the
initiative to let countries of the former Yugoslavia
sign agreements on enforcement of sentences with
the Tribunal. It is clear that Serbia and the entire
region have greatly changed since the time when the
Secretary-General suggested in his 3 May 1993 report

Our success in cooperating with the Tribunal
gives us a moral right to insistently press for effective
investigations into allegations of homicide committed
for the purpose of organ trafficking by the so-called
Kosovo Liberation Army. Serbia expects that the
ongoing investigation into those war crimes allegations
referred to in the report of the Rapporteur of the Council
of Europe dated 7 January 2011 will be conducted
professionally, impartially and efficiently in order for
the truth to be established and the perpetrators brought
to justice.
We have followed the investigation launched by
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and have expressed our concerns about the
lack of transparency in the conduct of the inquiry.
My Government hopes that many critical questions in
connection with the EULEX investigation, especially
those related to accountability, mandate, jurisdiction
and witness protection, will receive satisfactory
answers as soon as possible. Bringing the truth to light
on allegations of such heinous crimes must remain our
top priority.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

12-3629727
