United Nations

S/PV.6309

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6309th meeting
Monday, 10 May 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Salam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Du Xiaocong
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Puente
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Quarrey
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-35583 (E)

*1035583*

S/PV.6309

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Alhaji
Umaru Yar’Adua, President of the Federal Republic
of Nigeria
The President (spoke in Arabic): At the outset of
the meeting, I should like, on behalf of the members of
the Security Council, to express our deepest sympathy
to the Government and people of Nigeria in connection
with the death of President Alhaji Umaru Yar’Adua on
5 May 2010.
May I ask the members of the Security Council to
join me in observing a minute of silence to honour the
memory of the deceased Nigerian President.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Burundi, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gahutu
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Charles Petrie,
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Petrie to take a seat at the Council
table.

2

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mrs. Heidi Grau, speaking on behalf of His Excellency
Mr. Peter Maurer, Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Switzerland.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mrs. Grau to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on the agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Charles Petrie and Mrs. Heidi Grau. I
now give the floor to Mr. Petrie.
Mr. Petrie: It is an honour for me to brief the
Council on the preparations for the forthcoming
elections in Burundi in my new capacity as Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General for Burundi.
This is a historic moment for Burundi, and for the
region. Marking the end of its transition in 2005,
Burundi held elections that led to the installation of a
democratically-elected Government. Now, in 2010,
Burundi is set to set an extraordinary example of
political maturity. A country until recently embroiled in
internal violence is hopefully on the verge of
demonstrating
how
one
democratically-elected
Government cedes place to another.
Since my deployment to Burundi, while nuances
of view obviously remain, all of the political and civil
society interlocutors I have encountered have
expressed cautious optimism for the success of the
impending elections. We plan to remain closely
engaged in support of the Burundian people to ensure
that this cautious optimism is translated into reality.
Let me turn to the details of electoral
preparedness. On 15 December 2009, the National
Independent Electoral Commission set forth an
ambitious electoral calendar. This entails five polls,
starting with the communal elections on 21 May and
followed by the presidential elections on 28 June, the
legislative elections on 23 July, the senatorial elections
on 28 July and the collines elections on 7 September.

10-35583

S/PV.6309

In the event that a second round of presidential
elections proves necessary, it could be held on 26 July.
An essential step in the electoral preparations was
the issuing of some 900,000 free identity cards. In
addition to these cards, the President of the Electoral
Commission also authorized the use of other
documentation to complete registration. Together, these
steps paved the way for voter registration, which took
place from 21 January to 8 February. Some 3,541,596
voters were registered at the close of the process, well
above initial expectations. Provisional voter lists were
thereafter issued and corrected, though not necessarily
to the extent initially expected.
To date, 24 political parties have submitted the
names of their candidates for the communal elections.
Twelve of these parties are registered in 50 per cent of
the communes, while five have registered candidates in
all 129 communes. Fifteen political parties have
designated presidential candidates and there are two
independent candidates. The Commission plans to
establish 7,000 polling stations countrywide, an
increase of 700 stations compared to the 2005 elections.
The code of conduct established for political
parties, the media and the administration has now been
signed by almost all concerned. While it is yet to be
signed by the Front pour la démocratie au Burundi and
the Conseil national pour la défense de la démocratieNyangoma, efforts are still ongoing, with the support
of Governments and organizations in the region, to
encourage these parties to adhere to the principles.
Security during the electoral period is a key
priority for the Government and its partners. A
technical commission to coordinate all dimensions of
this was established in 2009, bringing together the
Ministers of Public Security, Defence, Interior and
Justice. The Commission has been working on an
integrated operational security plan. The draft decree
was to have been endorsed by the Council of Ministers
on 3 May, but the meeting was postponed. This has not
stopped the relevant security structures from
continuing to implement the various components of the
integrated operational security plan.
On 4 May, President Pierre Nkurunziza issued a
decree setting the duration of the campaign from 5 to
18 May. On the same day, the Minister of the Interior
called upon all Burundians to respect the electoral
code, the guidelines concerning demonstrations and the
code of conduct.

10-35583

Turning to the budget for the elections, I am
happy to report that, through the collective efforts and
contributions of the Burundi Government and its
partners, the electoral budget has now been all but met.
The remaining budget gap is now estimated at just over
$1,700,000. The electoral cycle can begin in May while
our joint efforts continue to meet that final amount.
Contributors to the United Nations-managed basket
fund include Belgium, Egypt, the European Union,
France, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, the United
Nations
Development
Programme
and
the
Peacebuilding Fund. Belgium, China, the European
Union, France, Germany, the Netherlands, the United
Kingdom and the United States have also made
additional bilateral contributions to these elections. For
its part, I am pleased to inform the Council that the
Government of Burundi has provided a total of
$8.1 million towards the electoral budget, including
$2 million for the security costs of the elections.
In response to the President’s request, a number
of international partners have committed to deploying
long-term electoral observers. The European Union has
already deployed its observers, and I understand that
Belgium, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Kenya, Namibia, South Africa, Uganda, the United
States, the African Union, the East African Community
and
some
international
non-governmental
organizations are all considering deploying observers.
Concerning direct support to the Electoral
Commission, a group of international experts,
supported by the United Nations, is providing technical
assistance. The United Nations has, of course, played a
long and important role in helping to prepare the
ground for these elections, either by supporting the
various mechanisms established to coordinate
international assistance, conducting field monitoring
missions, advocating to help Burundi narrow the
electoral funding gap, providing assistance during the
identity card delivery campaign, or building capacity in
security, human rights, media and gender-based aspects
of the electoral process.
Despite all of these positive developments to
date, I would not pretend that significant challenges do
not remain. I need hardly remind this Council that the
elections are taking place against a backdrop of the
violence and real human suffering that affected the
country only a few years ago. In my view, the
challenges ahead relate particularly to the tightness of

3

S/PV.6309

the electoral calendar and to the management of
tensions that may arise on the day of elections, as
results are announced, or in the resolution of any
subsequent electoral disputes. We have established a
United Nations task force which will closely monitor
and react to any contingency needs for logistical or
other support to the National Independent Electoral
Commission. I am also happy to note that the
Commission has provided training to political parties
to sensitize them on the peaceful management of
electoral results. And again, the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB) is working
attentively with partners to support a process for the
orderly, careful and non-partisan management of any
disputes.
I am happy to note that, by the start of this year,
incidents of pre-electoral violence on the part of young
people associated with political parties had already
started to decrease. That said, isolated incidents
continue to be reported. We must all watch vigilantly to
ensure that, with the formal electoral campaign now
under way, such violence does not re-emerge as a
significant threat.
The forthcoming elections will represent the
culmination of almost two decades of hard work in the
cause of peace by the people of Burundi, their political
leaders, the leaders of the region and the African
continent, and supported by us, Burundi’s friends and
partners at the international level. As I have suggested,
the preparations for the elections are grounds for
cautious optimism. I would like to reiterate that the
elections in Burundi are significant not only for the
country, but also for the subregion. Many of Burundi’s
close and less close neighbours are also embarking
upon challenging electoral cycles. We believe that
successful and peaceful elections in Burundi would
raise the bar and set the true standards for remarkable
progress in the broader region.
But looking beyond the elections, the country
will continue to face socio-economic, political and
security challenges that will continue to need
addressing. Continued close engagement by the wider
international community will remain crucial to
ensuring that the gains achieved are irreversible and
that the country continues on its path of economic
recovery and sustainable development. One question
that the Government has already begun to discuss in
very broad terms with the United Nations is what form
United Nations engagement should best take after the

4

installation of a new Government, and I look forward
to continuing that conversation with the Government,
with the successor administration that issues from the
elections, with international partners, and with this
Council.
Finally, I would be remiss indeed if I did not take
the opportunity of this briefing to salute the tireless
work of my predecessor, Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, as
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as of Deputy Executive Representative Bintou
Keita, who has played such a pivotal role in the run-up
to these elections and during the interregnum in the
leadership of BINUB.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Petrie for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Grau.
Mrs. Grau: I appreciate the fact that the
representative of Burundi and the Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission are
invited to participate when the Council discusses the
situation in Burundi. I have the honour to read out this
statement on behalf of Ambassador Peter Maurer, the
Chair of the country-specific meeting on Burundi, who
has had to leave New York on urgent matters.
I thank Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General Charles Petrie for his briefing. The
Burundi configuration will have a meeting tomorrow to
hear first-hand from Mr. Petrie and to discuss the
situation on the eve of the elections.
Later this month, Burundi will embark on a fivestage national election cycle that will last until early
September and will renew all elected positions at all
levels of Government in the country. In all our contacts
with the Burundians, they have expressed their hope
and aspiration that this extended exercise in electoral
democracy will provide new legitimacy for their
institutions and produce the comprehensive political
stability necessary to further building peace and a
sustainable economic future for the country.
Since the Council’s most recent meeting on this
item, A delegation of the Burundi configuration visited
the country at the end of February. The delegation met
with all stakeholders, including the President, and
assisted in the preparation of the fourth biannual
review of the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in
Burundi, which was completed on 24 March with the
adoption of recommendations and conclusions.

10-35583

S/PV.6309

The delegation’s assessment of the overall
situation was positive. We do not close our eyes to the
numerous pitfalls and challenges awaiting Burundi on
its way to consolidated peace, but over the course of
now three visits of the Chair to the country we have
seen progress. Important issues that were feared to
have the potential to derail the process have been
tackled. This is particularly true for the creation of an
environment conducive to the holding of free, fair and
peaceful elections that the configuration continuously
insists on. We saw difficulty in producing means of
identification for citizens willing to vote, and this
difficulty has been overcome. We continue to see
widespread concern about political youth groups
spreading fear and intimidation among people of
different political persuasions. In our meetings with the
ministers concerned, we were assured of the
willingness of the Government to tackle the issue.
Burundi, together with the Peacebuilding
Commission has successfully worked on the financing
of the elections. It has been possible to mobilize almost
all the resources needed. I would like to thank all
Member States and international institutions that made
this possible, and to appeal to potential donors —
traditional and non-traditional — to contribute to
closing the remaining gap. I would also like to thank
the Government of Burundi, the National Independent
Electoral Commission, the political parties and the
media for their role in the successful preparation of the
electoral process.
Successful elections in Burundi will be key to
solidifying the political foundation for peace and
economic development in the country. Burundi is the
first among a number of countries in the region to hold
elections this year. With successful and peaceful
elections, Burundi can lead by example. There should
be a dividend for this particular contribution to peace.
Burundi will need more investment far beyond the over
$40 million used for the elections. It will need
investment in the socio-economic integration of the
hundreds of thousands of internally displaced persons,
returnees and demobilized fighters; investment in
labour-intensive infrastructure and agriculture projects;
and investment in the development of economic sectors
that can provide jobs, livelihoods and a future for the
millions of Burundians living in poverty.
Given the budgetary pressure mounting in most
Member States, and among traditional donors in

10-35583

particular, it will be necessary to reach out to private
investors willing to take a risk with Burundi.
The configuration will continue to hold an
international spotlight on Burundi as it evolves in
building peace. The Peacebuilding Commission should
stand ready to help in building partnerships with
international financial institutions, regional entities and
representatives of the private sector willing to explore
opportunities in Burundi. The Burundi Configuration
also remains available as a political platform for all
stakeholders. Finally, it remains the Configuration’s
task to ensure that no peacebuilding issues fall by the
wayside.
This year, we have a good opportunity to reflect
together with Burundi on how to further integrate
international
support
for
peacebuilding
and
development. We will have to renew existing
frameworks. The Burundi Government, supported by
the World Bank, is developing a new Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper. The Security Council will
decide on a new mandate for the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi. The Peacebuilding
Commission will review its engagement with Burundi.
Taking the case of Sierra Leone as an example, it
would be desirable to streamline and harmonize these
efforts and to aim at merging the new Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper with a new Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding. It is important for
essential peacebuilding issues to be identified and
addressed in all three of these contexts. It might be
helpful to institute a regular exchange on these matters
and to start exploring possibilities at an early stage.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mrs. Grau for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Burundi.
Mr. Gahutu (Burundi) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to express, on behalf of my
delegation, my sincere thanks to the President of the
Security Council for having organized this meeting on
the situation in Burundi. Since this is the first time I
have taken the floor since your accession to the
presidency of the Council, Sir, I should also like to
offer our best wishes for your success in discharging
your duties this month. We are convinced that your
experience and your human and intellectual talents will
help to give a fresh impetus to the work of the Council.

5

S/PV.6309

At the same time, I cannot neglect to take this
opportunity to pay due tribute to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Japan, for the excellent
work he accomplished last month.
My delegation welcomes the presence among us
of Mr. Charles Petrie, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General for Burundi. Given that this is the
first time I have spoken publicly since his appointment,
my delegation should like to wish him every success in
his new role. We assure him of the full cooperation of
the Government of Burundi in the execution of his
mandate.
This meeting is timely, as only a few days have
passed since the launch on 5 May of the official twoweek campaign period leading up to the communal
elections to be held on 21 May. The elections will be
contested by between 23 of the 44 political parties
officially recognized under Burundian law.
As all those present here are aware, the
presidential elections will take place on 28 June. The
public will decide among candidates for deputy on
23 July, while senators will be chosen one week later,
on 28 July. The electoral cycle will end on 7 September
2010 with the election of councillors at the colline level.
Despite the monumental work required to
organize such an electoral marathon, today we can say
with confidence that the 2010 elections will take place
to the satisfaction of the Burundian people and the
international community alike. Several early signs and
the important phases already completed point to the
successful holding of these elections. Without giving
an exhaustive list, I shall now mention some of the
steps already taken.
The National Independent Electoral Commission
has been established, as have a consensus electoral
code and calendar. A voter registration operation was
carried out with great success, as was a countrywide
census. In contrast to those of 2005, which were held
while the Forces nationales de libération was still
underground, the 2010 elections will be held in a calm
and peaceful military-political climate.
Plans for election security have been carefully
developed and will be executed with professionalism in
order to avoid any potential problem that might
compromise the smooth conduct of the elections. The
security measures taken by our Government, which
have been operational since the beginning of the

6

electoral campaign on 5 May, seem to be working very
well. To show the importance of the security aspect of
the elections, the Government has just made $2 million
in additional funds available to that end. Some donors
have also made contributions, for which we express
great thanks.
The presence of a great number of regional and
international observers is a further guarantee of the
holding of free and transparent elections. The President
of the Republic, through various forums, has invited
observers to deploy in great numbers to supervise the
correct holding of the elections so as to ensure that no
one will be able to play the bad loser by resorting to
false claims of electoral fraud.
Press freedom is reaching new heights. A synergy
of media has already been established to cover the
elections. The majority of the mass media signed a joint
media action plan charter in 2010, committing
themselves to pooling their resources and respecting
professional principles of balance, fairness and respect
for pluralism in their election coverage. A total of 15
local public and private radio stations have joined
forces to cover the campaign. Journalists have fanned
out throughout the country to bring the highlights of the
electoral campaign to the public in four languages —
Kirundi, French, English and Kiswahili. We already felt
the positive effects of this approach in 2005, and its
repetition this year will cement the success of this
exercise, which could thus serve as an example on our
continent.
An environment favourable to the successful
holding of elections has been established. This
environment is already real and can be seen on a daily
basis, as attested by the fact that the partners are
increasingly turning to dialogue as a natural habit. A
number of meetings have been organized between the
Ministry of the Interior, the Independent National
Electoral Commission, political parties, civil society
organizations and the media to provide for the
discussion of various issues related to the elections.
We estimate that, in fact, pre- and post-electoral
activities are just as important as the elections
themselves, which will make it necessary to provide
support activities before, after and during the electoral
period in order to learn lessons, develop capacities and
create institutional memory with a view to improving
electoral processes in Burundi and establishing en
exemplary democracy for our region.

10-35583

S/PV.6309

The communal election campaign that began on
5 May across the country is proceeding normally and
no major incidents have been reported. That augurs
well for the remainder of the electoral process.
The political climate and the legal and operational
frameworks for free and transparent elections already
exist. With regard to financing, it should be noted that
the revised total budget for the five polls comes to
$30 million. A few weeks ago the basket fund deficit
was $20.8 million; now, that deficit has been reduced
thanks to new and additional contributions.
As I have said, the Government of Burundi has
made fresh efforts and has contributed $2 million for
election security costs. Belgium, France, Germany,
Luxembourg, the United Kingdom and the United States
have also made new contributions. The Peacebuilding
Fund has made $3 million available, and we thank the
Fund for that shot in the arm in support of the electoral
process now under way. The managers of the electoral
basket fund have made savings of $4 million in various
areas.
Less than two weeks remain before the start of the
first round of elections, set for 21 May, the budget for
the electoral cycle remains in deficit. To be sure, the
situation is less alarming than it was at the time of the
meeting of the Peacebuilding Commission on 24 March,
but it still demands due attention from our partners, to
whom we urgently appeal for additional funding to
make up this deficit. My Government hopes that the
partners who work with us daily on the peacebuilding
process in Burundi will be engines for mobilizing and
disbursing the additional financial resources still
necessary. We all hope that the 2010 elections will be a
shared success.
Eagerness to ensure funding for the elections
should not eclipse the other needs of Burundi and its
people in the area of long-term development. The two

10-35583

campaigns for the mobilization of resources should
thus take place simultaneously to create an
environment conducive to the holding of free,
transparent and peaceful elections. The electoral cycle
under way is the longest electoral marathon in
Burundi’s recent history. It will last four months, and
in the meantime the socio-economic engine must
continue to run and must be fed with fuel. By “fuel”
we mean aid for long-term development projects and
future foreign investment in Burundi. In particular, I
am referring to the national strategy for the socioeconomic reintegration of conflict-affected populations
and the priorities identified during the first conference
of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Burundi, which
should be the object of sustained attention by the
international community.
I wish to conclude by thanking Burundi’s
regional partners, the entire international community
and all those from near and far who have invested their
time and energy working for the cause of peace in
Burundi. My delegation assures the Council that
Burundians are more determined than ever to pursue
the culture of dialogue in resolving electoral conflicts
before, during and after the elections. We are also
firmly resolved to succeed in the challenge of holding
free, transparent and peaceful elections. We did so in
2005 and promise the international community that we
will do so again and make Burundi a haven of peace
and an example of successful democracy on the
African continent and, in particular, in our subregion.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers on my list. In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

7
