78

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

crease their assistance to thc people of Ethiopia for
relief, rehabilitation and rccovery of the droughtstricken areas;
4. Calls upan all conccrned to cnsure that the
international assistancc provided be used for the sole
purpose of relief and rehabilitation;
5. Invites the Secretary-General, the United Nations Disaster Relicf Co-ordinator and the Administrator of the United Nations Developmcnt Programme
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session and to the Economic and Social Council at its
sixty-fourth session on the implementation of paragraphs 2 to 4 above and of other rclevant resolutions
of the Assemhly and the Council.
98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

32/56.

Office of the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2816 (XXVI) of 14 Deccmber ] 971, establishing the Office of the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, 3243 (XXIX) of 29
Novembcr J 974 on the strcngthening of that Office.
3440 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, which provides,
inter alia, for measures to be taken in support of thc
activities of the Office, and 3532 (XXX) of 17 December 1975 on the financing of emergency relicf
assistance and technical co-operation activities of the
Office,
Recalling also section II, paragraph 14, of its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of I 6 September ] 975,
Reaffirming its resolution 31/ 173 of 2 I Deccmber
1976 in which, in ter alia, it recognized the need for the
maintcnance of the activities of thc core programme of
the Office of the United Nations Disastcr Relief Coordinator and provided for measures for securing a
sound financia! basis for the Office as well as fo~ a
review by thc Economic and Social Council in 1978
of alternative sources of funding for thc technical cooperation activities of the Office,
Bearing in mind that the Office of thc United Nations
D!sa_ster Reli~f Co-o~dinator. as a permanent body
w1thm the Umted Nat10ns system, is rcsponsihle, ínter
alia, for co-ordinating international disaster relief assistance,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the Officc
of the United Nations Disaster Rclief Co-ordinator; 2 º
2. Commends the Unitcd Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator for his efforts on behalf of the victims
of disasters;

3. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 2102 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977 on measures
to expcdite international relief;
4. Invites Governments of disaster-prone countries
to undertake measures of planning and preparedness
for the provision of relief to victims of natural disasters
and to co-ordinate their efforts with those of and
co-operate with, the international community,' and
requests the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief
20 A/32/64 and Corr.l.

Co-ordinator to assist those countries m this work to
the extent possible;
5. Urges rcsident representatives of the United
Nations Development Programme, in collaboration with
the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator and appropriate specialized agencies, to cooperate with and assist Governments that wish to
include in their country programmes projects to reduce
thc impact of disasters and lessen their long-term socioeconomic cffects;
6. Reafjirms that the Sccretary-General should continuc to have the capacity to contributc emergency
relief assistancc to countries as a first response to disastcr situations:
7. Decides to examine at its thirty-third session the
question of future financia} arrangements for ensuring
a sound financia! basis for the core programme of the
Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator with a vicw to including in the draft programme
hudget for the hiennium 1980-1981 proposals for a
further transfcr of appropriate costs from voluntary
funding to the Unitcd Nations regular budget;
8. Requests the Committee for Programme and Coordination to take thc prescnt resolution into consideration whcn formulating its recommendations on thc
medium-term plan for the period 1980-1983.
98th plenary meeting
R December 1977

~2/;"i7.

Examination of long-term treurls in f'<'O•
nomi<' deYelopment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of l May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New Intcrnational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 197 4 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Dutics of States and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
Scptembcr 1975 on dcvelopment and international cconomic co-operation.
RecognizinR that the United Nations activities initiated by General Assembly resolution 3508 (XXX) of
15 Deccmbcr 1975, entitled "Examination of long-tcrm
trcnds in the cconomic development of the regions of
the world". ~o be continued and expanded on the basis
of Econom1c and Social Council resolution 2090
(LXIII) of 25 July 1977, should contributc to the
establishment of the ncw international economic order
and, in this context. to the process of international
cconomic negot_i~tions relating, inter alia, to trade, prim ary commod1t1es, food problems, industrialization,
monetary problems and other issues of primordial importancc for cconomic and social dewlopmcnt on a
global scak,
Bearing in mind that the regional studies involved
should be so designed as to reach practica! conclusions
rcgarding (he expansion of cconomic co-opcration on
hoth a regional and an international scalc,
Bearing a/so in mind the need to study long-tcrm
prospects for the social and economic development of
~he vari_ou~ regions of t_h_e world and on global scale,
mte: alta,_ m order to ut1hze, as appropriate, thc results
ach1cvcd m the work 011 the new intcrnational developmcnt strategy,

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting that studies and projections of long-~e~m
trends and their implications for development pohc1es
will be considered by the Committec for Dcvelopment
Planning at its fourteenth session,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of t~e
Secretary-General on long-term trends in the econom1c
development of the various regions of the world_ and
their mutual relationship and studies of the regional
commissions annexed thereto, 21 prepared in accordance
with paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution
3508 (XXX);
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 2090 (LXIII), in particular paragraph 4 thereof,
which contains the rccommcndation to start, on thc
basis of the regional studies under ~ay, prepa~ations
for the elahoration of an over-all soc10-econom1c perspective of the development of the world economy up
to the year 2000, with special cmphasis _on the ye_ars
up to 1990 and on the problems of dcvelopmg countnes;
3. Reafjirms the necessity to take into account, as
appropriate, regional and global long-term prospects
for economic and social development during thc preparatory process for, and in the elaboration of, the
new international development strategy;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session, through
the Economic and Social Council, the progress report
referred to in Council resolution 2090 (LXIII);
5. Decides to consider the status of the examination of long-term economic trends at its thirty-fourth
session as a separate agenda ítem;
6. Invites all States, as well as the concerned organizations, organs and bodies within the United Nations system, to reply to requests for information which
may be made in the course of the implementation of
the present resolution.
98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

32/92.

Assistance to the Comoros

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/ 42 of 1 December 1976
relating to assistance to the Comoros, in which it requested thc Secretary-General to mobilize financia!,
technical and economic assistancc from the international
community, particularly from the developed countries
and the appropriatc organizations within the United
Nations system, with a view to meeting the short-tcrm
and long-term development nceds of this ncwly independcnt country,
Recalling its resolution 31/ 15 6 of 21 December
1976, in which it recommended spccific action by the
developed countries in favour of devcloping island
countries,
Having regard to thc particularly exceptional circumstances in which the Comoros acceded to independence
on 6 July 1975,
Taking note of the island character of this developing country and of the serious economic situation with
which it had to <leal immediately after its accession to
independence,
21 E/5937 and Corr.1, E/5937/Add.l and Corr.1 and 2,
E/5937 / Add.2-4 and Add.4/Corr. l.

79

Having regard to Economic and Social Council dec~sion 25 2 (LXIII) of 29 July I 977, in which the ~ouncil
took note, ínter alia, of the vicw of the Comm1ttce for
Dcvelopment P!anning 22 conccrning the inclusion of
thc Comoros in the Iist of thc least dcveloped countries, 2 :1
H aving regare! to thc vcry substantial sacrificc_s made
by thc Government a_nd peoplc o~ t~e C?mº:ºs m rcorganizing and improvmg the adm1111strat10n m both the
social and economic ficlds,
Noting the statement of the rcprcsentativc of the
Secrctary-Gcneral, which emphasized the urgency of
providing increased assistancc adapted to the real needs
of thc young rcpublic of thc Comoros, 24
Having studicd the report of the Secretary-General25
transmitting the report of the United Nations Mission
to the Comoros which revicws the extremely critica!
economic situation in the Comoros and contains, intcr
alia, a list and the cost of urgent projects formulated
by the Government of the Comoros that requirc intcrnational assistancc,
1. Endorses the assessment and recommendations
of thc United Nations Mission to thc Comoros; 2 n
2. Draws the atte11tion of the intcrnational community to the critical budgctary situation confronting the
Comoros;
3. Ca/ls thc attention of the international community to the Iist of urgcnt projects submitted by thc Government of thc Comoros for financing, 27 as described
in thc report transmitted by the Secretary-General;
4. Urges Mcmber States and regional and intergovernmental organizations to respond generously and
to continuc to provide the Comoros with the cconomic,
financia! and material assistance necessary to meet the
cost of the projects and other measures referred to in
the report of thc Mission;
5. Urges the specialized agencies and othcr organizations of the United Nations system-in particular
the Unitcd Nations Development Programme, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Developmcnt,
the Intcrnational Monctary Fund, the Food and Agriculturc Organization of the United Nations, the Internation:d Fund for Agricultura! Devclopment, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
Unitcd Nations Children's Fund and the Unitcd Nations
Educational, Scicntific and Cultural Organization-to
grant incrcased assistancc to the Comoros and to coopcratc with the Secretary-General in organizing an
cficctivc intcrnational programme of assistance to that
country;
6. Decides to include the Comoros in thc list of
the léast developed countries;
7. Exprcsses its deep satisfaction regarding thc
measures taken by the Secrctary-General to organize
an cffective programmc of international assistance to
the Comoros;
8. Notes with appreciation the assistance already
providcd or pledged to the Comoros by Member States,
22 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/5939 and Corr.1 ),
para. 83.
2 3 See resolutions 2768 (XXVI) and 3487 (XXX).
24 O/]icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Second Committee, 41st meeting, paras. 9-12.
25 A/32/208 and Add.1 and 2.
205ee A/32/208/Add.1 and 2.
:!7 A/32/208/Add.l, annex I.
