S/PV.7616

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7616th meeting

Friday, 29 January 2016, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-02273 (E)
*1602273*

S/PV.7616

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on a successful
presidency of the Security Council. It is my honour to
be the first speaker to share observations about this
month as a newly elected member. Japan welcomes
today’s formal wrap-up session. We also welcome your
initiative, Sir, to hold an informal session this afternoon,
which will allow us to have an interactive dialogue with
the broader membership of the United Nations. As this
session is in open format, let me suggest to you, Elbio,
to start this afternoon’s informal session with questions
and answers.
Let me first touch upon the working methods of the
Council. I would like to remind all Council members
that in presidential note S/2010/507, of which I have
a copy with me, all participants in Security Council
meetings are encouraged, in paragraph 29, to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less. Making a short
statement is not easy. Winston Churchill once said, “If
I had more time, I would have written a shorter letter”.
Let me try to follow the five-minute rule.
The Security Council has dealt with many difficult
issues during the month of January. Among them, I
would like to concentrate on the nuclear test conducted
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on
6 January. The test was a clear violation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the international
non-proliferation regime. It also constitutes a grave
security threat that undermines peace and security
in the region and beyond. On the day of the nuclear
test, the Security Council immediately held emergency
consultations upon a request by Japan, the United
States and the Republic of Korea. The Security
Council was united in issuing a press statement right
after the meeting, which strongly condemned the test
2/18

29/01/2016

and decided to begin working immediately on further
significant measures in a new draft resolution of the
Security Council.
As one of the proponents of the emergency meeting,
let me express our appreciation for the cooperation of
all Council members. After the very swift reaction by
the Council, informal discussions have been conducted
towards a new draft resolution. We would like to
commend the efforts led by the United States, which
holds the pen. Japan believes that adopting a new draft
resolution with further significant measures needs to
be the top, urgent priority of the Council.
Sanctions under the Charter of the United Nations
are not a punishment or the final objective. Rather,
sanctions are one of the important tools that the Council
has at its disposal to bring about a comprehensive
solution to the issue in question. We agree that in
order to bring about a solution to the issue there has
to be dialogue. But we should also be reminded that
we have been engaged in dialogue with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea for more than 20 years
on their nuclear development programme. Also, past
agreements and dialogues have not succeeded in
bringing about a solution. Those agreements include the
1994 Agreed Framework, the Pyongyang declaration
between Japan and the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in 2002 and the Joint Statement of the Six-Party
Talks in 2005 — just to mention a few. But none of
those attempts worked, as promises by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea were not kept. In order for
dialogue to work, there has to be pressure at the same
time. That is the very reason that we are arguing for a
new, robust draft resolution.
In stark contrast to the grave challenge posed to the
non-proliferation regime by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, the international community
witnessed a positive development with regard to the
Iranian nuclear issue, namely, the advent, on 16 January,
of the implementation day of resolution 2231 (2015).
As a result, United Nations sanctions related to Iran’s
nuclear programme were lifted. That is clear proof that
sanctions do work.
Before concluding my statement, Mr. President, I
would like to commend you and the entire Uruguayan
team for your incredible work. It must have been a big
challenge for Uruguay to assume the presidency in its
very first month on the Council. Having been on the
Council with you for one month, Sir, I have learned a
16-02273

29/01/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

S/PV.7616

tremendous amount from your effective and professional
conduct of the presidency. I wish Ambassador Rafael
Darío Ramírez Carreño and Venezuela every success in
the month of February.

It is hard to have a conversation when you have such
different views of life. On the other hand, it was very
important that we went there. I think that was a very
important demonstration of the Council’s concern.

Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I, too, want to
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on the very
efficient and effective manner in which you and your
team have managed our work during the past month,
which has been a very busy one. I also want to commend
the new members. I was very impressed at the way that
all of them immediately became very active, engaged
and efficient in our work.

I was very pleased with the conversations in Addis
Ababa, where I think we had a really good engagement
with the African Peace and Security Council — a very
frank discussion with them about the challenges we
face. I came away from that meeting convinced that
the only way we will make progress on this issue is
if the Security Council and the African Peace and
Security Council and the East African Community all
work together. We cannot afford to be divided. I really
welcome that engagement, which I think is something
we should be making more of.

It is very good to have this wrap-up session, two
sessions, in fact, as the Ambassador of Japan has
mentioned, as we are having a formal session here
today — and there have been requests from the wider
membership for more of these formal wrap-ups — and,
I am pleased to note, we are also going to continue the
recent tradition of an informal wrap-up, this afternoon.
Here in the Chamber we tend to speak from
prepared texts because we are stating the positions of
our Governments on the important issues of the day.
But I am not using a prepared text, other than a few
scrappy notes, because I want to focus on another
aspect of our work here today. I think that the Council
does very well in stating its positions nationally, but it
does not do so well in what I see as its core business,
which is problem-solving. We need to spend more time
talking to each other about how we solve the problems
on our agenda, and less time stating our positions for
the record. I think that is an issue that New Zealand
will continue to promote for the remainder of our time
here on the Council. Taking that perspective, I want
to address two issues that came up on our agenda this
month.
The first is the issue of Burundi. I would like to
thank France and Egypt for their very accurate reports
and summations (see S/PV.7615) of the conversations
we had in Bujumbura and with the African Union Peace
and Security Council in Ethiopia. It was a great relief
to New Zealand that we finally managed to get the trip
to Burundi under way. It was something we had asked
for over six months ago. It was a disappointing trip
in lots of ways. We found it very difficult to engage
with the Government of Burundi on the issues because,
as we heard from the representative of France, the
perspectives of the Government, on the one side, and
the opposition, on the other, were so very different.

The second issue I want to talk about today is Syria,
which has dominated a lot of our time on the Council.
First I want to pay tribute to Spain, our collaborator
on the Syrian humanitarian file, as well as to welcome
Egypt, which is joining us now on this very difficult set
of issues. In this case we had another example where
the world responded when something really graphically
grim was put in front of us, that is, the starvation in
Madaya — a little like the drowned boy on the Turkish
beach. We all rushed to respond in a very dramatic way.
But we should have been doing that much earlier. Again,
this is a classic failure of the international community
and of the Council in responding to information we
knew was there but we had not grabbed the issue or
acted quickly enough.
I was reminded of being here in the Chamber
20 years ago when we knew what was happening in
Rwanda. But it was only when the cameras got to Goma
and saw the refugee situation there that we actually
got an international response. Again, it was months
too late. We need to be much better at grabbing these
issues, working with them and not just waiting for the
television cameras to spur us into action.
Those are the thoughts that I wanted to contribute
today. I wish to thank the members of the Council for
being such excellent colleagues.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I could not agree more with the opening comment by
the Ambassador of Japan, specifically the quotation
from Churchill and the five minutes. It is a topic I am
obsessed with, I must admit. We talk too much, with
not many initiatives carried to success. We do not
implement things properly.

16-022733/18

S/PV.7616

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

For that reason, if I may, allow me to mention that
in the last open debate in which we spoke on working
methods (see S/PV.7516), Spain carried out a new but
important exercise, namely, gathering the opinions of
the broader membership. Those views were reflected
in a document that I circulated among all members.
I think those are good working methods — when we
speak little in the Chamber and yet take full advantage
of what was actually said in the Chamber.
Since this is the first wrap-up session since August
2015, and so I therefore feel I can speak about what has
happened between August and today. I quite agree with
Mr. Gerard van Bohemen that it is better to improvise
with certain ideas and to share reflections, rather than to
give a lengthy account of everything that has happened.
I would like to differentiate between where I think the
Council has had success and conducted itself well and
where I think it needs to improve. I think that, since
August, the Council has conducted itself very well in
many cases, especially in two.
The first was in the adoption of resolution 2242
(2015), on women and peace and security. I do not
simply say that because it was adopted during the
Spanish presidency of the Council, but because,
working very well with the United Kingdom, and
starting with very wide-ranging positions among those
at the table, we were able reach overall consensus on
a very ambitious and important text that, among toher
things, sets up an informal working group that will
enable the implementation of resolution 2242 (2015) to
become an actual reality.
The second area where I think the Council was
successful was the nuclear agreement with Iran. I say
that because I had the weighty responsibility to be
the facilitator of the new mechanism established in
resolution 2231 (2015), which presupposes major efforts
from the Spanish Mission as facilitator, as well as for
the Secretariat and other institutions. Let me say that it
is my intention to hold an open briefing to all Members
of the United Nations no later than within the next two
weeks, so that the membership can properly understand
how the new mechanism is going to operate when it
comes to commercial relations with Iran. I will make a
very general announcement.
On the negative side of things, in the first place, we
obviously have the question of Syria. When it comes to
Syrian policy, we have not been able to put an end to the
war there. We have our fingers crossed that the meetings
4/18

29/01/2016

in Geneva today will conclude successfully. They have
not begun as we would have hoped, but they have begun
anyway. On the humanitarian front in Syria, although
it is a real pleasure to work with Gerard and with our
friend Amr from Egypt, unfortunately, we cannot give
ourselves good marks, as the humanitarian statistics are
becoming increasingly worse. For that reason, the three
of us have come up with mechanisms to ensure that
there are no more Madayas, as well as to improve the
response levels of the Syrian Government to requests
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. Those are two important priorities.
On the chemical weapons front, that is working well
because very soon we will be getting the first results
from the Joint Investigative Mechanism. That leads me
to mention at this important forum that we are in the
middle of an important process of reviewing resolution
1540 (2004), which will conclude in December. My
goal in that review process, with the help of Council
members, is to ensure that resolution 1540 (2004) is
sufficiently effective to truly halt the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors.
In my notes, on the negative side, there is also
Burundi. In that context, let me say that, although the
results of the Council’s trip were not what we expected,
I will say the Council has performed well, insofar as
we managed to carry out a trip at an important time
to prevent a situation we all fear. I think we should
be satisfied with our conduct in that regard. Results,
however, are a different matter.
There are various other initiatives that have gone
very well. I will just touch on resolution 2261 (2016),
on Colombia, which shows that States have trust in
the Security Council. That is an important matter. I
would mention as well as the important resolution 2249
(2015), on combating terrorism, as well as resolution
2253 (2015), on the financing of terrorism.
To conclude, so as not to exceed my five minutes,
Mr. President, I congratulate you for the excellent work
you have done in the Council in your first month. I also
commend you for following the tradition we began a
few months ago with Toledo-style wrap-up sessions,
such as the one that will take place at 3 o’clock today.
Such sessions make it possible to have a more informal
exchange on the opinions about our work with the wider
membership of the United Nations.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to begin by warmly thanking you and your
16-02273

29/01/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

entire team, Mr. President, for the sustained efforts
throughout Uruguay’s presidency of the Security
Council during the month of January. I also wish to
say just how much we appreciate your foresight in
recognizing the Council’s priorities, your high degree
of professionalism in easing the Council’s work and
your team’s keenness to communicate with everyone.
I also welcome the initiative to convene this wrapup session on the Council’s work in the month of
January, a month during which the Council dealt with
a particularly hectic schedule and extremely important
issues that have a direct impact on peace and security.
During the past few weeks, the international
challenges proved to be particularly complex, which
demanded fortitude and cooperation going forward.
Given those challenges — Israel’s persistent occupation
of Palestinian territory, the exacerbation of the risk and
dangers of terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, political and humanitarian crises
that are spreading from Syria to Central Africa to
Yemen, the many challenges facing West Africa and
sub-Saharan Africa, the issues of Cyprus and of Haiti,
the support for the historic peace accords in Colombia,
and now, our responsibility to protect civilians during
conflict — all these issues fall to the responsibility
vested in the Security Council to tackle challenges to
international peace and security.
Egypt, during previous meetings of the Council,
has spoken on critical issues. For that reason, I will
focus solely on the mission of the Council to Burundi
as a model for analysing the work of the Council in
effectively tackling crises on our agenda and to say that
the strength of the Council lies in its shared vision and
joint action in tackling such crises. As far as we are
concerned, the mission can be counted as among the
major achievements of the Council this month, given
that it represented genuine engagement with a crisis
that requires our close and timely attention because it is
of concern to the international community and because
of the reality of the situation and the means available
to resolve it. That was a visit that enabled the Security
Council to directly come to grips with the reality on the
ground. We were able to sit down and speak with a wide
array of national stakeholders. We held discussions with
those in charge of various spheres of life in Burundi and
came away from that with several positive indicators
that we then took to the Burundian leaders, to say that
they needed to strengthen their actions.

S/PV.7616

The message, therefore, on the part of the
Security Council to the President of Burundi could be
considered as one of the direct outcomes of that visit.
The informal dialogue with the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union also helped us to come up
with a comprehensive approach, and we also had other
means of better understanding the political and security
situation. I have full confidence that the members of the
Council came back with a deeper understanding with
what has taken place on the ground and a clearer vision
as to the options available to us.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
holding this monthly wrap-up session, which affords us
to look back on the issues and the work undertaken by
the Security Council in the period under consideration,
making it possible to chart a course for future meetings.
In that regard, allow me to commend the leadership
and wisdom that you have shown throughout your
outstanding presidency of the Security Council.
The glimmers of hope that have come from the
regularly held and peaceful elections in West Africa,
the establishment of a national unity Government
in Libya, significant progress in the Côte d’Ivoire
towards a successful transition and the positive course
of talks in Colombia and Cyprus have partly offset
the particularly disastrous humanitarian effects and
myriad consequences of the violence in Syria, the
lethargy of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process and
the continuation of terrorist attacks throughout nearly
the entire world. We are fortunate, Sir, that you called
for two important open debates on the ministerial level
(see S/PV.7606 and S/PV.7610) — on the protection of
civilians and on the situation in the Middle East and
the question of Palestine — which afforded us a deeper
understanding to more efficiently direct our action.
The report of the Regional Office for West and
Central Africa illustrates how, through preventive,
proactive and better coordinated diplomacy and with the
support of the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations can make conflict prevention a reality.
From Nigeria to Togo to Burkina Faso to the Republic of
Guinea and to Côte d’Ivoire, successful elections have
attested to the continued and tenacious engagement
on the part of the Economic Community of West
African States — which my country has the honour of
chairing — and the ideals of peace, democracy, liberty
and the rule of law. That positive impetus deserves to

16-022735/18

S/PV.7616

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

be supported and strengthened with a view to future
elections in many countries in the subregion.
Another example of the positive results coming out of
your presidency, Sir, was the unanimous co-sponsoring
and adoption of resolution 2261 (2016), through which
the Council, following the request on the part of the
Government of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia, decided to create a special political
mission to monitor the peace process under way and the
surrendering of weapons, after the conclusion of a final
agreement to a conflict that has lasted nearly 50 years.
That mission reflects the commitment of the parties to
negotiated solutions and attests to the immense hope
invested in the United Nations, which the Senegalese
delegation strives to maintain. The same can be said of
the formation of a national accord Government in Libya
and of the positive events that we have seen driven by
the Cypriot, Greek and Turkish communities with the
view to resuming peace negotiations, with the support
of the United Nations.
Those significant advances on the path to peace,
however, must not hide the sad reality that millions of
civilians are living in disarray Africa and in the Middle
East. In that respect, allow me to dwell on several of
those situations.
The litany of terrorist attacks that occurred this
month shows the acuity if not the scale of a phenomenon
against which we continue to fight untiringly, but it also
represents the greatest threat to our security and the
ideals that constitute a model world. That leads me to
reiterate the overriding need to effectively implement
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
with a view to a pre-emptive holistic approach, which is
the only approach capable of reaching lasting solutions.
As we have heard at length, that applies to the situation
in the Middle East, on which I will not dwell.
With regard to the Horn of Africa and the difficult
situation in Somalia, on which we held rather intense
consultations yesterday, I would like to relaunch
the appeal that I made then for the international
community, individual States and international
organizations to continue their financial support at
this critical moment in Somalia’s history. We are now
seeing positive signs, particularly with regard to the
electoral process and the progressive return of Somali
expatriates — who are investing and believing in the
future of their country — all of which are elements that
merit the support of the international community.
6/18

29/01/2016

Lastly, to in conclusion, I would like to express to
you, Sir, how pleased the delegation of Senegal is to
participate at your side and, especially during the open
debate on the protection of civilians, which remains the
very essence of the commitment of Senegalese troops
in theatres of operation as they try to bring about
security throughout the world. I assure you of the full
cooperation of the Senegalese delegation on that issue.
We also eagerly await the Venezuelan presidency,
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Echoing Churchill’s
remarks, I too would like to say that if I had had the
time, I would have prepared a shorter statement. I join
other Security Council members in congratulating you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Uruguay for having
successully lead the Council during the productive
month of January, despite having only just recently
assumed membership of the Council. The excellent
manner in which you expertly steered the Council’s
work this past month is indeed commendable.
It is noteworthy that the last the time the Council met
in this formal wrap-up format (see S/PV.7516 we had just
adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2015/15, which
concerns the situation in Syria and outlines proposals
for the implementation of the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). Since then, the Council has made
further strides in addressing the Syrian conflict, most
notably with the adoption of several key outcomes last
December. In January, we assessed the implementation
of those decisions, particularly in resolution 2258
(2015). In our assessment, while limited access for
humanitarian relief and supplies had been secured
for Madaya, Kafraya and Zabadani, parties to the
conflict, especially the Government, must do more
to address the dire humanitarian situaion of Syrian
civilians in other besieged and hard-to-reach areas. We
strongly reiterate the call upon all parties to allow and
facilitate the movement and provision of humanitarian
relief, particularly across lines of combat. It is only
humane and right to do so. The concept of medical
neutrality, highlighted by Spain during the open debate
on the protection of civilians held on 19 January (see
S/PV.7606), seems particularly relevant in this regard.
We look forward with interest to reading about the
further development of the concept.
Looking a bit further back, to the end of 2015,
strong and action-oriented outcomes were adopted,
including on Burundi, Libya and South Sudan, as well
as on thematic issues such as counter-terrorism and
women and peace and security, inter alia.
16-02273

29/01/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

We have just now heard a briefing by the co-leaders
on the Council’s visit to Burundi last week. I wish to
emphasize the point that Burundi must realize that the
Council’s desire is to seek a better and more secure and
predictable future, and to address the current insecurity
issues through political inclusiveness and dialogue. We
therefore share the co-leaders’ assessment, particularly
on the need for the Government to do more to restore
public confidence and in maintaining security and law
and order for all segments of society in the country.
As demonstrated by the many significant decisions
taken during the past month or so, when Council
members demonstrated significant flexibility and
goodwill, we were able to come together to effectively
discharge the mandate of maintaining international
peace and security. We should continue to build on this
positive momentum.
Such solidarity was again demonstrated in the
Council’s swift and unified response to the nucleartest detonations by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea earlier this month. Malaysia reiterates its
condemnation of the test detonation, which we consider
to be an unwarranted provocation that could threaten
peace and security in the Korean peninsula and in the
wider region. The test violates international norms
against nuclear testing, to which all responsible members
of the international community are committed.
We also welcome once again the possibility of
advancing or achieving closure with respect to the
long-running conflict in Colombia. We congratulate
the parties, the grantors, the accompanying countries
and other partner stakeholders for their tireless
efforts towards peace in Colombia. We look forward
to working on operationalizing the special political
mission established by resolution 2261 (2016), which
will form part of the tripartite mechanism to monitor
and verify the ceasefire and cessation of hostilities
between the parties.
The Council also saw noteworthy and positive
developments on the Iran nuclear issue. In January,
implementation day of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action between Iran and its international partners,
prescribed under resolution 2231 (2015), has arrived,
and we welcome the lifting of United Nations and
other sanctions against Iran. We urge Iran to continue
to work closely with the International Atomic Energy
Agency and other relevant partners to remove all

S/PV.7616

lingering doubts as to the peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme.
In the light of such positive developments, we
would also encourage Iran to continue deepening
dialogue and cooperation with its regional partners
aimed at addressing the scourge of terrorism and the
various conflicts in the Middle East region.
Notwithstanding the very useful interactive
informal briefings held at the end of the past few
months, Malaysia continues to believe in the utility
and value of these formal wrap-up sessions. As such,
we are pleased that Uruguay has decided to hold this
formal wrap-up session and the informal briefing
later this afternoon, reflecting the views expressed by
elected Council members which had served earlier,
as well as the sentiments of the wider United Nations
membership. Malaysia is of the view that formal note
507 briefings such as this one should become a fixed
item on the Council’s programme of work, particularly
for the month of December. Among other reasons,
formal wrap-ups in December would provide outgoing
elected Council members with the opportunity to
place on record views and reflections on the Council’s
membership. At the same time, it would also afford an
opportunity for the Council as a whole to reflect on and
assess its performance over the past year. This would be
an important exercise in transparency and inclusivity
on the part of the Council.
While recognizing that the scheduling of Council
meetings, including the formal wrap-ups, is the
prerogative of the presidency during any given month,
we will be consulting closely with all Council members
in taking this proposal forward.
On that note, I conclude by wishing ambassador
Rafael Ramírez Carreño and the entire Venezuelan
delegation all the best in taking up the Council’s
presidency for February, which we believe will be
equally fulfilling and productive.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): On this last
working day of the first month of the year, it is a good
time to take stock and look ahead to the issues that we
will need to focus on in February and beyond. I would
like to take this opportunity to talk about three top
priorities, Syria, Burundi and North Korea, and also
to say a few words at the end about an aspect of our
working methods.

16-022737/18

S/PV.7616

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

29/01/2016

First, on Syria, the world has truly been shocked at the
appalling conditions and starvation in Madaya — images
of suffering with which we are now only too familiar.
While the Council repeatedly discussed the situation
in Madaya over the past few weeks and raised the
alarm about the need for more assistance, especially
medical care, we still face obstruction by the regime
and ruthlessness on the part of the forces on the ground,
which prevent the people of Madaya from getting what
they need. And as we know now, Madaya offers us only
a glimpse of the terrible suffering that is taking place
in communities across Syria. Earlier this week, during
its briefing to the Council (see S/PV/7612), the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs noted
that it had increased the number of besieged areas in
Syria from 15 to 18, and the number of people in those
besieged communities from 393,700 to 486,700. That is
an increase of more than 90,000 people trapped without
access to humanitarian assistance. With all the major
indicators going in the wrong direction, we simply must
find a more effective way to change the humanitarian
situation on the ground. Especially in the face of this
horrendous situation, it is all the more important that
the peace process move forward, and we strongly
support Special Envoy De Mistura in his continuing
efforts to convene the parties in Geneva.

must impose real consequences. Our agenda is packed
with many other priorities.

On Burundi, after much negotiation and difficult
planning, we managed to start the year with a trip,
on which we found an extremely tense and dangerous
situation. We heard from civil-society members who
had witnessed murder and from women who spoke
about sexual violence and rape. Local journalists
pleaded for the freedom to report, and the United
Nations briefed us on reports of mass graves and
ethnic violence. We urge the Government of Burundi
to conduct a serious dialogue with all stakeholders,
including the armed opposition. In terms of next steps,
we are closely following the African Union (AU) Heads
of State Summit set to take place this weekend. We
heard from the AU Peace and Security Council that it
is determined to ensure that the force of 5,000 that it
has already authorized is accepted in Burundi and then
actually deployed. Action is needed.

I would like to thank the delegation of Uruguay for
its leadership of the Council this month and to offer
our support to the incoming presidency of Venezuela.
I would like also to congratulate the Director of the
Security Council Affairs Division, Movses Abelian, for
his recently announced promotion and to thank him for
his steady stewardship of the Council over the past five
years.

On North Korea, as we said in our press statement,
the Council strongly condemned the nuclear tests
conducted by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
on 6 January, which is a clear threat to international
peace and security. In that statement, we recalled the
need to take further significant measures, and we now
8/18

We had a positive moment just last Monday, when
we adopted resolution 2261 (2016), on Colombia, the
Security Council’s response to the joint call made by
the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia for United Nations
engagement to help end the conflict. And, of course,
we will need to stay focused on Yemen, South Sudan
and many other locations.
But looking at the working methods of the Council,
we are in fact encouraged by one important aspect:
flexibility. In addition to the meetings listed on the
monthly programme of work, in 2015 the Council held
56 briefings under “Any other business”, more than
one a week and more than double the total in 2014.
We also had 17 Arria Formula meetings, more than in
2013 in 2014 combined. Now, of course, that number of
meetings does not equal the number of crises solved, or
even averted. We know that. We wish more meetings
would translate into more solutions to crises. But I
think that these figures do nonetheless show that the
Council is seeking to resolve the pressing crises that we
face today in a more timely way, often trying in a more
innovative manner to address these issues.

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I must begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, for your excellent
work in presiding over the Security Council as well as
that of your entire team. We are grateful, Sir, for the
way in which you led the Council this month, which
began so explosively and has been so full of major
issues that will continue to be priorities for us in the
month of February. It is also a great pleasure to receive
the presidency from a Latin American brother after 25
years of absence from the Security Council. Further,
in the spirit of the statements of the representatives of
Japan, New Zealand, Malaysia and Spain, who took
advantage of the opportunity today to reflect on issues
that we think are of vital importance in the Council,
16-02273

29/01/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

going beyond the narrower viewpoints of our national
positions, we would like to add the following.
First of all, we support the holding of these wrapup sessions because we think that, above all, we
as non-permanent members need to be transparent
and accountable for what we do and say here in the
Council, since we are here because we were elected
by the General Assembly. We therefore support the
accountability initiative as an activity that we will
engage in this afternoon with other members of the
Assembly.
I cannot help mentioning resolution 2261 (2016)
on Colombia as an extraordinary success during your
presidency, Mr. President. It is probably only we Latin
Americans who can truly appreciate the significance of
this step. For over 50 years, Colombia was plunged in
a bloody war whose various origins were very closely
linked to the social and political situation of all Latin
American countries, in particular a violent period of
years of political unrest following the assassination of
the leader Jorge Eliécer Gaitán Ayala. The fact that both
the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia—Ejército del Pueblo
have asked for Security Council support to monitor and
verify the implementation of new peace agreements is
not just a recognition of the work of the United Nations.
Indeed, through that action, the Security Council is
taking on great responsibility to ensure that this culture
of violence ceases, that weapons should be laid down
and that other mechanisms of war that exist in Colombia
should be dismantled, such as paramilitarism, the Plan
Colombia and other phenomena that are closely linked
to the conflict in that sister nation.
For us, Venezuela, as everyone knows, our liberator,
Simón Bolívar, was also Colombia’s liberator, as he was
the liberator of five other Latin American nations. For
us, our army crossed borders only to liberate our Latin
American brothers — never to attack any country. As
the late President Chávez Frías once said, one of our
strongest desires is to see peace — peace and social
justice — for our Colombian brothers. We think that
the adoption of this resolution was one of the most
important achievements in January. We wish to reiterate
our thanks to the United Kingdom, which, in a very
short amount of time, was able to facilitate a resolution
that is to a great extent in line with the agreements that
the parties reached during their last meeting in Havana.

S/PV.7616

Unfortunately, while we have this encouraging
news from Colombia, I must confess that we are not
comfortable with the way the Security Council is
addressing some issues and not others. The Security
Council has a very clear mandate pursuant to the
Charter of the United Nations. However, there are
certain problems that, due to national interests,
particularly those of the Council’s permanent members,
become priorities to such an extent that a single topic is
tackled four or five times in a month, when the reality
is that there is a conflict throughout entire regions such
as the Middle East that requires a shared, joint vision
to resolve it.
In this regard, I would highlight the question of
Palestine. The issue of Palestine is very frustrating
for us and a sign of the failure of the Security Council
thus far to work in a coordinated manner. There is no
consensus on the subject, and we have been unable to
adopt a single resolution in the last seven years. New
Zealand proposed a draft resolution. France is trying,
and we are expecting a draft resolution. I think the
Security Council should truly make it a goal this year to
propose a solution for the Palestinian people, because
what is happening in Palestine is utterly in violation of
international law.
This has nothing to do with Israel, nor it is against
the Israelis; we deeply regret the civilian deaths on both
sides. This is more a question of international law and
the need for the settlement activities in Palestine to end.
There is a need for Security Council resolutions to be
properly implemented. A response needs to be given
to the legitimate concerns of the Palestinian people,
with a solution based on the existence of two States.
Nor have we been able to promote Palestine becoming
accepted as a full-fledged State Member of the United
Nations, which is a prerogative of the Security Council
and is one of the prerequisites for moving forward in
negotiations, in the sense that it should be a given that
two States exist. Otherwise, Palestine will continue
to be subjected to disproportionate military action by
Israel and to an unending settlement process.
While we are gathered here, I would also mention
the Palestinian youth and the Palestinian people
who are being blockaded in Gaza. These people had
expectations and trust in the international community
that we have unfortunately failed to live up to.
Also with regard to the Middle East, we need to
recognize the situations in Iraq, in Syria and in Libya,

16-022739/18

S/PV.7616

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

which are all linked. They have the same origin, and
at some point we need to carry out an assessment of
the Security Council interventions in those conflicts
and what the results have been. Today, there are vast
territories where State institutions do not exist, where
there is no official institution of any kind nor any social
fabric that could provide a response for these peoples in
the face of the trauma of conflict. In Iraq, in Libya and
in Syria, most of the State institutions have collapsed,
and in the ensuing vacuum a new phenomenon has
arisen — new in terms of its size.
Terrorism is not a new phenomenon. Many
countries around this table have suffered from
terrorist acts. We have always condemned terrorism
on principle, but the terrorism we are seeing today is
highly funded with great military might. It is almost an
army, and it represents the development of a new kind
of war — one that uses social networks and appears
capable of countering all coalitions formed to fight it.
We believe that the Security Council needs to rethink
its action in the face of this new phenomenon in the
Middle East and make it a priority so as to address
these issues one by one, without leaving any one out.
We have discussed the issue of Syria. What has
happened in Syria is a tragedy. We reject the use of
starvation and siege against the population itself
as a weapon of war. We repudiate the attacks on
humanitarian agencies and on civilians. We condemn
what happened in Madaya.
But also we raise our voice in outcry against what is
happening in Yemen. As I said, there are issues that are
just not discussed. The situation in Yemen also needs
to be tackled because the same factors underpinning
the Syrian crisis are at play in the conflict in Yemen as
well. Clearly there needs to be a regional vision for the
solution to these conflicts.
With regard to Syria, the enormous effort
undertaken by the International Syria Support Group to
promote the negotiations in Geneva is an extraordinary
opportunity that I hope the Council will not squander.
I think Mr. De Mistura deserves the full support of the
Security Council. We are troubled that, at this stage,
parts of the opposition still have not agreed on who will
represent them and have put preconditions on initiating
the dialogue. We call on Council members that may
have influence on those parties to uphold the agreement
and remind them that it was agreed that they were going
to begin discussions without preconditions. We have
10/18

29/01/2016

said that humanitarian issues would be prioritized once
the peace talks began.
Finally, I must mention the situation in Burundi.
We have said on many occasions that we are particularly
troubled that 60 or 70 per cent of the conflicts on the
agenda of the sanctions committees take place in Africa.
That indicates that our brotherly African continent
continues to suffer the legacy of its colonialist past and
all the divisions within its countries. It is in constant
conflict. We appreciate the visit that the Council
conducted to Burundi and affirm that any action taken
by the Security Council, not withstanding its differences
with the authorities of the country concerned, must
must be in line with Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations and the principles of respect for national
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
I also thank the countries that have indicated their
active support for us as we assume the next presidency.
We hope that we will live up to the example of our
Latin American predecessor and hope to contribute to
international peace and security from that position on
the Security Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, and your team for a successful presidency.
You, Sir, have guided the Council through an eventful
month. Uruguay and the other new members of the
Council have really hit the ground running. I very much
agree with Mr. Motohide Yoshikawa on brevity.
We appreciate that you, Sir, have chosen to hold a
wrap-up briefing at the end of your month. I note that the
three most recent presidencies all held informal wrapups outside the Chamber with all General Assembly
members. Those have the same benefit as these formal
meetings in terms of transparency, but they have the
added benefit of allowing interactivity and allowing
all General Assembly colleagues to ask us questions.
Whether we do them formally or informally, I hope
that we can use these sessions to draw lessons on our
working methods. Here are three specific suggestions
drawn from experience this month. They are not
criticisms of the presidency; quite the opposite, they are
encouragement to go further still in modernizing the
working methods of the Security Council.
First of all, we saw in Burundi how Council visits
can have a real impact on the challenges we face. We
sent a strong message when we returned to Burundi
just 10 months after our last visit and we made clear
during the visit that we expect progress on what I
16-02273

29/01/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

call the three “Ds”: de-escalation, dialogue and some
form of deployment of an international presence.
However, there is a fourth “D”: delay. There was a
delay in agreeing the visit to Burundi and I think that
delay was not good enough. The situation degenerated
and our delay weakened our message at a time when
sustained pressure was needed. So, I wonder whether
we should move away from consensus in agreeing such
visits. If some Council members do not want to come
on a visit, let us not allow them to undermine the entire
Council. Going further, perhaps there would be value
in setting aside a week every four months or so where
all Council members would be encouraged to visit an
area on our agenda, whether as a whole or in a group
or even individually. This so-called visiting week could
allow us all to do some real diplomacy and outreach
and engagement and even prevention or resolution of
conflicts.
Secondly, we are at our best when we respond to
events quickly and efficiently. Our work on Colombia
this month was a good example of how we can work
quickly and flexibly to get an important issue onto our
agenda, and I am hopeful that our actions will herald a
new era for everyone in Colombia. Even our meeting on
Madaya in Syria had a bright side in terms of putting a
spotlight on an immediate issue that could put pressure
on those responsible. It was well timed, given the
London conference next week, and I hope the profile
that we have given will encourage every participant in
London to pledge generously to help both the immediate
and the long-term needs of the people in Syria and the
region. That means more support for education, job
creation and ultimately more hope for the future.
Not all of our meetings have such a clear purpose.
Regular debates, regular briefings and regular
consultations fill up our programme of work and often
lead just to the repetition of well-known positions,
rather than to genuine engagement or progress. The
Council adds most value when responding to events
as close to real time as possible, rather than according
to an arbitrarily fixed reporting cycle. So, rather than
clogging up the programme of work, let us try to leave
enough time to be agile in the face of ongoing issues.
The crises of the world do not operate on a quarterly
basis, so our response to them should not either.
Thirdly, and finally, one of the most important
responsibilities for the Security Council in 2016 is to
recommend to the General Assembly who the next
Secretary-General should be. Outside the Security

S/PV.7616

Council, a lot of people are doing good work to help
us answer that question. Inside the Council, we have
some catching up to do on what we want from the next
Secretary-General, what challenges he or she will face
and how we can work together to overcome them. To
address those questions and more the United Kingdom
will call for discussion under the “Any other business”
rubric on that issue next month. To ensure that we get
the best candidate for the job, it is vital that we mirror
the activism being shown on that issue outside the
Council.
In conclusion, I commend Mr. Elbio Rosselli for
January and wish Mr. Rafael Darío Ramírez Carreño
good luck for February. Let us all focus on improving
still further our work in terms of our transparency,
interactivity, efficiency and impact.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking the Ambassador
of Uruguay and his team for all the excellent work
they carried out this month. It is no easy task to join
the Council and immediately assume such a heavy
presidency. You, Mr. President, did so brilliantly and
with great competency and professionalism. On behalf
of France, I thank and warmly congratulate you, Sir.
There is a great deal to be said at the beginning of
this year. I will not go back to the Council’s important
and difficult mission to Burundi, on which I briefed the
Council earlier today. However, I will say that it should
encourage us to review our methodology in terms of
preparing for such missions, and we must quickly
draw political lessons from those visits, in light of the
decisions, as I said, taken by the African Union at its
Summit.
Today I would like above all to assess the positive
trends and signs of hope that are emerging on various
important issues with the hope that we will see more
hopeful developments in the future. In the Central
African Republic, we welcome the commitment of
the Transitional Authorities and the Central African
people to organizing and participating in the elections
of 30 December, which took place peacefully. The
constructive engagement of Central African political
actors is commendable and should be continued. We
also welcome the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,

16-0227311/18

S/PV.7616

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

who worked to provide political, security and logistical
support for the elections.
On 28 January, the Constitutional Court announced
the final results of the first round of presidential
elections. Technical difficulties led to invalidization
of the first round of legislative elections. The objective
should still be to complete the transition in accordance
with the agreed timetable on 31 March. New electionsand
the second round of the presidential election will be
held on 14 February. At the end of this election cycle,
the Central African Republic will have a freely and
democratically elected Government and will be able
to continue its reconciliation and stabilization efforts
with the support of the international community. Let us
remain committed to supporting that momentum.
There has also been good news from Côte d’Ivoire,
where the presidential election held in October last year
demonstrated the progress made by the country in all
areas. Côte d’Ivoire demonstrates the extent to which a
peacekeeping mission can assist a country in addressing
and emerging from a crisis. The Council drew on the
lessons learned by deciding the immediate drawdown
of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI). Ultimately, the termination of UNOCI will
be the best symbol of its success. The strategic review
that the Secretariat will conduct over the next two
months will enable modalities to be defined. A prompt,
effective and well-organized withdrawal of UNOCI will
be the best way to build on gains made, demonstrate our
confidence in the country and its people, and ensure
a strong legacy for Côte d’Ivoire and for international
peace and security.
The promising new momentum in intercommunal
talks in Cyprus, which the Council acknowledged in the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2263 (2016) yesterday,
gives us hope. We must continue to relentlessly support
the efforts and resolve of the two leaders to reunify the
island, in accordance with parameters outlined by the
United Nations and in line with the European Union
acquis.
Last Monday, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2261 (2016), establishing a United Nations
mission to observe and monitor the ceasefire expected
in Colombia in the coming months as part of the peace
process. As previously mentioned, the adoption of the
resolution constitutes a success for the parties as the
newly established mission will be a factor in concluding
the talks currently under way for a ceasefire. It is also
12/18

29/01/2016

a success for the United Nations and for the Council,
which responded promptly to the appeal made by
Colombia in an unusual context in which a country
turns of its own volition to the Council to request its
assistance in implementing a negotiated settlement.
We must now meet expectations and ensure that the
planning of the mission takes place in a timely manner.
France will continue to work resolutely to that end.
January was also a memorable month for
non-proliferation, which is a harbinger both of hope
and of threats. As to hope, on 16 January the Security
Council received a report from the International Atomic
Energy Agency confirming that Iran was implementing
the initial provisions of the Vienna agreement, thereby
triggering Implementation Day. The strict and goodfaith implementation of the Vienna agreement will
be the only way to guarantee the credibility of the
agreement and to ensure that the resolution of the
Iranian nuclear issue is sustainable. We will continue
to monitor the situation.
With regard to threats, on 6 January that North
Korea conducted its fourth nuclear test in a gross
violation of Security Council resolutions. Such an act
poses a serious threat to regional and international
peace and security. We agreed to respond by holding
emergency consultations on that same day. We hope to
swiftly adopt a strong resolution under Chapter VII that
will substantially strengthen sanctions. Three weeks
after the nuclear test and facing the threat of a ballistic
missile test, it is now time for us to take action.
In Syria, there is a prevailing sense of both hope
and bitterness. Hope was kindled by the adoption of
resolution 2254 (2015) and the prospects for the start of
political negotiations, and bitterness by the conditions
in which the negotiations are taking placing because
there has been no improvement in the humanitarian
situation. In early January, humanitarian workers
described unbearable conditions in Madaya and other
besieged cities in Syria. The Council could not remain
indifferent to such testimony. That is why France
immediately reacted by calling a public meeting of the
Security Council to warn about the plight of civilians in
besieged towns in Syria (see S/PV.7610). We recall and
stress that humanitarian access to civilian populations
is not a favour or concession to be made by the Syrian
regime and other players involved; it is an absolute
requirement. A credible political process requires an
immediate improvement in the situation on the ground
for Syrians.
16-02273

29/01/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

S/PV.7616

At the public debate on the Middle East held on
26 January (see S/PV.7612), we stressed the importance
of a swift start to inter-Syrian negotiations, reiterated
the need for rapid and considerable improvement in the
humanitarian situation, and called for the discussions
to focus on the political transition, in accordance with
the terms of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523,
annex). We hope that the Vienna process will meet
those objectives. A political solution alone will put a
lasting end to the suffering of civilians and reduce the
terrorist threat that we all face.

reconstruction. This month, however, the reasons for
visiting the country were quite different. Burundi
has been plunged into escalating violence, and our
expectation is that this mission by the Security Council
will make some meaningful contribution to easing
tensions in Burundi and facilitating a return to inclusive
negotiations in the pursuit of a national consensus
towards a better and peaceful future for the country.
We thank the French Ambassador for the thorough
information he provided to the Council on the Security
Council mission (see S/PV.7615).

I conclude by warmly thanking the Uruguayan
presidency and wishing Venezuela every success as it
assumes the presidency. My last word will be for our
dear Movses Abelian, who has been appointed to a new
post by the Secretary-General. Movses has embodied
the institutional memory of the Council for many
years, and has given us his precise, professional and
wise counsel seven days a week, 24 hours a day. The
French delegation warmly thanks him and wishes him
every success in his new and important mission with
the General Assembly.

In Mali, with regard to the implementation of
the Peace and Reconciliation Agreement signed
in May 2015, the commitment of the parties to the
Peace Agreement and the progress made so far in its
implementation — despite weaknesses, difficulties and
serious threats such as the presence of terrorists and
international criminal network — Mali deserves credit
for the fact that the attainment of durable peace in the
country is possible.

Mr. Lucas (Angola) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the delegation of
Uruguay on your guidance of the work of the Council
this month.
(spoke in English)
In our view, more than these formal wrap-up
sessions by Security Council members — in which
we repeat much of what was said in consultations,
briefings, debates and open debates — we consider that
the interactive dialogues that the President and Council
members hold with the wider membership of the United
Nations are a more useful tool for the Council’s work.
We shall highlight and briefly touch upon the
African issues considered this month — namely, the
Security Council missions to Burundi, Mali, Côte
d’Ivoire, Libya, the West African region, the Sudan
and Somalia — and on two important moments of the
Uruguayan presidency: the debate on the protection of
civilians (see S/PV.7606) and the one on the Middle
East (see S/PV.7610).
Less than a year ago, the Security Council
conducted a mission to Burundi, which was viewed
then as a success story for a country that had emerged
from armed conflict and was on its way to consolidating
peace, national reconciliation and economic and social

The peaceful manner in which just and fair elections
took place in Côte d’Ivoire and the virtuous cycle in which
the country is apparently engaged are further instances
of the substantial changes taking place. In spite of that,
concerns remain on the importance of implementing,
with renewed determination, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, the
reform of the security sector and State institutions, and
the deepening of national reconciliation, against the
backdrop of the steady drawdown of the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
The work, mediation and good offices of the
United Nations Office for West Africa have played
an important role in stabilizing the region. However,
acts of terrorism, drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime are serious threats to West Africa’s
security, while terrorists are a destabilizing force in the
north of Mali and the Sahel region as a whole. Boko
Haram continues to spread terror, death and destruction
in the Lake Chad Basin region, requiring the combined
efforts of the international community to combat and
defeat them.
The situation in Libya has reached an impasse. The
constitution of the Government of national consensus,
as foreseen in the Peace Agreement, has not yet become
a reality, delaying much-needed concerted efforts to
combat the growing terrorist threat, mainly from the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).

16-0227313/18

S/PV.7616

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

As usual, discussions related to the Sudan revealed
significant differences among members of the Council,
making it difficult to reach an agreement on a press
statement that, still pending, will take stock of the latest
Security Council meeting. The situation on the ground
remains a matter of great concern, especially with
respect to the ongoing rejection by the rebel groups of
dialogue on the basis of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur and the efforts of the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel, and to the humanitarian
and human rights situations.
With regard to Somalia, during the meeting held
yesterday (S/PV.7614), it was stressed that it is important
for all Somali actors to focus on national priorities:
the organization of elections in 2016, the fight against
the Al-Shabaab terrorist group, and the strengthening
of Somali security forces. There are challenges that
will require the continuous and strong engagement of
the international community and commitment of the
Security Council.
In the debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/PV.7606), the wider membership of the
United Nations expressed its views on that critical issue.
The conclusion drawn from the debate was that, despite
the establishment by the international community, and
the Security Council in particular, of a robust normative
framework on the protection of civilians, embodied in
several resolutions and presidential statements, and
the strengthening of the protection of civilians and
human rights mandates in peacekeeping missions,
no improvement has been seen on the ground. More
civilians continue to be abused, and human rights are
violated before the very eyes of peacekeeping missions.
In the open debate on the Middle East (S/PV.7610),
there was general agreement that the most pressing
issue in the region is to defeat radical extremist groups
in order to facilitate a peaceful resolution of the
conflict. It is also absolutely necessary that we avoid a
scenario in which ISIL consolidates an extremist rogue
State in parts of Syria and Iraq as a breeding ground for
terrorists. Political, diplomatic, military and economic
cooperation must be intensified to start providing, in
a short period of time, the tangible rewards of peace
and stability to the peoples of the regions, who are
increasingly desperate and disillusioned by the policy
of double standards and inaction in the face of such
catastrophic political, economic and humanitarian
conditions.
14/18

29/01/2016

Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Sir, and the entire Uruguayan team for your hard
work during the very busy month of January. You have
organized and led the Security Council’s work in an
exemplary fashion, and the Ukrainian delegation
applauds your outstanding performance. It was no
small feat, given the number of contingencies that have
arisen this January. Having said that, I would like to
share with you some of my delegation’s ideas about the
work done by the Council so far.
The subject of the Syrian crisis has been consistently
at the centre of the Council’s attention. The deplorable
humanitarian situation in the country, the fate of the
people in besieged towns and cities, the situation around
the Syrian chemical weapons programme, the political
process to find a way to put an end to the bloody conflict
that has been ravaging the country for years — all of
this we tried to address. With a heavy heart, I have to
say that the Security Council has not performed very
well in that area despite all of our efforts. The Syrian
people continue to suffer and bear the brunt of the armed
conflict waged on their land. Particularly worrying is
the use by the parties to the conflict of starvation as
a method of warfare. This is absolutely unacceptable,
and I say this as a representative of the country that
suffered the artificial famine organized by the former
Soviet regime during 1932-1933.
It has been said many times in this Chamber that
something has to be done about the Syrian crisis.
Unfortunately, the words do not always translate into
action. I appeal to colleagues around the table that
we try to break the vicious cycle of self-perpetuating
violence in Syria. One thing is needed: political
will — genuine and sincere political will. Without
it, no matter how much or how long we continue our
debates in the Chamber or in the consultation room, the
situation on the ground will not change and innocent
people will continue to lose their lives.
Other than the Syrian crisis, we addressed many
other subjects. I deliberately choose not to go through all
of them, as other colleagues before me have already done
so. However, the North Korean nuclear test on 6 January
demands the particularly close attention of the Council.
This blatant act undermines the very foundations of
the global non-proliferation regime, and it cannot be
tolerated. A firm response from the Security Council is
required. We like to talk about non-proliferation; here
we have a clear case of proliferation, yet the Council is
very slow to react properly.
16-02273

29/01/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The visit of the Security Council to Burundi was
a very useful exercise, although quite disappointing.
The opportunity to talk to different interlocutors on the
ground and see the country first hand was of immense
importance for us as Security Council members
entrusted with the authority to maintain international
peace and stability. The situation in the country will
remain a source of concern for the Security Council for
quite some time, and we have to remain vigilant so as
not to allow the situation to escalate further.
On a different and positive note, I would like to
point out the adoption of resolution 2261 (2016) on the
establishment of a political mission in Colombia to
monitor and verify the implementation of the agreement
between the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del
Pueblo. It was a historic moment for Colombia, and the
Ukrainian delegation is proud to have been there to
support the efforts to end the longest-lasting civil war
in Latin America.
I wish to say a few words on the working methods
of the Council. First of all, I strongly support the
points made by the delegation of the United Kingdom
on Security Council visits and on the process of the
selection of the next Secretary-General.
As a member returning to the Council after
15 years, I cannot help but be astonished at the volume
of work that the Council does. There are many more
items on the agenda, and these items are discussed at
much greater length during our meetings. I am afraid,
however, that this is a case where more does not mean
better. Sometimes we are barely able to consider just one
item in one morning or afternoon meeting. I remember
that during Ukraine’s previous term on the Council 15
years ago, we would cover three or more subjects at
once. It is my strong conviction that this area of the
Council’s work requires significant improvement. I was
able to find the following quote after listening to the
Japanese Ambassador. “Sometimes not speaking says
more than all the words in the world.”
I would like to conclude by wishing Venezuela a
successful presidency in the coming month of February.
Venezuela can fully count on our support.
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting, and expresses its appreciation to the
Uruguayan presidency for leading the work of the
Security Council to a smooth conclusion in January.

S/PV.7616

With regard to the work of the Council this month, I
wish to focus on three points.
The first is the situation in the Middle East.
Currently, peace talks between Palestine and Israel
have come to a stalemate. The conflict is intensifying,
and the security situation is worsening. It is the shared
responsibility of the international community to
safeguard the legitimate national rights of the Palestine
people. The international community should continue
to urge for an immediate ceasefire and end to the
violence so as to ease the situation. Meanwhile, more
vigorous action should be taken to kick-start peace
talks and promote an early resumption of negotiations.
The international community should create a new
mechanism for the restoration of peace, and support
the efforts of the League of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. The Security
Council should respond positively to the legitimate
demands of the Palestinians and other Arab States and
consider seriously such questions as the provision of
international support to the Palestinian people.
Secondly, China appreciates Special Envoy De
Mistura’s mediation efforts in Syria and supports
the role of the United Nations as the main channel
for mediation in the quest for a political solution
there. At the moment, there is a significant window
of opportunity for achieving such a solution. The
international community should continue to support
United Nations efforts and work together to maintain
the current positive momentum for a political solution,
encouraging all Syrian parties to proceed from the
overall interests of the nation and its people, and to
demonstrate good faith, identify their common interests
and resolve their differences so as to enable the current
round of talks in Geneva to yield positive results.
Thirdly, positive progress has recently been made on
the political process in Somalia. Efforts to build a federal
system are making steady progress. China welcomed
the convening of a national consultative forum for all
Somalis and the consensus that has been reached on the
modalities for the elections to be held in 2016. We hope
that all the Somali parties will continue to be united
in promoting national reconciliation and advancing a
political process that is Somali-led and Somali-owned.
The international community should continue to
provide Somalia with humanitarian assistance and help
to ease the humanitarian situation. In accordance with
Somalia’s needs, we should increase our contributions
in the economic and security fields and help Somalia

16-0227315/18

S/PV.7616

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

strengthen its national capacity-building and embark
on the road to national development and prosperity as
soon as possible.
We would like to take this opportunity to wish
Venezuela, the incoming President of the Council for the
month of February, success in its work. We also thank
Mr. Movses Abelian for his important contributions to
the work of the Security Council in the past five years,
and wish him success in his new job.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank you personally,
Mr. President, and the whole Uruguayan delegation for
your skilful and effective presidency of the Council for
January.
This month saw a full agenda. We had a thorough
consideration of a number of African topics: Mali, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire and the
situations in Darfur and West Africa. We sent a Security
Council mission to Burundi and the headquarters of
the African Union, a positive result of which was the
President of Burundi’s affirmation of his willingness
and openness to accept international support for his
country’s efforts to find a solution to the crisis there.
We should take advantage of the opportunity. That
solid list shows that the majority of the Council’s work
has been focused on African problems.
I would particularly like to note the Security
Council’s adoption on 25 January of resolution 2261
(2016), establishing a United Nations mission in
Colombia. We believe that the progress the parties have
made in settling their 50-year conflict and the decision
to invite the further facilitation of the United Nations
constitute an important, perhaps even historic event
not only for Colombians but for the region as a whole.
Moscow is keeping a keen eye on the course of the
negotiations and will maintain its steadfast support to
reaching a speedy conclusion to the peace process.
Over the past month, the Council has considered
the humanitarian aspects of the internal armed conflict
in Syria three times. There can be no doubt that we
must not relax our attention to the situation there, given
the extremely grave consequences that the conflict,
the terrorist atrocities and the attempts of certain
external actors to forcibly redraw the centuries-old
ethno-religious map of Syria have had for the civilian
population. However, we believe that this is not a case
where the quantity of meetings reflects their quality.
To start with, once the plight of the residents of the
16/18

29/01/2016

besieged cities became the subject of the Council’s
intense attention, it was treated in a very one-sided and
biased way. Secondly, behind this activity there clearly
lurks a wish to distract attention from fundamental
issues of settlement and perhaps even to sabotage the
start of talks in Geneva. We must realize that without
the comprehensive political solution that we are all
hoping for, the humanitarian situation will not improve.
Unfortunately, we are compelled to conclude that
from time to time some delegations exploit their status
as members of the Council to politicize and put a
propagandistic spin on their own particular priorities,
rather than working quietly and painstakingly on the
maintenance of international peace and security within
the Council’s authority under the Charter of the United
Nations. That applies in particular to the Arria Formula
meeting held a few days ago on the global challenge of
accounting for missing persons from conflict, human
rights abuses, disasters, organized crime, migration
and other involuntary causes. There is no justification
for the artificial tying of this topic to the work of the
Security Council. There was no prior consultation of
Council members on the need for such a meeting, and
most were simply presented with a fait accompli. We
believe that this undermines the collective principles of
the work of the Security Council.
Incidentally, that collective approach helps to
improve the effectiveness of the Council’s activities,
including such important tools as mission visits. In any
case, there is nothing to prevent individual Council
members from visiting countries they are interested in
in their national capacity. We would like to point out that
Arria Formula meetings are supposed to be informal
confidential occasions for a frank exchange of views
in private on the issues that fall under the Security
Council’s remit. Unfortunately, we are increasingly
seeing individual Council members abusing the format
by making use of it to push their own initiatives or those
of their proxy organizations. Such events should be held
on the margins, not paid for under the Organization’s
budget.
In conclusion, I would like to express our thanks to
the outgoing Director of the Security Council Affairs
Division, Mr. Movses Abelian, for his assistance and his
facilitation of the Council’s work, and to congratulate
him on his promotion. I would also like to wish the
incoming Venezuelan presidency of the Council every
success in carrying out its functions.
16-02273

29/01/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my national capacity and will try to
limit it to five minutes, as was recommended by the
representative of Japan.
During the month of January, the Security Council
has held 17 meetings, 12 consultations, 2 open debates,
1 closed meeting and 1 mission to Burundi and Addis
Ababa. We have adopted 4 resolutions and 12 press
statements. If we based our productivity on numbers
of resolutions and meetings, I am not completely sure
what percentage that would constitute. My colleagues
have prepared some notes for me concerning which
they will probably only be annoyed with me, as usual,
because I usually ignore them and do not keep closely
to them. But I do not want to repeat everything that
has already been said in this Chamber, and I would
therefore like to touch on a few specific points that
include some positive aspects.
First, there was some good news from Mali and
Côte d’Ivoire, and we saw meaningful progress made.
The mandate of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus was renewed, and while that in itself is not
really important, what is important is the progress
that has been made by the Greek and Turkish Cypriot
leaders in advancing a process that we can only hope
will be crowned with success.
As a Latin American, the adoption of resolution
2261 (2016) on Colombia, which other colleagues have
touched on, is a source of great satisfaction to me, first
because I am sure that it will help to move forward the
negotiating process for peace, and secondly the Security
Council was able to act unanimously by adopting the
resolution because under our presidency.
We also believe that the two open debates held on
the protection of civilians (see S/PV.7606) and on the
Middle East (see S/PV.7610) were positive developments
because they once again drew the attention of the Council
and its members to those urgent issues. Moreover, the
issue of protecting civilians is deeply rooted in other
problems with which the Security Council is seized,
such as the terrible humanitarian situation unfolding in
the Middle East.
With regard to some points of concern, it has been
rightly pointed out that we are all concerned over
the North Korean nuclear test. This is a very serious
problem. We can only hope that the Security Council
will adopt a resolution on that issue in a few days.

S/PV.7616

As Latin Americans, we are very seriously
concerned by another suspension of elections in Haiti.
That is a real cause for concern because the political
establishment in Haiti is displaying an apparent lack
of responsibility for complying with the time lines
and its obligations to its own society to establish a
Government and to carry out the reforms and processes
that the people of Haiti have been yearning for. Haiti
is one of those places where the Security Council has
a clear presence through its peacekeeping operation.
To that end, I wonder whether now would be the right
time to consider conducting a visit to Haiti in the very
near future because we must do our utmost to get the
political process back on track in Haiti.
From the humanitarian perspective, the situations
in Syria, the Sudan and Yemen, where sieges and
hunger are being used as weapons of war and hospitals
and school facilities are being attacked, are of grave
concern to us. As a new member of the Security Council,
we are experiencing a certain degree of frustration
because, on the one hand, we see the Council fail to
ensure that one member meet its obligations and, on the
other hand, that non-State actors are ignoring its pleas.
As a new member of the Security Council, I must say
that we experience some degree of frustration which I
hope will wane with time.
With regard to methods, I should like to share a
single consideration. As a new member, I am struck by
the fact that the Council has its own momentum and
rhythm in dealing with different issues. We often talk
about collective wisdom, but I am struck by the fact
that we have plenary meetings here — “open meetings”,
as they are known — where we hear briefings, discuss
them and head to the consultation room next door. And
that is where we actually read out documents setting
forth national positions. Almost no debate takes place.
I cannot judge too clearly as I have only been here for
30 days, but we always hear the national positions in the
consultation room. We could hear the national positions
in the Chamber. Everyone who attends these meetings
could hear the statements, and real consultations could
take place in the consultation room on how problems
can be resolved and what we can accept as a body. This
may be a case of my speaking out of turn, but I was
keen to share these thoughts with Council members.
I thank all the delegations for their words of
congratulations, but those congratulations go to the
hard-working team that supports me. Any merit in

16-0227317/18

S/PV.7616

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

29/01/2016

our leadership goes to the team, and I accept all the
responsibility for any faults.

going forward and thank him directly for his constant
support to us.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

On behalf of the Council, we wish our brothers
and colleagues from Venezuela every success in their
presidency which they will take up in February.

I formally thank all delegations for their cooperation,
and the Secretariat, the interpreters and translators for
all their unfailing support. I wish Mr. Abelian the best

18/18

The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

16-02273
