S/PV.8268

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8268th meeting

Thursday, 24 May 2018, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Hickey
Ms. French

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-15907 (E)
*1815907*

S/PV.8268

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Burundi to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, and His Excellency Mr. Jürg Lauber,
Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the United
Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kafando.
Mr. Kafando (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for giving me this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on recent developments
in Burundi.
On 17 May, the people of Burundi voted in
favour of a new Constitution. According to the
Independent National Electoral Commission (CENI),
which announced provisional results on 21 May, of
the 4,768,148 people who voted, 73.25 per cent voted
in favour of the new Constitution, as opposed to the
19.34 per cent who voted against it. Blank ballots
totalled 4.11 per cent, and abstentions 3.28 per cent,
with a total voter participation of 96.24 per cent. Once
again, I point out that information was provided by
CENI. Overall, the referendum took place in a calm
environment despite many irregularities and incidents
reported by opposition and civil society representatives.
CENI itself also reported several incidents that, in its
view, were not such to influence the definitive results
of the voting.
During my briefing on 25 February (see
S/PV.8189), I shared the concerns of the SecretaryGeneral, who had stressed in his report (S/2018/89)
the need for the Government to seek the broadest
consensus possible on an issue as crucial as amending
the Constitution for the future — and the very
2/18

24/05/2018

fate — of Burundi. The Secretary-General underscored
in his report the spirit of consensus that prevailed in
the negotiations and the adoption of the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi and the
2005 Constitution that resulted from it.
Now that the country is moving towards another
important phase in its history, we expect a strong
signal from the Burundian authorities in favour of
resuming the inter-Burundian dialogue under the aegis
of the East African Community. Reviving that dialogue
would make it possible for Burundians to discuss
together the challenges they face in a climate of mutual
trust. It is important to reiterate at this point that it is
only through an inclusive dialogue that Burundians
will reach sustainable solutions to the current crisis.
Without an inclusive dialogue, there is a risk that the
opposition’s contesting of the results of the referendum
will further polarize an already tense political situation,
characterised by human rights violations and other
abuses, as well as the deterioration of the socioeconomic
and humanitarian situation.
In that connection, I would like to draw the
attention of Council members to the expulsion of
human rights experts deployed in the framework of the
implementation of Human Rights Council resolution
36/2, which the Group of African States in Geneva
endorsed on 29 September. Their visas were cancelled
by the Government on 26 April when they were
already in Burundi. I call on the Burundian authorities
to facilitate the return of those experts and to renew
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
The security situation in Burundi is generally calm,
although there have been isolated grenade attacks and
there continue to be reports of the discovery of dead
bodies, including individuals in military uniforms.
The Government should be encouraged to continue
its efforts to restore security throughout the national
territory. In that regard, I welcome the measures taken
against certain forms of violence that were observed
before and during the election campaign. The events
that occurred on 11 May in the commune of Buganda,
in the province of Cibitoke, which we condemned at
the United Nations, during which 26 people, including
women and children, were killed by unidentified armed
men, reminds us that, even though there is general calm
at the security level, the environment remains volatile.
18-15907

24/05/2018

The situation in Burundi

The humanitarian situation is undergoing
significant developments, but it is still a cause for
concern. Many Burundians continue to live in refugee
camps, particularly in Tanzania, Rwanda, Uganda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I welcome the
efforts made by Burundi and Tanzania, with the support
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and within the framework of the tripartite
agreement, which have already enabled over 13,000
Burundians to voluntarily return to their homes. Those
efforts must be continued.
The situation I have just described highlights the
relevance of continuing the inclusive dialogue under
the auspices of the East African Community. Council
members will recall that during the nineteenth summit
of the East African Community, held in Uganda on
23 February, Heads of State of the subregion strongly
recommended continued dialogue facilitated by former
President Benjamin Mkapa and the mediation of
President Museveni. The Summit also requested the
facilitator to make every effort to convene the fifth
session of the dialogue as soon as possible.
In response to the facilitator’s invitation of 25 April,
the Government of Burundi indicated that it would not
take part in any dialogue session before the constitutional
referendum was held. In that context, the Conseil
national pour le respect de l’Accord d’Arusha pour la
paix et la réconciliation au Burundi et la restauration
de l’état de droit questioned the appropriateness
and relevance of a dialogue after a referendum
that was supposed to bury the Arusha Agreement.
Consultations should be held in the next few days with
a view to relaunching the dialogue. I remain convinced
that an inclusive dialogue remains the only path to
a sustainable political settlement of the political,
socioeconomic and humanitarian challenges Burundi
has faced since 2015. Among those challenges is the
preparation and success of inclusive, credible and
transparent elections in 2020. In that regard, the Council
could renew its full support to the region, in particular
to the mediation led by Ugandan President Yoweri
Museveni and to the facilitator, former Tanzanian
President Benjamin Mkapa, with the support of the
African Union and the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Lauber.
Mr. Lauber: At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for inviting me to brief the Security
Council on behalf of the Burundi configuration of the

S/PV. 8268

Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and for the excellent
cooperation between the Council and the configuration.
As per established practice, this statement has been
approved by the members of the PBC configuration,
including the country concerned, Burundi.
Today’s briefing gives me an opportunity to inform
the Council about my latest visit to Burundi, which took
place in late March, and on developments that occurred
after my visit. At the end, I will formulate some
recommendations regarding international engagement
with Burundi. I briefed the PBC Burundi configuration
about the outcome of my visit on 16 April.
From 27 to 30 March, I visited Burundi for the
sixth time in my capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. The
visit allowed me to get a first-hand impression of
the situation on the ground, to maintain contact with
the Government and other national stakeholders, to
advocate for renewed dialogue and cooperation between
the Government and its international partners and to
identify further avenues for PBC engagement with
Burundi. At the time of my visit, the security situation
in the country was generally calm.
During my visit, I was received by His Excellency
Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, President of the Republic
of Burundi; the Minister of External Relations and
International Cooperation; the Minister of Finance,
Budget and Privatization; the members of the National
Independent Electoral Commission; the President
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission;
leaders of three political parties; the African Union
Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region;
representatives of the private sector; the United Nations
country team; the International Committee of the Red
Cross; the diplomatic community and a group of local
economists and historians.
My visit was an opportunity to learn more about
the preparations for the constitutional referendum,
which took place on 17 May. The Independent National
Electoral Commission explained how it was registering
voters both for the referendum and already for the
elections of 2020 and how the referendum would be
conducted. I underlined in those contacts that the
referendum should take place in a democratic and
open environment and without any incidents. I also
invited the Government to reflect on whether Burundi
may require international electoral assistance for the
elections of 2020.

18-159073/18

S/PV.8268

The situation in Burundi

On 29 March, I met leaders of three political parties:
the ruling party the Conseil national pour la défense de
la démocratie-Forces pour la défense de la démocratie,
the Union pour le progrès national and Agathon Rwasa.
They all agreed that Burundi’s political actors should
define the path towards the elections of 2020 in a joint
road map. Such a road map would include benchmarks
aimed at ensuring that the elections will be free, fair,
transparent, peaceful and fully inclusive, and engage
the participation of all political parties.
The serious economic challenges that Burundi is
facing were another key subject of my conversations.
Government officials called upon Burundi’s partners
to focus more on mid- and long-term socioeconomic
development than on humanitarian assistance. The
Government informed me that it is currently drafting
a new national development plan, which might be
published before the summer.
Burundi’s international partners reiterated their
readiness to support Burundi with regard to both
socioeconomic and humanitarian challenges. They
expressed their wish to be informed about the national
development plan as early as possible in order to adapt
their development strategies to national priorities.
Burundi’s international partners and representatives
of the private sector referred to certain challenges for
economic engagement, including the lack of foreign
currency and difficulties in obtaining bank loans.
In my conversation with the President of the
Republic, I emphasized that the PBC remains committed
to facilitate dialogue between the Government
and its international partners. In that regard, I
suggested organizing another round of socioeconomic
consultations in Bujumbura, which could involve such
additional partners as the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), the European Union and bilateral donors.
Burundi’s national development plan might serve as a
basis for that conversation. The President expressed his
interest in the initiative, including the participation of
additional partners.
During my stay, high-ranking officials from
Burundi, Tanzania and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) signed a
tripartite agreement on the return of Burundian refugees
from Tanzania. Priority for repatriation will be given
to those 19,148 refugees whose registered intention to
return has already been verified by UNHCR.
4/18

24/05/2018

With regard to the humanitarian response plan
for 2018, the Government reiterated its view that
the plan contained exaggerated numbers and that
there had not been sufficient consultation on it with
national authorities. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs had launched the plan in
February 2018. Its total volume of $141.8 million is
currently covered at the rate of only 2.9 per cent. I told
the Government and its humanitarian partners that a
swift agreement on the humanitarian response plan will
allow for the mobilization of additional resources. I also
offered the PBC Burundi configuration as a platform to
generate broader support for the plan.
When I met the President of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, I learned about the
impressive progress made in this area in recent months.
The Commission has already collected more than
45,000 testimonies and worked in 16 of the 18 provinces
of Burundi. Among the challenges that the Commission
is facing are time pressure, the security of data and the
question of accountability.
In my meeting with the President, I recommended
an extension of the mandate of the Commission by
one year, until the end of 2019, in accordance with
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for
Burundi. I indicated that the PBC could help mobilize
international technical and financial assistance for
reconciliation efforts in Burundi. As in previous
meetings, the President insisted on the importance of
national reconciliation. He responded positively to the
suggestions that the mandate of the Commission be
extended and that international expertise be mobilized.
In the past few days, representatives of the United
Nations country team and United Nations officials in
New York informed me of the following developments
that had occurred after the conclusion of my visit.
On 20 April, President Nkurunziza appointed five
new Ministers, increasing the Cabinet from 20 to 21
members. Four Ministers were replaced, including
Foreign Minister Alain Aimé Nyamitwe, who was
succeeded by Ezéchiel Nibigira. The campaign for the
constitutional referendum started on 1 May. According
to various observers, the environment of the campaign
and the referendum was relatively calm. At the same
time, I received reports that included allegations of
intimidation and repression against opponents of the
constitutional changes. On 11 May, as the Special
Envoy mentioned before me, 26 people were killed in
18-15907

24/05/2018

The situation in Burundi

a violent attack in the village of Ruhagarika, in northwest Burundi, by unidentified perpetrators, which was
an assault that was broadly condemned by national
and international actors. The international community
continued to follow developments in Burundi
attentively and in a constructive manner. In view of
the constitutional referendum, the African Union and
the European Union, in their capacity as guarantors
of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement,
encouraged Burundi’s Government to respect the spirit
and the letter of the Agreement.
I also received an update on the implementation of
Human Rights Council (HRC) resolution 36/2, which
had been presented to the HRC on 28 September 2017,
by African countries, including Burundi. As mentioned
by the Special Envoy, the three human rights experts
who had been mandated by the HRC resolution to
determine facts and circumstances entered Burundi in
February. However, they were unable to conduct their
work and left the country after one month. In view
of Burundi’s support for the HRC resolution and its
commitment to cooperation with the three experts, the
window of opportunity for the mission remains open.
According to United Nations officials, it would be
advisable to conduct the mission as soon as possible
to allow the three experts to present their report to the
Human Rights Council at its next session in June.
Based on my conversations in Burundi and New
York, I draw the following conclusions with regard to
international engagement with Burundi.
First, the international community should continue
to follow developments in Burundi attentively and take
all aspects of the current situation into account. In
doing so, there is a need for coherence among United
Nations actors and the international community,
including regional and subregional actors, and for
finding common ground with the Government in order
to build trust and a better sense of partnership.
Secondly, the mediation efforts of the East African
Community, led by President Museveni of Uganda and
by former President Mkapa of Tanzania, continue to
deserve our full support.
Thirdly, the upcoming national development plan
may offer a basis for a renewed conversation between
the Government and its international partners. I am
therefore planning to organize another round of the
socioeconomic dialogue between Burundi and its
partners in 2018, in cooperation with the Government

S/PV. 8268

of Burundi and the United Nations Resident
Coordinator. The involvement of partners such as the
IMF, the European Union and bilateral donors that had
not participated in the Bujumbura round tables last
year seems crucial to me. In my view, such a dialogue
session has the potential to foster confidence between
Burundi and its partners.
Fourthly, besides mid- and long-term socioeconomic
cooperation, the international community should
not neglect the immediate humanitarian needs in
Burundi. The configuration should continue to
encourage cooperation between the Government and its
humanitarian partners, with a view to addressing the
most urgent needs of the population, in particular in the
areas of basic social and health services, food security
and protection.
Fifthly, the significant gains achieved through the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement must not
be undermined. One of the advantages of a road map
to 2020 among political actors would be that it could
yield a broadly shared understanding of how the gains
of Arusha can be preserved, especially in view of the
elections of 2020.
Sixthly, the international community should
continue to support national reconciliation efforts and
follow the ongoing reconciliation process in Burundi
attentively.
The President: I thank Mr. Lauber for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Burundi, for his informative
briefing and for his commitment. I am also grateful to
my Swiss colleague, Mr. Jürg Lauber, in his capacity as
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for his very useful briefing.
France takes note of the results of the referendum.
Although the elections were held in relative calm, as
has been said, we deplore the fact that the campaign
took place in a climate clouded by intimidation and
various threats of violence against those opposed to
constitutional reform. The revision of the Constitution
introduces amendments that run counter to the Arusha
Accords. Indeed, if care is not taken, it may begin to
unravel the Accords, which have been the backbone
of a decade of peace in Burundi. The institutionalized

18-159075/18

S/PV.8268

The situation in Burundi

24/05/2018

system of power-sharing between the various elements
of the Burundian community has been put in doubt, and
the mechanisms for protecting the Tutsi minority have
either been weakened or are disappearing. In our view,
this reform will not help to resolve the crisis that the
country has been mired in since 2015.

Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their illuminating briefings on
the situation. We firmly believe that respect for the
constitutional order of every country defines and
sustains modern States today and thereby guarantees
their stability and plurality.

We therefore remain very concerned about the
political impasse and the security situation in Burundi.
Faced with the impossibility of dialogue and a total
shutdown of the political arena, the most radical
opposition factions have been tempted to resort to
armed struggle. In the ruling party, the Imbonerakure
militias are playing an increasingly significant part in
intimidating and repressing any dissenting voices and
are difficult to control. The situation is therefore at risk
of deteriorating and the status quo is not sustainable in
the long term. The Ruhagarika massacre of 11 May, in
which 27 civilians were murdered, is yet another new
and tragic illustration of that.

The results of Burundi’s constitutional referendum
of 17 May, with the participation of 26 political
parties, reaffirm the will of the people and define
the determination of the Burundian authorities and
the majority of the Burundian population to advance
towards an inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue and
political stability. The fact that the referendum was
held without major incident is testament to the overall
improvement in the country’s situation.

We must break out of the current vicious circle. The
dialogue facilitated by the East African Community
has so far failed, mainly due to obstruction by the
Burundian authorities. However, the priority must
remain to launch a genuine inclusive national dialogue,
without conditions or exclusions, that gives voice to
the aspirations of every element of Burundian society.
That priority is inseparable from the issue of respect
for human rights, which is also worrying. An inclusive
dialogue can be possible only if the Government makes
the right moves, including enabling the opposition, the
media and civil society to play their part without being
undermined. We also expect robust demonstrations of
regional support to ensure that this dialogue can truly
take place.
In this difficult context, we call on all Burundian
parties to return to the spirit of consensus that led to
the conclusion of the Arusha Accords and on their
guarantors to mobilize in the quest for a political
solution to the crisis. The necessary regional leadership
for the situation in Burundi must accompanied by close
monitoring on the part of the Council. In Burundi’s very
volatile situation, the Arusha Accords are now more
than ever the compass that must guide the efforts of the
Burundian parties and the international community in
the service of Burundi and its stability.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking Special
Envoy Michel Kafando and Ambassador Jürg Lauber,
6/18

In that connection, we call on all parties to abstain
from taking actions that could be counterproductive.
We believe that the provisional results announced by
the Independent National Electoral Commission on
Monday, 21 May, which show a 73.26 per cent vote in
favour of the new Constitution of Burundi and a mere
18 per cent against, with a high participation rate,
represent a solid foundation for elections to be held in
2020. We believes that those results express the will of
the people and that this decision lies exclusively within
the purview of Burundi’s national sovereignty. That
is to say, we see this as an internal Burundian issue
and a decision that will ensure the country’s long-term
stability. Similar processes have been carried out in
other countries without major problems. In that regard,
we believe that all necessary precautions and preventive
measures should be taken to optimize the subsequent
processes. The Council should continue to promote
a spirit of impartiality and negotiated settlement by
fostering and calling for inter-Burundian dialogue.
Equatorial Guinea has always believed in and
supported the mediation efforts of all international,
regional and subregional organizations together with
those of Burundi’s national political actors. That is
the only way to ensure a negotiated settlement of the
conflict in Burundi. That political process must be based
on respect for democratic principles and values and the
promotion of fundamental human rights and freedoms.
In that regard, we call on all Burundi’s political actors
to continue to make efforts to establish and build
trust in order to advance a comprehensive, frank and
transparent national dialogue that can bring national
unity and cohesion. In that effort, we believe that the
Government of Burundi must assume a leadership role
18-15907

24/05/2018

The situation in Burundi

and take appropriate measures to maintain the country’s
unity and build a national reconciliation process. All
such efforts should have the backing of the Council and
the international community.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke
in French): The Kingdom of the Netherlands thanks
Special Envoy Kafando and Ambassador Lauber for
their illuminating briefings. The Netherlands has been
closely following the political climate in Burundi, since
we are very concerned about the consequences of the
potential political tensions for the population of Burundi
and, in particular, for the security situation. I would
like to draw the Council’s attention to three aspects:
first, the incidents related to the referendum; secondly,
the ongoing need for inter-Burundian dialogue; and
thirdly, the importance of the Arusha Accords.
Despite the absence of serious violence, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands has taken note of the
various incidents reported during the elections, such
as denying accredited opposition observers access to
polling stations or arresting them, and intimidating
Burundian citizens in and around polling stations,
including through the presence of members of the
ruling party’s youth league at some polling stations.
We condemn such acts around the referendum process,
which may have harmed a climate conducive to free
choice. We expect the Burundian Government to ensure
that any action based on the referendum, including the
process of formalizing constitutional amendments, will
be conducted on the basis of a broad consensus on the
part of all stakeholders and in line with the relevant
provisions of the current Constitution.
Despite the current impasse, the Netherlands
continues to give its full support to the inter-Burundian
dialogue led by the East African Community. A political
solution developed through constructive and inclusive
dialogue remains the most sustainable and viable way
out of the political crisis in the country. We call on the
Burundian Government to allow the political arena to
be opened up in the post-referendum phase by ensuring
circumstances that are more conducive to peaceful
dialogue and contributing to positive efforts aimed at
helping Burundi and its partners combat the country’s
persistent poverty. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
fears that the risk of violence in Burundi continues. In
that regard, we condemn the attack in Cibitoke province
that claimed the lives of 24 civilians, including 11
children. We call on all stakeholders to refrain from
violence and fully respect human rights.

S/PV. 8268

The Arusha Accords, signed in 2000 after
three decades of conflict, remain the cornerstone of
stability in Burundi. All dialogue, political reform
and action undertaken in Burundi should be based on
the principles and spirit of the solid foundations laid
by Presidents Nyerere and Mandela. They created
a system of constitutional provisions to discourage
the concentration of power in a single party or
group and to form a unified army. We fear that the
proposed constitutional amendments will undermine
the achievements of the Accords. We recognize and
stress the importance and primary responsibility of the
guarantors of the Arusha Accords in safeguarding the
spirit that reigned at their adoption.
In conclusion, the Netherlands remains committed
to the development and stability of the people of
Burundi, while recognizing that only Burundi’s
stakeholders have the power to bring about lasting
peace. We fully support the East African Community
and the guarantors of the Arusha Accords in their
efforts to find a peaceful and lasting solution to the
current crisis.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia is grateful for the
briefings delivered by Mr. Michel Kafando, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, and Ambassador Jürg
Lauber, Permanent Representative of Switzerland, in
his capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission.
Bolivia appreciates and supports the Special Envoy’s
efforts to continue the inter-Burundian dialogue in an
inclusive environment. We also appreciate the efforts
to facilitate that goal led by the former President of
Tanzania, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and the President of
Uganda, Mr. Yoweri Museveni, in accordance with the
Arusha Accords, which must remain the cornerstone of
that process. We reiterate that dialogue and respect for
the Accords are key to enabling Burundi’s emergence
from its crisis. In that regard, and in view of the fact that
Burundi presents no threat to international peace and
security, since its situation remains stable, we believe
that the road map proposed by Mr. Mkapa should be
implemented in order to reach a consensus and create
the conditions necessary for a peaceful environment for
the next elections, to be held in 2020.
The Security Council, and the international
community in general, must act on a basis of respect
for Burundi’s sovereignty, independence and territorial

18-159077/18

S/PV.8268

The situation in Burundi

integrity. In that regard, we consider that Burundi’s
referendum and constitutional reform are both internal
issues that must be consolidated by Burundians for
Burundians. We must take into account the progress
made in the negotiations in the inter-Burundian
dialogue. We should not forget that there is consensus
on several points. It is important to analyse those where
there is still a lack of agreement, and the international
community should support that dialogue constructively
with a view to reaching a peaceful settlement. Burundi’s
contribution to peace and security through its troop
contributions, which demonstrate its institutional
capacity, should also be taken into account.
The international community should support
Burundi in strengthening its capacities and assisting
it with its socioeconomic development and the
humanitarian challenges it is facing. In that regard, we
commend the tripartite agreement signed by Burundi,
Tanzania and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees on the return of refugees to Burundi
from Tanzania, which prioritized the repatriation of
19,148 refugees. We also encourage the international
community to continue funding the humanitarian
response programme in Burundi.
In order to overcome these challenges, we need to
create an environment of trust, and that means lifting
the unilateral sanctions that have negative effects on the
lives of vulnerable groups such as women and children
and are detrimental to the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals. We should point out
here that such unilateral actions are illegal according to
the Charter of the United Nations.
We acknowledge the efforts and work of the East
African Community (EAC), the African Union Special
Envoy, the Chair of the Burundi configuration and the
United Nations country team in Burundi. We encourage
them to continue their work and to coordinate their
efforts to achieve better cooperation in order to
continue supporting the mediation under the auspices
of the EAC, which should continue to lead that process.

24/05/2018

on 11 May in the north-western province of Cibitoke
in Burundi, resulting in the deaths of 26 civilians. We
offer our sympathies to the families of the victims
and wish the injured a speedy recovery. We urge the
Government to undertake a thorough investigation and
bring the perpetrators to justice. We therefore support
the recommendations we heard today from our briefers,
and would like to make some observations for the
Council’s consideration.
First, on the political front, we take note of the
17 May nationwide referendum on amending the
Constitution. We hope that the results of that critical
event reflect the will of the Burundian people, and
will have no negative impact on the country’s political
and security situation. We reiterate our concern
about the minimal progress made in developing the
inter-Burundian dialogue. We call on all political actors
to engage in meaningful communication, which should
include negotiations for the road map aimed at charting
a viable path towards the holding of peaceful, free, fair,
transparent and inclusive elections in 2020.
That nationally owned process should be held in
an environment conducive to dialogue, confidence
and nationwide consensus, engaging all key political
stakeholders with the aim of ensuring durable peace. We
emphasize the importance of the continued efforts of
the African Union and the East African Community in
the mediation process. We therefore urge the leadership
of the subregion and the guarantors of the Arusha
Agreement to redouble their efforts in revitalizing
political interaction, while engaging all parties. In
that regard, we support the personal involvement and
commitment of the facilitator, former President of
Tanzania Benjamin Mkapa, and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi, Mr. Michel Kafando.
We hope that the next round of the inter-Burundian
dialogue will be more inclusive and productive, thereby
paving the way for the restoration of peace, security
and long-term stability in Burundi.

Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Envoy Michel Kafando and Ambassador Jürg Lauber,
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their insightful briefings and
significant contribution to our deliberations today.

We also note the importance of all political sides
implementing the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement. We see that as the only key to a peaceful
resolution of the country’s political crisis. We also
emphasize the importance of respecting the fundamental
rights and freedoms of all its citizens.

At the outset, we would like to express our deep
condolences to the people and the Government of
Burundi for the barbaric terrorist attack that took place

Secondly, on the humanitarian track, with nearly
180,000 internally displaced persons and 430,000
refugees, together with 3.6 million people in need

8/18

18-15907

24/05/2018

The situation in Burundi

of assistance, the current humanitarian situation in
Burundi must be urgently addressed. The repatriation
of refugees must be voluntary and in accordance with
the principles of respect and dignity set forth in the
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951.
We commend the signing of the tripartite agreement
between representatives of Burundi and Tanzania and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees on the return of additional Burundian
refugees from Tanzania.
Thirdly, on the development track, we note the
efforts of the Government of Burundi to stabilize
the economic situation in the country, including by
drafting the national development plan, which will
be a significant step forward. International support is
therefore critical to assisting the nation to overcome
existing economic challenges. That platform could
become the basis for confidence-building between
Burundi and its partners.
Lastly, we commend the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission on playing such
a significant coordinating role and for facilitating
dialogue between the Government of Burundi and the
international community.
Ms. French (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Kafando for his briefing. We would also
like to thank Ambassador Lauber for his briefing and
tireless efforts with the Peacebuilding Commission.
Arbitrary arrests, a lack of transparency, the
suspension of media outlets and attempts to put pressure
on voters marred Burundi’s 17 May referendum process,
thereby undermining confidence in its reported
outcome. The results leave us concerned that Burundi
is moving closer to one-party rule. The referendum
took place against the backdrop of stalled progress in
the East African Community-led dialogue, continuing
repression and an unstable political situation. The
referendum further aggravates ongoing acute political
tensions, which have destabilizing effects on Burundi
and the wider region.
Although the Government allowed vigorous
campaigning by the opposition during the designated twoweek campaign period, numerous cases of harassment
and repression against referendum opponents in the
months preceding the voting contributed to a climate of
fear and intimidation, resulting in an environment that
did not allow for a credible referendum. The absence of
independent observers also undermines confidence in

S/PV. 8268

the reported result. We also condemn reports of armed
groups killing 26 innocent civilians in the days leading
up to the referendum. The climate of violence, fear and
repression underscores the need for serious dialogue to
advance peace.
Restrictions on media worsened in advance of the
referendum, further undermining the credibility of
the process. We condemn the Government’s decision
to suspend the broadcasts of Voice of America and
the British Broadcasting Corporation during that
particularly volatile time. That decision, along with
other media restrictions, arbitrary arrests and harsh
sentences for human rights defenders, undermines basic
democratic norms and signals continuing troubling
limitations on civic and political space in Burundi.
We remain concerned that the Government
will interpret the revised Constitution as resetting
presidential term limits, and that other amendments seek
to consolidate the President’s power, place restrictions
on independent candidates and coalitions of candidates
and run counter to the power-sharing principles
enshrined in the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi. Such amendments will
have long-term impacts on Burundi’s governance
and institutions.
We recall the ruling party’s commitment under
the Pretoria Protocol to respect the principles of the
Arusha Agreement, including respect for term limits,
and expect it to abide by them. The United States is
closely tracking the trend of leaders extending their
rule by eliminating or extending term limits. We note
from experience that, when whole generations of people
are denied democracy and fundamental freedoms,
instability and insecurity are often the result. It appears
that Burundi is following that undemocratic trend,
which we fear will lay the foundation for continued
instability and political tensions for years to come.
The United States supported and was present at the
signing of the Arusha Agreement, which brought an
end to years of tragic civil war in Burundi. We believe
that parties must continue to respect it in the interests
of Burundians and the wider region.
The Government of Burundi must take clear
steps to reopen the political space for members of the
opposition, independent media and civil society and to
engage in inclusive dialogue with Burundian political
stakeholders. It is critical that the Government of
Burundi participate in good faith in the next session

18-159079/18

S/PV.8268

The situation in Burundi

of the inter-Burundian dialogue. We urge the region
to intensify its engagement on Burundi in the postreferendum period to press for a durable political
solution to Burundi’s political crisis, a reopening
of political space and an end to human rights abuses
and violations.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would very much like to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Burundi, Mr. Kafando, and Ambassador Jürg Lauber
for their very useful briefings today. I would like to
underscore that we fully support their efforts to achieve
durable peace and sustainable development in Burundi.
Today’s briefings underlined the precarious nature
of the current political, economic and humanitarian
situation in the country and continued reports of
grave human rights violations and abuses. The attack
on 11 May, which many have mentioned, killed 26
people in Ruhagarika and further demonstrates that the
security situation remains fragile.
The referendum on 17 May was held against that
backdrop. We note that the Government allowed some
campaigning during the campaign period. However,
reports of an overall climate of intimidation, including
the closure of certain media outlets in the lead-up
to the referendum, demonstrate that conditions for
reconciliation and long-lasting political peace and
stability are still largely absent. The spirit and key
provisions of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi therefore remains relevant and
central. They constitute a pillar for peace and stability
in Burundi and the entire region. An inclusive political
resolution of the current conflict must be found
through dialogue. A lack thereof will negatively affect
upcoming elections in 2020 and the socioeconomic
and humanitarian situation. We fully support greater
involvement in East African Community-led mediation
efforts under President Museveni and former President
Mkapa. We expect the Government to commit fully to
the inter-Burundian dialogue.
The efforts of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) are equally
important. The PBC remains a unique platform for
discussing the situation in the country with Burundi.
We strongly support Ambassador Lauber’s approach
and efforts and hope that the dialogue on socioeconomic
issues will contribute to increased confidence between
Burundi and its partners. In the short term, addressing
the humanitarian situation in Burundi is of paramount
10/18

24/05/2018

importance. Urgent action is needed to alleviate
immediate suffering rooted in issues such as food
insecurity and protection challenges.
Lastly, continued reports of grave human rights
violations and abuses in Burundi remain deeply
worrisome. Sweden calls on Burundian authorities to
ensure that the three human rights experts mandated by
the Human Rights Council can carry out their work in
the country unhindered. In addition, we urge Burundi to
swiftly agree on a memorandum of understanding with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, as well as with the African Union,
with regard to its human rights and military observers.
Upholding and respecting human rights and ensuring
accountability are critical, nurture trust, strengthen
dialogue and reconciliation — and ultimately contribute
to durable peace.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Mr. Michel Kafando for the
quality of his briefing on the sociopolitical situation in
Burundi. I also thank Ambassador Jürg Lauber, whose
recent mission to Burundi has enabled us to follow
developments on the ground.
I will focus on the referendum held on 17 May
and the outlook for the political process in Burundi.
On 17 May, Burundian voters voted in favour of the
constitutional reform proposed by the Burundian
authorities. Côte d’Ivoire takes note of the provisional
results of the referendum, which unquestionably
remains a prerogative of the Burundian authorities.
However, we regret the lack of consultation with the
various sectors of Burundian society, which not only
risks widening the split between the ruling coalition
and the opposition but may also further undermine
the process of national reconciliation in Burundi. Côte
d’Ivoire therefore urges the Burundian authorities,
in the aftermath of the referendum, to work to create
a peaceful sociopolitical climate that will foster a
resumption of political dialogue on the basis of the
Arusha Accords. The Accords have been the main
pillar of peace and stability for more than a decade and
brought an end to the country’s civil war by establishing
a system in which power is shared by Burundi’s various
ethnic groups.
The stalemate in the inter-Burundian political
dialogue is of concern to the entire international
community. The fact is that more than six months
after the last session of the inter-Burundian dialogue,
18-15907

24/05/2018

The situation in Burundi

conducted in Uganda under the auspices of the East
African Community, there has been no significant
progress in the political process despite the efforts
of the facilitator, Mr. Mkapa. Côte d’Ivoire urges
Burundi’s stakeholders to resume their dialogue on the
basis of the Arusha Accords. We urge them to reject
preconditions and unilateral actions in order to create
the conditions necessary for a successful resolution of
the crisis, through a credible political process leading
to democratic and inclusive elections in 2020.
In conclusion, my delegation encourages the East
African Community and the mediator and facilitator of
the inter-Burundian dialogue to work for a resumption
of the political dialogue. We call on the international
community to support all regional and subregional
initiatives to that end. We support Special Envoy
Kafando and reiterate our readiness to support his
continued efforts to help end the crisis in Burundi.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this meeting and
the briefings of Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of
the Secretary‑General for Burundi, and the Ambassador
of Switzerland, Mr. Jürg Lauber, in his capacity as
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We fully support their efforts.
Peru takes note of the results of the referendum,
but regrets that it was organized without independent
observers amid complaints of intimidation of the
opposition and restrictions on the freedom of the press.
We are particularly concerned about the fact that the
constitutional amendments promoted by the Government
of Burundi and approved in a disputed referendum may
undermine important commitments made in the Arusha
Accords, which are recognized and supported by the
Security Council, designed to safeguard the rights of
the Burundian minorities and affecting the delicate
governmental balance achieved between the country’s
various communities after a tragic civil war. In that
regard, we should encourage the authorities of Burundi
to protect the entire population, including minorities,
and to put an end to the violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms that unfortunately continue. We
also want to underline the need to reject hate speech,
to keep all parties committed to the delicate balance
that has maintained peace and stability in Burundi for
more than a decade, and to prevent any recurrence of
acts of violence, especially those that have taken place
since 2015.

S/PV. 8268

In the current circumstances, we consider it
urgent to ensure that the process of inter-Burundian
dialogue can move forward and that the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights can resume its
activities in Burundi.
Finally, we believe it is important to ensure that the
Council follows developments in the country carefully,
and that regional organizations and neighbouring
countries can also follow developments there more
closely and support the inter-Burundian dialogue led
by the East African Community.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would first
like to thank Mr. Kafando, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi, for his very clear and
frank briefing, which comes at an important time for
Burundi, in the wake the referendum. I should also
like to thank Ambassador Lauber, for his thoughtful
briefing, particularly the six recommendations he
made for international community engagement. I am
happy to say that we support all of those very clear and
useful recommendations.
The United Kingdom would like to join the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, the United States,
France and other speakers today in expressing our
concern about the violence seen in the run-up to the
referendum. Human Rights Watch has reported that
at least 15 people opposing the referendum have been
killed, while six have been raped and eight abducted.
We remain very concerned about the restrictions on the
political space and the media in the period leading up
to the referendum. Regrettably, the preparations for the
referendum and the vote itself were held in a climate
of intimidation and repression, with a lack of public
information on the proposed reforms. We heard today
from Special Envoy Kafando about reports of many
irregularities by the opposition and from civil society.
Such actions only reduce the confidence that the results
of the referendum represent the will of the electorate.
We are of the view, in strong agreement with Special
Envoy Kafondo, that the Government of Burundi must
ensure that the spirit of the Arusha Accords is respected
when any constitutional reform is implemented. The
current crisis in Burundi can be resolved only by
continuing an inclusive dialogue that preserves the
Accords. We hope that the implementation of the
constitutional amendments will not have any impact
on the previous agreements, particularly with regard
to ethnic quotas and the representation of women in

18-1590711/18

S/PV.8268

The situation in Burundi

the Government. The United Kingdom calls on the
African Union and the other guarantors of the Arusha
Accords to pay careful attention to preserving them
during any implementation of constitutional changes in
Burundi. We encourage and support the African Union
in its efforts to ensure that the spirit of the Accords is
adhered to.
As others have already said today, we remain
extremely concerned about the human rights situation
in Burundi. We note with concern the points made
by the Special Envoy about the expulsion of human
rights experts, and we join his call to the Burundian
authorities to facilitate their return and cooperate with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. We continue to call on the
Government to implement the two resolutions adopted
at the thirty-sixth session of the Human Rights Council
(A/HRC/36/2 and A/HRC/36/19). We also urge the
Government to make progress on the criteria set by the
European Union (EU) that would pave the way for a
resumption of EU financial assistance to Burundi.
What we have heard today indicates that there is
little prospect of an early end to the political crisis
or improvement in the humanitarian situation in
Burundi. The current situation is unsustainable. We
often talk in this Chamber about the importance of
conflict prevention. The risks in Burundi are huge, and
the case for preventive diplomacy is overwhelming. We
therefore join the Peacebuilding Commission’s call to
the international community to pay close attention to
the situation in Burundi, and we strongly encourage the
Burundian Government, the East African Community
and the African Union to vigorously pursue inclusive
dialogue and preserve the gains of the Arusha Accords,
which is the only way to ensure peace and security in
the country.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Envoy Michel Kafando
for his briefing on the constitutional referendum
held in Burundi and the development of the situation
there. We have taken note of the report of Mr. Jürg
Lauber, Permanent Representative of Switzerland
to the United Nations, in his capacity as Chair of
the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). We welcome the configuration’s
balanced and equidistant approach to the issue of a
Burundi-owned settlement, which has made it one of
the most trustworthy channels for communication with
Bujumbura. We support the PBC’s efforts to revitalize
12/18

24/05/2018

cooperation with Burundians by discussing issues
related to the country’s socioeconomic development
and re-establishing donor confidence.
The Russian Federation continues to be of the
view that the referendum on 17 May on amending the
Constitution is a strictly internal affair for Burundi. As
we know, the changes were initiated by the National
Commission for the Inter-Burundi Dialogue, which
included representatives of various sectors of society,
encompassing members of all the parties represented
in Parliament, including the opposition, as well as
non-parliamentary political associations, the clergy
and civil society. The Commission’s high level of
representativeness, even during the referendum’s
preparatory stages, has meant that we can say that the
people supported the idea of holding the referendum.
The results showed an impressive — even unheard-of,
among African countries — turnout of 96.24 per cent,
with an overwhelming majority of voters — 73.26 per
cent — supporting the constitutional amendments.
We believe that the referendum took place in calm
circumstances and was preceded by a democratic and
transparent campaign, despite some problems.
We would like to draw our colleagues’ attention
to the fact that the alarmist predictions made in this
Chamber only a few weeks ago were not justified. On
the contrary, in general we see positive momentum in
the way the situation in the country is developing. We
are not idealizing it, but we also see no reason to get
worked up about it, as some of our colleagues have done
today. That could send those who do not enjoy support
in Burundian society the wrong message about the
Security Council’s attitude to the situation there.
The reality of the security situation in Burundi is
surely testified to by the fact that the seventy-second
session of the African Inter-Parliamentary Union
will be held in Bujumbura from 22 to 23 May. We
urge that be taken into consideration, including when
considering the rationale for keeping the Burundian
dossier on the Security Council’s already overburdened
agenda. Ultimately, there are always problems in any
country. However, it is important to ensure that the
Council considers only those issues that represent a
threat to international and regional peace and security.
We do not believe that the Council should get embroiled
in discussing countries’ domestic political situations,
usurping the role of other United Nations structures in
Geneva, giving someone or other some advice or other
on State structure and lecturing them on democracy
18-15907

24/05/2018

The situation in Burundi

and how people should live. Today, unfortunately,
we had a lot of people wanting to tell an independent
Government what to do. Let us respect ourselves and
others. Exercises such as these definitely do nothing to
enhance the Security Council’s authority in the eyes of
African Governments.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank Mr. Kafando, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Burundi, and Mr. Jürg
Lauber, Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the
United Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
for their briefings. We appreciate their efforts to
promote peace and stability in Burundi and the region.
The current situation in Burundi is generally
stable. The Government has worked actively to
preserve national peace and stability and promote
economic and social development. It has formulated an
national development plan, signed an agreement with
Tanzania and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the return of refugees
and worked with neighbouring countries to encourage
the voluntary return of Burundian refugees to their
homes. China welcomes those developments. Burundi
is an important country in the Great Lakes region,
and its stability and development contribute to wider
peace and stability in the region. The international
community should continue to provide it with
constructive assistance. China would like to emphasize
the following three points.
First, there must be proper respect for Burundi’s
national ownership, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity. China notes that the Independent National
Electoral Commission recently announced the results of
the constitutional referendum, with broad participation
and nearly three quarters of the population voting in
its favour, in a full demonstration of the ability of
Burundi’s Government and people to properly address
relevant issues. The international community should
consider the situation in Burundi comprehensively
and objectively, respect the country’s ownership in
handling its affairs and provide constructive assistance
with a view to preserving peace and development in
the region.
Secondly, there must be continued support for
Burundi’s political process. We appreciate the positive
efforts by regional and subregional organizations such
as the African Union, the East African Community

S/PV. 8268

(EAC) and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region in exercising their good offices with
regard to the issue of Burundi. We support the EAC in
taking the lead in that regard.
Thirdly, our priority should be increasing
humanitarian assistance to Burundi and supporting its
economic and social development. Burundi continues
to face humanitarian challenges, owing to a relatively
large gap in funding for humanitarian assistance. We
hope that international partners will honour their
commitments in a timely manner and provide assistance.
We call on the relevant international agencies and
organizations to resume their economic cooperation
and development assistance to the country as soon as
possible. The Secretary-General’s Special Envoy and the
PBC are important bridges for communication between
Burundi and the international community. We hope
that they will make use of their respective advantages
and enhance their communication in cooperation with
the Burundian Government. China is ready to continue
to support their work.
China has consistently supported Burundi
in its peace process and assisted it in its national
reconstruction to the best of its ability. We are ready to
continue to play a constructive role in achieving peace,
stability and sustainable development in Burundi.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Special Envoy
Michel Kafando for his briefing on the political situation
in Burundi. We have always valued the contribution of
the Special Envoy. We also commend Mr. Jürg Lauber,
Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the United
Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
and appreciate his briefing. It once again demonstrated
how useful the work of the PBC is to the Security
Council, and how, when it is handled in an effective
manner, as Ambassador Lauber has done, the advisory
capacity of the PBC is critical to making the Council
more effective and, I might add, wiser.
We were able to closely follow the constitutional
referendum, which took place on 17 May. We note the
generally calm environment during the campaign and
the conduct of the referendum, despite reports about
allegations of intimidation and repression against
opponents of the constitutional changes, which were
referred to us both by the Special Envoy and by the Chair
of the Burundi configuration. We believe any grievance
with regard to the process of the referendum and its

18-1590713/18

S/PV.8268

The situation in Burundi

outcome should be addressed through the established
legal mechanisms in a more transparent manner.
We are also encouraged to note that the security
situation in Burundi still continues to be stable. As
the country prepares to embrace the outcome of the
referendum, the pressing issue now is how to avoid any
erosion in the relatively calm situation that prevails now.
As we have been repeatedly stating, the political
impasse in the country can be addressed only through
peaceful, inclusive and consensual dialogue. The lack
of progress in that regard in the mediation led by the
East African Community (EAC)has been of a matter
of serious concern. Hence, the rapid re-launching of
genuine and inclusive dialogue, under the auspices of
the EAC and with the support of the African Union
(AU) and the United Nations on the basis of the spirit
of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement
for Burundi and the Constitution of Burundi, is all the
more urgent to ensure lasting peace and stability, as
well as a better future for Burundi.
We believe, as was also stressed by Ambassador
Lauber, that strong coordination and coherence among
the EAC, the African Union and the United Nations
is key to making progress on the peace process. We
urge the Government of Burundi to recommit itself to
participating in the dialogue process. All the stakeholders
in the crisis in Burundi should also cooperate fully
with the facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue and
participate in that process in good faith.
The engagement between the international
community and the Government of Burundi has to
be based on a realistic strategy aimed at supporting
strong institutions and creating a conducive climate in
which political differences can be addressed without
backsliding into the violence of the past. In that
regard, the Council should explore new avenues for
re-engagement with Burundi in order to address the
political impasse. While we welcome and encourage
the work of the Chair of the Burundi configuration
in serving as a bridge for dialogue between Burundi
and the international community, we also recommend
exploring discreet diplomacy, in close coordination
with the AU and the EAC, to engage the Burundian
Government. The cultivation of trust in all of that
is critical.
As the political impasse coupled with the continued
reduction of international financial assistance has put
huge socioeconomic pressure on Burundi, we believe
14/18

24/05/2018

that alleviating the socioeconomic difficulties of the
population, as well as addressing the humanitarian
situation, should also be an integral part of the
re-engagement. Ambassador Lauber’s proposals made
a while ago are worth looking at carefully and seriously.
On the side of the Government of Burundi, too,
we believe that it is important for there to be openminded engagement with the international community
to explain the constitutional reform process and its
outcome, the plan for the election in 2020, as well as the
commitments to the spirit of the Arusha Agreement.
The Government might also look seriously at the
situation with regard to the three human rights experts,
mandated by Human Rights Council resolution 36/2,
which was presented on 28 September 2017 by African
countries, including Burundi, in Geneva, and gather
the information so that it would be able to garner
the necessary assistance to address the capacity gap
critically needed in the area.
In conclusion, sustainable peace can be achieved
only through a comprehensive solution on the basis
of the Arusha Agreements and the Constitution of
Burundi. Now that the referendum has passed, we can
only hope that there will be readiness on the part of
all the relevant stakeholders for frank and genuine
dialogue to chart the best way forward.
Burundi is a country that continues to contribute
in a significant manner to the peace and security of
Somalia, which has huge significance for peace in the
Horn of Africa and Africa in general. It is also from
that perspective that we look at the need for improved
relations between Burundi and the international
community. It is our hope that Ambassador Lauber will
continue with the very encouraging approach he has
adopted and the process he has embarked upon.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Michel Kafando
and the Permanent Representative of Switzerland, in his
capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their valuable briefings.
We have followed with interest the efforts made by
the Government of Burundi to conclude the referendum
on the Constitution, which was held on 17 May 2018,
with the participation of the majority of the political
parties. According to the preliminary results announced
nationally by the Independent National Electoral
Commission, 73.26 per cent of voters voted in favour
18-15907

24/05/2018

The situation in Burundi

of the constitutional changes. That is a very high turn
out. Indeed, it reflects the ambitions of the Burundian
people, despite the relative calm prevailing in Burundi
at the time. We hope the presidential elections in 2020
will be conducted in the same environment of calm.
In accordance with that milestone reached in
Burundi, we urge the Government to move beyond
the present stage and make future plans to promote
the well-being of the people of Burundi, whose
security and livelihoods have suffered as a result of
the political instability over the past two years. We
stress the importance of holding an inclusive national
dialogue without preconditions in order to allow for the
expression of the aspirations of all Burundian people.
In that vein, we highly appreciate the concerted
effort made by President of Uganda Yoweri Museveni,
the mediator of the political dialogue led by the
East African Community (EAC), and Mr. Benjamin
Mkapa, its facilitator. We hope that the dialogue will
be successful and reach consensus solutions that will
ensure the political stability of Burundi. We reaffirm
the need for the Government of Burundi to engage
with regional and international organizations, namely,
the United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union and the EAC, to ensure the desired stability.
We have followed with interest all of the efforts made
last year to bring the parties to the conflict in Burundi
to the negotiating table in Arusha. Unfortunately, those
efforts have not been successful. Therefore, we call for
the continuation of such efforts because we believe that
no tangible progress in the political process between
the opposition and the Government of Burundi can
be achieved unless all parties are brought to the same
negotiating table to reach consensus and put an end to
political polarization and establish the rules for law
and security. The only way to achieve such consensus
is for all parties to comply with the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, which was
signed in Tanzania in 2000.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the
voluntary return of the Burundian refugees following
the tripartite agreement signed among the Government
of Burundi and the Government of Tanzania and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. The Burundian authorities must redouble
their efforts to ensure the refugees’ reintegration in
society and establish an environment that is conducive
to that objective.

S/PV. 8268

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, and Ambassador Jürg Lauber, Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their comprehensive briefings.
The situation in Burundi has to be seen in the
wider regional context of the Great Lakes region. It
risks deepening a humanitarian and refugee crisis
in Burundi and its neighbourhood. While thanking
international and regional mediators for the efforts so
far, we encourage the East African Community and the
African Union to increase their commitment to breaking
the political impasse and enhancing coordination of
their steps in that regard.
We recognize the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi, with its provisions on the
need for broad political consensus and avoiding
concentrating power in a single institution or unit as
the main instrument for peace and stability in Burundi
and in the region. Poland would like to emphasize the
particular role the leaders of neighbouring countries
and the Arusha Agreement guarantors have to play
in overcoming the causes generating instability in
the region.
Poland has concerns about the situation in
Burundi, both in the pre-referendum period and in
the tense situation after the voting. We are worried
about the deterioration of human rights and limitations
on political space for members of the opposition,
independent media and civil society. We hope that the
inter-Burundian dialogue will be continued, as only an
inclusive political dialogue can ensure a sustainable
and widely acceptable solution.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Madam President, I would like to congratulate
you personally and your country, Poland, on your
assumption of the rotating presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May. You can count on the
full support and cooperation of my delegation for the
remaining days of your mandate. Through you, I would
also like to thank the other members of the Council
that have always supported respect for the principles
and values of the Charter of the United Nations in

18-1590715/18

S/PV.8268

The situation in Burundi

24/05/2018

addressiing the situation in Burundi — although
some delegations remain imprisoned or brainwashed
in their 2015 rhetoric without moving in parallel with
the evolving situation in the country. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Jürg Lauber, my colleague
from Switzerland, Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, for his positive
and growing role in the peacebuilding process in my
country, Burundi. I cannot help but thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michel Kafando,
for his briefing to the Council this morning.

remain an unforgettable red-letter day in Burundi’s
political history.

The purpose of my statement is to share with the
Security Council the latest developments in Burundi
since the Council’s previous briefing, three months ago
here in the Chamber, on the situation in my country
(see S/PV.8189).

At the substantive level, the new Constitution fully
respects the 2000 Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi, to which the Government
attaches great importance. All the substantive
articles — I repeat, all the substantive articles — of the
Arusha Agreement guaranteeing democratic principles,
sovereignty, social cohesion, political stability, national
unity, social justice, the protection of minorities, ethnic
and gender quotas in institutions, term limits and the
protection of human rights have been maintained or
even strengthened. What is being said about supposed
non-respect for the Arusha Agreement is manipulation
of opinion and the will of certain outside actors to
destabilize our country. That behaviour, which has
manifested itself since 2015, is not dead and buried.
Of that we are very aware. The people of Burundi
remain very vigilant so as to safeguard their unity and
cohesion. The degree of patriotism that has developed
among Burundians since 2015 will leave no cracks for
any attempt from abroad to destabilize the country to
exploit it.

On the political front, on 17 May, Burundi concluded
its constitutional referendum with resounding success.
According to the provisional national results announced
on Monday, 21 May by the Independent National
Electoral Commission, the “yes” to Burundi’s new
Constitution won by a large margin, with 73.26 per
cent of the vote, as well as with a record participation
rate of 96.24 per cent. Through the referendum, the
Burundian people demonstrated to the international
community their political maturity and their capacity
to organize free, transparent and peaceful democratic
elections, and especially with a budget made up entirely
of Burundian funds.
The referendum and the two-week campaign
preceding it took place in very good conditions
throughout the country and across the diaspora.
No major incidents were reported to the Electoral
Commission during the entire process up to election
day. The campaign was very lively, pluralistic, colourful
and inclusive. In total, in addition to the ruling party, 25
political parties and opposition coalitions participated
in a peaceful election campaign throughout the country,
with a high sense of political tolerance between those in
favour of the “yes” side and those in favour of the “no”
side as to the revised Constitution.
By voting 73.26 per cent in favour of the new
Constitution with such record participation, the
Burundian people once again reaffirmed their
sovereignty, unity in diversity, social cohesion, political
tolerance, patriotism, bravery and will to definitively
take ownership of their country’s political, economic
and cultural governance. The date of 17 May 2018 will
16/18

My delegation recalls in passing that the
constitutional reform that was just successfully
completed was the result of broad consultations
conducted over more than a year with the Burundian
population in all its diversity. That was an exercise
aimed at the country’s long-term stability, in particular
by ending the transitional period under the current
2005 Constitution.

So far, only one political actor, the leader of an
independent coalition called Amizero y’Abarundi, out
of the 26 parties that took part in the elections, has
contested, without convincing anyone, the outcome
of the referendum. That was done even before the
provisional official results were published by the
competent body, the Independent National Electoral
Commission. It should be recalled that that political
actor has never recognized any electoral results
since he entered politics. His denial of the results is
a repeat offence in that he has denied the results of
all the elections in which he has participated. In the
event that that recidivist actor does not withdraw his
groundless challenge, wisdom and the rule of law quite
naturally oblige him to comply with the electoral code
by using the competent legal mechanisms for litigating
electoral disputes.
18-15907

24/05/2018

The situation in Burundi

A few delegations in the Chamber today made
statements taking shots at the recently concluded
referendum process. They are the same delegations that
put forward alarmist scenarios before the referendum,
which nevertheless, fortunately, took place under very
good conditions. I would say to those delegations that
the referendum is a victim of its own success.
With regard to media coverage of the referendum,
my delegation commends the outstanding synergy
between the public and private media. As soon as
polling stations opened, 15 public and private radio
stations provided live coverage of the elections in
real time in the four most widely spoken languages in
Burundi. That ongoing media presence reinforced the
degree of transparency of the voting, as did the major
presence of the political representatives of each party
and political coalition in all polling stations — with
the right to confirm the results of the voting operations
after counting the votes.
Speaking of the media, I would note that Burundi
was recently unfairly and prematurely condemned by
some of its partners for having temporarily suspended
the broadcasting of the British Broadcasting Corporation
(BBC) and the Voice of America for flagrant violations
of journalism standards. After a rigorous investigation,
the BBC World Service, in its 11 May letter addressed
to the President of Burundi’s National Communication
Council, acknowledged that journalists involved in
arranging and conducting an interview with a guest
who had ties to the Burundian radical opposition had
acted in violation of the professional ethics and strict
rules of the BBC.
After the admission of the facts, the management of
the BBC presented its official apology to the National
Communication Council in its 11 May letter. In the same
letter, the BBC undertook to spare no effort to ensure
that such breaches of journalistic ethics would not recur
in future. The National Council of Communication
of welcomed the apology of the BBC and awaits the
follow-up to the right of reply that BBC radio promised
the Government of Burundi to quickly close this issue
in a constructive spirit. My delegation encourages the
Voice of America, which recognized in its 18 May letter
that it had broadcast biased information on Burundi, to
do the same.
With regard to dialogue as a means of peacebuilding
and the peaceful resolution of political disputes,
Burundi reiterates its commitment to peacebuilding,

S/PV. 8268

unity, stability, social cohesion, national harmony, the
rule of law and the ongoing democratic order through
sustained dialogue.
With regard to the security situation, Burundi
remains firmly committed to peace, stability and
national reconciliation. The security situation is
generally stable throughout Burundi. The successful
holding of a free, transparent, democratic and peaceful
constitutional referendum and the organization, from
22 to 23 May, of the seventy-second session of the
Executive Committee of the African Parliamentary
Union in Bujumbura bear witness to that. At the end of
its session, the African Parliamentary Union welcomed
the positive developments in the political, security
and social situation in Burundi. It believes that the
normalization of the general situation in the country
should push our European Union partners to normalize
their relations with Burundi by lifting the economic
sanctions, which are unfairly causing difficulties for
the Burundian people. The African Parliamentary
Union also regrets the poor understanding of the
political, social and security situation in Burundi
following disinformation campaigns that currently
permeate the international community. During his
statement to the press, the Chairperson of the Executive
Committee of the African Parliamentary Union stated,
among other things, that “what is being said about
Burundi and what we see on the ground is different”.
He said that what they had found was “a viable and
peaceful Burundi — a country that needs support in its
reconciliation and development efforts”.
With regard to bilateral cooperation with our
partners, Burundi reiterates its commitment to
strengthening its mutually beneficial friendly and
cooperative relations with both traditional and
non-traditional partners in a spirit of constructiveness
and mutual respect. We must together turn the page on
2015 and set ourselves towards Burundi’s future, in
particular towards peaceful elections in 2020. We wish
for a peaceful, stable and prosperous Burundi living in
harmony with its neighbours and the other nations of
the world.
In the area of human rights, Burundi continues its
efforts to promote and protect human rights from both
legislative and institutional perspectives. Here and now,
we reaffirm our full cooperation with the international
community in protecting and promoting human rights
in accordance with the ground rules established in the
Charter of the United Nations.

18-1590717/18

S/PV.8268

The situation in Burundi

With regard to the return of refugees, the voluntary
repatriation movement that began in 2016 is continuing
at a satisfactory pace with the arrival of several
thousand citizens who had taken refuge in Tanzania in
particular. To date more than 200,000 Burundians have
already returned home on a voluntary basis. Burundi
expects 72,000 returnees by the end of this year, mainly
from Tanzania.
On the humanitarian front, Burundi hopes that
any support from the international community will be
primarily directed to the development efforts under
way in the country. Humanitarian aid should be limited
to people in emergency situations.
I cannot conclude my statement without reiterating
our urgent request to remove Burundi from the Security
Council agenda. There are no objective criteria that
justify keeping Burundi on the Council’s agenda, per
the provisions of the Charter, which everyone is familiar
with. We are not asking for preferential treatment.
Rather, we are asking that Burundi be treated fairly like
the other Members, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.

18/18

24/05/2018

The current situation in Burundi in no way poses a
threat to international peace and security — the main
mission of the Security Council. On the contrary, Burundi
participates actively and admirably in peacekeeping
missions around the world, with more than 6,000 men
and women deployed, mainly in Somalia and the Central
African Republic. Our participation in peace missions
is to pay back the international community, which
stood by Burundi in the dark moments of its history
before the rebirth of democracy in 2005. The time and
energy allocated to Burundi should be directed to other
areas of conflict and tension, which are increasingly
numerous. I ask the Council to listen to us and consider
our appeal. Otherwise, history will remember that
Burundi was kept on its agenda above and beyond the
criteria established by the United Nations Charter, and
that risks creating a dangerous precedent.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

18-15907
