UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SECOND

YI?‘AR
d
MEETING:

28 OCTOBER

1977

NEW YORK
\

CONTENTS
Page

, . . . . . . . , . . . , _. . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. . . . . . .. . .. , . ,. . . , . . , . , , . . (. . . . . . ,. . . .

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Pcrmnnent Representative of Tunisia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2420) . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2043)

Adoption

of the agenda

S/PV.2043

1

-..

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quartcrJY
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a systorrl
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Reschtiom and Decisiom of tJtc*
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutit~ns
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

Held in New York

2043RD

MEETING

on Friday,

28 October

President: Mr. Rikhi JAIPAL (India).
Ptwent: The representatives of the ‘following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2043)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2420)
The meeting was called to order at 4.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12420)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions taken
by the Council at its earlier meetings, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Ghana, Guinea,
Guyana, Lesotho, Mauritania, the Niger, Nigeria, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, the Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, the
United Republic of Cameroon and Viet Nam LO take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the Presiders t, Mr. Benjaoui (Algeria),
Mr. Tlou (Botswana), Mr. Boaten (Ghana), Mr. Carnara
(Guinea), Mr. Jackson (Guyana), Mr. Molapo (I,esotho),
Mr. Kane (Mauritania), Mr. Poisson (Niger), Mr. Garba
(Nigeria),
Mr. Baroodv
(Saudi Arabia),
Mr. Kamara
(Senegal), Mr. Hussen (Sonmlia), Mr. Medani (Sudan),
Mr. Kodjovi (Togo), Mr. Mestiri (Tunisia), Mr. O.~ono
(United Republic of Cameroon) and Mr. Dirlh BO Thi (Viet
Nam) took the places reserved ,fur them at the side of’ the
Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: I also wish to inform the members of
the Council that I have received a letter dated 78 October

1977, at 3.30 pm.

from
the representatives of Benin, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Mauritius which reads as follows:

“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council,
have the honour to request that, during its current
meetings devoted to consideration of “The question of
South Africa”, the Council should extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Ilorst Gerhard Kleinschmidt, External Representative
of The Christian Institute of Southern Africa.“’
3. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Councii
agrees to the request and, at the appropriate motnent in the
Council’s proceedings, I shall invite Mr. Kleinschmidt to
make a statement.
It was so decided.
4. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of the Sudan. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
5. Mr. MEDANI (Sudan): Mr. President, it is a matter of
great satisfaction thal this debate is being presided over by
you, a great friend and the representative of a great country
that has very strong bonds with my country and people in
particular and with the African people in general. We are
indebted to India for the being the first to ask for the
inclusion in the agenda of the General Assembly of the
question of the evil laws of apartheid. Your legendary
leader, Gandhi, was in the vanguard of the fight against
racial discrimination in South Africa. The consistent support your country has given to all colonial peoples is a
source of inspiration to many.
6. Seven months ago the Security Council was seized of
the question of South Africa. It adjourned (hen without
taking action on the four draft resolutions submitted by its
three African members. There were those who argued for
more time to persuade the white racist regime to change its
apartheid policies. We have now received a clear answer
from the Government of South Africa, a complete rejection
of that plea in the form of intensified and repeated police
brutalities at Soweto, the cold-blooded murder of Steve
Biko while in detention and, lastly, the recent wave of
massive repression of blacks and even of whites tliat dare to
oppose apartheid. This is a manifestation of a situation in
which our consciences, as sovereign judges, have long been
and must be put to the test.

7. The recent crackdown on at least 16 mass organizations, two white-led antiapaltlzeid groups and black newspapers have proved beyond any reasonable doubt that the
apartheid rkgime is ignoring
the advice of even its traditional partners without whomapz~thcid can hardly survive.
This is all the more true since the South Africa Govermrent
oppresses its black population on the ostensible graund that
it is championing Western ideals and values.
8. 1 am extremely happy that this morning we heard the
representative of the United Kingdom affirm that his
Government
totally
rejected this false assumption.
Throughout all these years it has been agonizing for us to
see the zealous devotees of democracy and justice uphold
this wrongful assumption, only to discern their error and
misjudgement long afterwards.
9. l-low can it be supposed that the custodians of
democracy, human
rights and justice can turn a deaf ear to
the cries of thousands of men, women and children who arc
being murdered or driven from their schools and homes as a
result of the contemptible and infamous apzrthaid theory
that is shaming the civilized world and impairing our
endeavours to achieve a world of common understanding
and mutual co-operation’? It is because of this regrettable
fact that all attempts by the General Assembly and the
Security Council to eradicate all forms of colonialism and
u/~~~t/zeic~From South Africa have been frustrated. They
have been frustrated, regrettably, not in the interest of
those who censure the faults and the crimes but in the
interest of those who commit them. It is lamentable to see
that sometimes even morality can be subvertedby error.

14. It is not beyond the comprehcnSiclrl lbf aIlyho~I>’ here
that the South African peoplewill be ~(~~~1l~IIe~Ito reslH
~IlLlt
to armed struggle, if only to L)pIX”sc‘ il SyStCblIl
institutionalizcs violence to oppress tlle111. It wilt he
regrettable, therefore, if the Security C’ourlcil
is tIcit Shh!tu
use its authority and lay down the basis l’rll, ~CUCC
in lhat
area. Freedom for the Azanian people’ \vill ultimately 1~’
obtained,

but

we

are

]loping

tll:\t

it

Will

L?)I~IC

H.ith kSS

human sacrifice and pain. That is why II\>‘ rIt’le@tioil .i!~ills
the representative of Tunisia,
the CI~~I’~?~I I C’ll;lirlniW
d
Ihe
African Group, in requesting the C’0ll ricil to WSlllllf
examination of the draft resolutions sttlrlilittcd
tr> it SWCI1
monthsago. The reviseddrafts. introducc*d ll!, ihe W}WXNtative of Mauritius /2()4(kh I~ZL’CJII’II.~/
, it’ adop~cd, would
represent the minimum responseto S~)rltll I\I’riua’s intraIlsigencc.

10. Such behaviour shows not only the contradictions
between what some of us say and the decisionsthat are
made, but also a complete lack of far-sightedness.For, by
the simplest application of probability and the lessonsof
contemporary history, let none of those who say not what
they do dreamthat their long-term interests,and indeedthe
interestsof mankind, lie in their affiliation to the qxzrtheid
regimerather than with the future independentAfrica.

15. We hope that the Council will live 111)to its rlul!~ 01
preservinginternationai peaceand securi ly II!; il~~~~lyill~ tllc
necessarymandatory sanctionsagainst tjlc nlint>rity GOV*
ernment of South Africa. By so doing, Iji~. (,‘ouacil will hI:
upholding justice for the valiant Axaniarl
~w~~plc who XC
determinedto redeemtheir dignity and hil-tl\riphl.

11. It is perhaps pertinent to listen to the Right Reverend
DesmondTutu, former dean of JohannesburgCathedral,
when he warnsthat
“The West has a crucial role to play to ensure the
survival of all in our subcontinent and you should not
abdicate your moral responsibility, becauseyou in the
West have undergirded aprtheid, injustice a,ndoppression
by your investmentsand the useof the veto in the United
Nations , , . You must decide where you want to be; we
will not be unfree for always and we will rememberthose
who helped LIS in our struggle.”
12. It should not, however, passunnoticed that the latest
Draconian measurescome at a time when the five Western
States membersof the Security Council are attempting to
enlist South Africa’s co-operation on Namibia and Zimbabwe. The idea is to blackmail those Western countries
into silence about the deterioriating situation in South
Africa proper. The Western States and the international
community should reject the attempt to hold them to
ransom, particularly as South Africa has no right to be in
2

16. The PRESIDENT: I thank the rcprescrlta~ivc tll’ the
Sudan for the kind referenceshc adrlrcssecl to mc tlnd IO
rIly country and for recalling the role crI’ t]l~ late hkdu~t~lln
Gandhi.
17. The next speakeris the representative (11’Togo. I illvitc
him to take a seat at the Council taI>l~~ ;lrlc] 10 make his
statcnlent .

18. Mr. KODJOVI (Togo) (i/ltelp’c’tufic,Iz J~OI,Z~+~rt(~/rL
Mr. President, it is a pleasureto pay yt,rl ;I welLdeserved
tribute for the efforts you have becil Illiikillg since the
beginning of this month as Presidcllt
fli’
the
Security
Council ‘to promote peace in the worIc1. blay I alsu thank
both YOU and the membersof the ~‘ourl~-il <or authoriziag
mc to take part in the iml>ortant deI~:ltcs currently under
way and to make my country’s rind
rlly delegation’s
contribution to the search for soluti~~rls tr, the situatioll
created in South Africa by the recent rct,rcssive measures
taken by the Vorster Government within tlla cL)ntext of the
normal application of the systemof CJpa~~/r~i~f+

19. The brutality of such measures, on a scale unprecedented in the past 17 years, sheds a harsh light on the
nature of the system of apurthcid anti eloquently S]WWS
that their proponents are determined to drive the intcrnational community, which they have been defying in the
most hateful way for many years, to the end of its tether.
They also show, with cruel clarity, that the situation
prevailing in South Africa constitutes a serious danger to
world peace. We have always maintained, on the basis of
the lessons drawn from history, that rigimes which base
their action on racism and minorities moved by a gluttonous greed for domination obey an implacable dialectic.
When, endowed with all the appropriate means, they start
out on their inexorable march, nothing can stop theit
bloodthirsty frenzy; like a steamroller they spare no one.
WC saw this happening with nazism.

suicidal tendencies. It must take up Vorster’s odious
challenge-it can do so, while there is still time-through the
adoption and scrupulousimplementation of the measures
advocated in the draft resolutionssubmitted by the African
membersof the Council, That is the minimum
that
the
situation requires.
74. It is a questionof safeguardingthe lives of millionsoi
human beingsdoomedto slavery in their own country, or
condemnedto genocideunder a massiveracist pogrom.The
object is to save the human race from the dangersand
horrors of a new world war. We cannot continue to allow
these imperatives to be outweighed by sordid material
interests.
25. I no longer remembertoo well what political realities
and what sociologicaland psychologicalfactors impelled
Cato the Elder to end all his speeches
with the resounding
cry “Dclmd~ CarthugoI’: Carthagemust be destroyed.The
nature
of the eventstaking placein South Africa, the terror
we feel in contemplating the inevitable apocalyptic consequencesof an intensification of institutionalized racial
hatred prompt us to repeat “Apartheid must be stamped
out”. The survival, the unity and the harmoniousprogress
of mankind are at stake.

20. The peoples of Europe, concerned wit11 enjoying the
delights of the euphoria of the belle $,~ot~ue,watched with
general apathy and indifference the gathering of the Nazi
storm. When, locally, that regime first began its work of
destruction, no one worried too much. America was too far
away and too powerful to feel involved. Russia, for its part,
was at work on the great Socialist Revolution, China, too,
in the silence of its grandeur and its vastness was preparing
its emergence, The Nazi system spread like an oil slick. The
rest is history. We know, too, the price that had to be paid
to calm the storm.

26. Mr. BARTON (Canada): The Security Council’s debate on the question of South Africa and its policy of
apartheid hasbeensuspended
for severalmonths, but, aswe
all know, this does not reflect any lack of interest on the
part of our Governments. Indeed, quite to the contrary, it
is the result of the intensiveinternational diplomatic efforts
which are being directed towards the resolulion of the
problems of southern Africa, in which the policy of
upmthc~‘d of the Government of South Africa plays a
central role. Let me sumrriarizethem briefly.

21. Today, in South Africa, it is the blacks and their
sympathizers who are lortured physically and morally by
the apartheid rCgimc, a hateful system which benefits from
complicity and support as we know, It is said that history
does not repeat itself; yet the same causes produce the same
effects. The monster that has been allowed to grow, that
has been helped to develop in South Africa will soon no
longer be content with the short commons offered by the
black population of Azania and the young independent
countries in the region. It will soon set its sights higher. For
that matter, has it not already acquired the most powerful
means of resistance? Is this just an allegory, an exaggeration’? Alas, no! No, because some very recent statements
leave no room for doubt.

27. At the conclusion of our considerationsduring the
month of March on this subject, the five Westernmembers
of the Council joined together in an initiative designedto
bring about the independenceof Namibia in a manner
consistent with the provisions of Council resolution
385 (1970). The exploration of the meansof bringing
about this objective hasrequired a great deal of effort and
is continuing. At the sametime, the United Kingdom and
the United Stateshave been involved in the elaboration of
proposalsdesignedto bring about early independenceand
majority rule in Zimbabwe, And this initiative too has
reacheda decisivestage.

22. Indeed, Vorster confirmed his hostility to any compromise on the question of apartheid and his systematic
rejection of the principle of “one man, one vote” and, on
23 October last, declared his country ready to “survive on
its own” and to “stand alone” against the combined attacks
of the great Powers and denied ever having promised that
South Africa would refrain from manufacturing atomic
weapons, That is a clear statement and requires no
comment.

28. During the month of May, the United Nations, in
co-operation with the Organization of African Unity and
the Federal Government of Nigeria, convenedat Lagosthe
World Conferencefor Action againstApartheid. It wasthe
most significanl such conferenceyet held on this subject.It
brought together delegationsfront 112 Governments, I2
inter-governmental organizations, five liberation movements, 51 non-governmentalorganizationsand a numberof
prominent individuals. The wide rangeof participation, as
well as the high level at which the Governments were
represented,left no doubt about the seriousness
with which
the international community regardsthe problem created
by the policies and actions of the South African Government. The Lagos Dcclaration,z which was adopted by

23. In such circumstances,the international community
mustgo beyond a meredenunciationand condemnationof
apartheid, and timid sanction measures
that are adopted
only to be violated. Confronted with the Vorster rEgimc
whose twists and turns, guile and unremitting determination prevent us from seriously envisagingany possibility of a so-callednegotiated settlement,the international
community must stop shilly-&allying and quibbling and
abandon its complacency, which, consideringthe circumstances,are completely unjustified and indeed smack of

2 United

3

Nations

publication,

Sales No. E.77.XIV.2,

sect. X.

consensus, sets out in unmistakable language the intensity
of the opposition of the international community to South
Africa’s system of aparfheid. It underlined the support ot
the international community for the victims of those
policies in their struggleto achievefull and equalparticipation in their own society.

that action at this point is warranted, and we have
concerted our efforts in exchangesof view sinceMarchand
since Lagos on the variety of possibilities which lie
before us.

29. In the wake of our deliberations here at the United
Nations and elsewhere,and of the Lagos Conference,the
Government of South Africa can have no illusions as to
how it is seenby the rest of the world. Its policies, which
have created a society embodying cruel divisions along
racial lines, have been universally condemned.The South
African C;overnment has been advisedby voiceswithin and
without that it has set its country on the road to disaster,
and that only a commitment in favour of fundamental
changecan avert it.

34. The CanadianGovernmentis preparedto support the
imposition against South Africa of a mandatory arms
embargounder Chapter VII of the Charter and, in addition,
WCare prepared to support a call to all Governmentsto
review their economic relationswith South Africa. There is
no doubt that the proposal in relation to action under
Chapter VII of the Charter is of profound significance.If
adopted, it would be the first time that a MemberState was
to be the subject of measures
taken under ChapterVII. It
hasrightly been regardedas a grave decision,to be taken
only after the most serious consideration and careful
weighingof its implications.
35. Since 1963, my country has strictly maintained a
voluntary embargo on the export of artns and military
equipment to South Africa, in accordance with relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. Since 1970, that
embargo has covered the export of spare parts. Nevertheless, in the light of the steady deterioration of the
situation in South Africa over the past severalmonthsand
South Africa’s continued ability to acquire arms and
military equipment, my Government considersit appropriate that the voluntary arms embargo should now be
mademandatory.

30. The responseof the South African C;overnmcnt to
international appeal and demands for progress towards
racial justice has been uncompromising, Last month,
Mr. Steve Biko died in a South African prison, and hiswas
the twenty-first such death in South African prisonsin the
past 18 months. IHisdeath deprived black South Africans of
a leader who was widely respectedas a manwith potential
for engagingeffectively in the inter-racial dialoguewhich is
essentialto a peaceful evolution of South African society.
The CanadianCovernrnent made known its concern to the
South African (;overnment and advised it that a full and
prompt investigation into the circumstancesof Mr. Biko’s
death was warranted.

36. The implicationsof our actionshere in the Councilare
far-reaching and should be lecognized as such. If we can
reach agreementon a united determination of the kind that
I have indicated, a clear message
will have beensentto the
C;overnmentof South Africa and to those who support it
from the world community, as expressedthrough the
decisionsof the Council. My delegation looks forward to
contributing to sucha conclusionto this debate.

31. Canadiansreacted with shock and dismay to the latest
oppressive wave of bannings and detentions and the
silencing of an important element of the South African
press. To give expression to these feelings, the C2lIl~lLliiUl
C;overnment called in the South African Ambassadorto
convey to him and his Govertimcnt our concerns.

37. The PRESIDENT: I sl~ouldnow like to addressthe
32. Among those struggling courageously against the
Council in my capacity asrepresentativeof INDIA.
unjust and humiliating system of apmdzeid is Mr. Percy
Qoboza, the editor of the principal black newspaper,T/W
38. The item on our agenda has been appropriately
World, which wasamongthose bannedlast week. In a papet
Ibrtnulated as “The question of South Africa”. Since the
that he presentedto a conferencelast May at the I.)niversity
very inception of the United Nations, South Africa has
of Pretoria, Mr. Qoboza stressedthat black leaderswished been a question mark becauseits membershipis not
to have a dialogue with the whites of South Africa
consistent with the principlesof the Charter. Its pursuitof
concerning the future of the country which is ttieit
racial discrimination asa socialobjective and its policy of
common fatherhmd. I-te said---andit is worth remembering npurtkekl, or the separatedevelopmentof races,arc flagrant
hiswords:
violations of the Charter, Its doctrine of racialsuperiority is
in violent contradiction to the spirit that moved LhC
“It is never too late to do the right thing. It is never too
founding Fathersof the United Nations.
late to transform the might of South Africa into the
might of justice and dignity for all. It is never too late to
39. South Africa should not have beenmadea Metnberor
build a South Africa where pcoplc of all racescan live
the United Nations in the first place. But sincethat was
together in mutual respectand tolerance.”
unavoidable, India took the initiative to have inscribedon
It is LhaLgenerosity of spirit which must bo encouraged the agendaof the first sessionof the (icneral Assemblythe
subject of the racial discriminationpractisedasState policy
amongall segmentsof the South African population.
by South Africa. Since then, the General Assemblyhas
discussedthis question year after year. The Security
33. Now the Security Council is considering measures Council has also been engagedin debate on this matter
which can be taken to promote changein South Africa.
since1960.
Opinions vary as to what kind of measurescan most
appropriately be employed to move rowardsthat objective.
40. The United Nations has declared apartlwid a crime
But there is no difference of opinion amongour members againsthumanity and againstthe conscienceand dignity of
4

mankind. Furthermore,
the Security Council has detcrmined that the practice of apartheid by South Africa
disturbs international peace and security.

There is at the moment a favourable constellation of
circumstances and personalities for such a course of action
by the Security Council.

41. The response of the white Government in South
Africa to the urgings of the international community to
abolish apartheid and to move in the direction of racial
equality has been consistently and totally negative. The
recent repressive measures adopted by the Pretoria rCgime
are evidence of its decision to consolidate its political
position and to proceed with the further implementation of
its policy
of apartheid. This is nothing other than an open
challenge to the United Nations and to the values which we
are carefully promoting for mankind’s future based on
justice, equality and peace.

48. At the same time, we should begin the process of
examination, study and legislation for the progressjvc
imposition of economic sanctions in the months to come
for this is only the beginning of what may turn out to be d
prolonged test of will and trial of strength between the
Pretoria rigime and those who are opposed to its policy of
apartheid. It will be prolonged because of South African
self-sufficiency.
It is going to be essentially a struele
between the Pretoria rCgime and those who trade with it
and who will be called upon to make the adjustments and
sacrifices necessary for winning this long drawnmout
struggle.

42. Judged by the values of Western civilization, South
Africa is clearly a serious embarrassment to Western Europe
and the Christian world. Judged by the values of other
civilizations and religions, South Africa is an enemy to
everything that is fine and noble in man; it is also an enemy
to one’s faith in the further evolution of the human spirit
to its full potential.
43. The rCgime in South Africa is not an eccentric old man
with outrageous views: nor is it an obscure and small
society with outlandish habits. It is a self-righteous and
vicious maverick among the nation States of modern times.
It has not withered away under the burden of’ its own
iniquity. Five generations of Africans have endured injustice peacefully in the hope that the international community would be able to bring about a change in South
Africa.
44. The African people of South Africa have now ap
parently no hope of any peaceful change for the better.
There are only two choices open, since peaceful action for
change has now been banned. The two options are either
armed struggle or mandatory action by the Security
Council.
45. We are dealing with a situation in which a minority of
14 per cent of the white population is determined to
occupy 86 per cent of the territory and to rule over some
20 million Africans and others and relegate them to
separate development in 14 per cent of useless land. This
monstrous injustice is unparallclled in this or any other
time in history. The denial of equality on grounds of race
to some 10 million persons cannot bc tolerated by the
United Nations any longer. It cannot be regarded as a
matter falling within the domestic jurisdiction of the white
minority rdgime at Pretoria. It has incensed the entire
international community and it endangers international
peace and security. Whatever the sacrifice, the United
Nations should give the highest priority to redressing this
massive injustice.

49. Consequently, we must take into account the willingness and capacity of the Western world to maintain the
tempo of sanctions in the military and economic fields. My
delegation has no doubt that Western co-operation wi]] be
forthcoming, first in small doses and later in larger measure,
depending upon South African intransigence.
50. My delegation is particularly sensitive to the precarious and vulnerable position of the African and other
people inside South Africa and we shall never support any
course of action that might make their burden heavier.
Since they have been denied all possibility of peaceful
action for change, we propose the alternative of mandatory
sanctions by the Security Council because we believe that it
can bring the Pretoria rCgimc to its senses sooner or later.
5 1. Resuming my role as PRESIDENT, I should like to say
that the next speaker is Mr. Horst Gerhard Kleinschmiclt, to
whom the Council extended an invitation under rule 3L3 of
its provisional rules of procedure earlier in this meeting.
Accordingly, I invite him lo take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
52. Mr. KLEINSCHMIDT:
Mr. President, ] want to thank
you and the members of the Security Council most
sincerely for giving me the opportunity to address you on
the new and pressing issues which the South African
Government has brought about in my cotlntry.
53. I should also like to express my very deep appreciation
of the significant and uncompromising statements which
have been made by the majority of the representatives Who
have addressed the Council during this debate and who have
proposed direct, concrete and proper action to be taken
against the apartheid system.

46. We talk nowadays about outlawing and prohibiting
weapons of mass destruction. Apnrtheid is nothing less than
a political weapon of mass destruction.

54. I have worked in The Christian Institute of Southern
Africa since 1972. In 1975, I was appointed as assistallt to
Dr. Hcyers Naude. One week after my appoinlment, ] Was
detained under the notorious Terrorism Act. After my
release and after I was compelled to Ieave South Africa. ]
set up in the Netherlands the first external office of the
Institute.

47. My delegation considers that the time is opportune fol
converting the existing voluntary arms embargo into an
immediate mandatory arms embargo against South Africa.

55. 011 19 October 1977, the organizatiorl ] ml rePresenting here today, together with 17 others,
Was
of’ficial’y
declared a banned organization. Al] my c~JllWues

‘I’

62. On Wednes&dY,1’) October, the Vorstcr Gwmnent
perforllled the last act in a whole processof action over
recentmonths which put an end to legal opposition in that
cOuntry.
The
advocates
of dialogueand reforlll
have beCn
shown through Vorster’s finality that every voice of
oppositionwit1 be punis]&
by administrative action.
The
lastfew vestigesof the shaky framework within which WllC
open opposition was still possibleIxlVe finally been rcmoved.Tlie path for reform hasended; a total dictatorship
is the pat]1the Vorster Government haschOSen:
there
iS fur
mY colleaguesinside South Africa and for our many
thousandsof supporters no longer any means through
whicll they can openly voice their dissent and act for
change.

executive positions have been banned and it has become
impossible for them and our members to meet in the name
of the Institute. The staff members who were banned may
no longer talk to one another, as this constitutes an offence
punishable by law. Some 30 conditions are ilnposed
011
them which rob them of virtually all their freedoms. All our
assets have been attached by the Vorster police. This
includes bank accounts, office furniture, property
and
vehicles. Using prison labour, the police and the political
police-the Security Branch-removed
from our offices in
Johannesburg and Cape Town every file, every document,
everything down to the last chair.
56. By describing these actions, I am not describing the far
worse acts which the South Ai’rican police perform,
whether we talk about the destruction of shanty dwellings
in Cape Town or the torture and murder of our comrades in
prison detention centres. But it is the sum total of this
action on the part of the Vorster system which has brought
about this renewed world-wide outcry against apartlzeid.
57. Even some of apartheid’s traditional allies seem to
have had second thoughts about their relations with
Pretoria. Even they seempossibly prepared to undertake
certain cautious stepsto stop their own further strengthening of the apm-fheid State. But already it is clear that these
allies of apartheid, these countries which benefit cconomically from the present order in my country, are
prepared to apply only the most cautious of measures.1
want to askthose countries what worsekind of things need
to happen to us, need to be inflicted upon us by the police
of MI-. Vorster, before they will take more courageoussteps
to end their involvement.
58. There was a time when we in the Christian Institute
published reports about imprisonment without trial, when
we reported on detentions and on torture, But in certain
quarters we were not believed, we were thought to have
gone too far. Today, after the death of SteveBike, wehave
beenvindicated and at last the facts are beingaccepted.
59. It has only just become known what were the true
reasonsfor the death of Steve Biko. The medical report
done at the autopsy states that the causeof death was
injury to the brain. Other extensive injuries to his body
further contributed to his death. Details of this report,
which is a secret report until it is admitted in court at the
inquest, leavejust been releasedby a Swedishjournalist
from the Stockholm newspaperExpressen.He hasreleased
detailed information on the contents of this report.
60. We first had to wait for the death of this significant
person in the South African struggle before it was clear
enoughto certain of Mr. Vorster’s friends in Europe, aswell
as in North America, that it has now becomedifficult to
continue their traditional support.

63. This is a historic moment for aI1the people of SOldl
Africa who want freedom. Their determination and WitI tu
attain liberation is being demonstratedevcly day. But asof
now there is but one path left, one path Only-ild
that is
tlie path of our national liberation movement, the African
National Congress(ANC). We are very grateful today that
our true leadershad the wisdom in years past to map OUl
the path from which noneof usca11 depart now. WeCando
nothingelsethan askfor our acceptancein their ranks.
64. The Christian institute of Southern Africa is no
liberationmovement,nor doesit want to becomeone, but I
believe that many in our ranks can and will realize thal
their Christian convictions demand that they should also
play a full part in the liberation struggle as it is being
carriedout by ANC.
65. We believe that ANC hascarried in the hearts anclin
the minds of the people of South Africa the powerful
tradition of resistanceagainstracismand exploitation and
that its ultimate victory will bring peaceandjustice to our
land.In achievingthis goal,the peopleof South Africa need
to be united, and it is only the ANC banner which can
makethis possible.
66. 1 do not believe that the events of 19 October do
nothing more than merely add to the long listsof detained
people, banned people and banned organizations. No, 1
believethat Mr. Vorster has attempted to put an endto an
era of resistanceto his Government’s policies. He has,
through administrative action, removed visible o12Ilonents
to hissystem.He has,I believe,drawn a final line underthe
growing dissent he has had to fact throughout South
Africa. At the overt level, he may have succeeded,In time
to come we may readlessin newspapersabout the nature
of our struggle. But the people continue to suffer. Their
poverty
and their subjugationare reaching Yet new levels.
But their anger and their determination to end ay/artheirl
havenot beenchangedby thesemovesof the south African
authorities.

67.
Many
countries
in Western Europe and in North
61. We want to know from those who do not want an oil
America have in recent years, through their non-governembargo, who do not want to adhere to armsembargoes, mentalorganizations, supportedin various waysthe emergwho do not want to end their nuclear collaboration and ing organizationsof opposition insideSouth Africa. Often,
who do not want to stop the economic exploitation in
we believe,they havebeenmotivated to do soby the desire
South Africa: what else must Mr. Vorster do to us before not to have to support radical alternatives, asespousedby
certain countries wiIl showthe political will actually to stop the African National Congress,Today there is-and I speak
strengtheningapartheid?
for oneof the OrganiZatiOrU
that has been supportedfrom

6

outside--no question about this any longer. I believe that
the new situation shows beyond a doubt that all countries
that are offended by the present regime in South Africa
have to rccognize and support our liberation movement, I
wish to state again that I of The Christian Institute of
Southern Africa, a body legally existing inside the country
until 10 days ago, am making this assessment, and I am
assured that I do not stand alone in this.
68, The message from the oppressed people today is this:
take strong action LOend apartheid Do not debate whether
economic sanctions will hit the poorest people most. The
poor people ask when apartkeid will end and not when it
will become more endurable. If the South African people
have to suffer, they want to suffer with hope and with an
end in sight. Ameliorating measures, such as codes of
employment practices, have provided no hope; they will
never end apartheid; nor have they benefited the affected
people to date.
69. I thank the Security Council once again for affording
me this opportunity of addressing it.
70. The PRESIDENT: There are no other names of the list
of speakers for this meeting. I should like to consult the
members of the Council about what they wish to do now.
Do the sponsors of the draft resolutions before us wish to
speak at this stage?
71. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): On behalf of
the three African members of the Council, sponsors of the
four draft resolutions before the Council, I would ask that
we proceed now to the vote on those drafts.
72. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): Speaking for
my delegation, I would say that it is undoubtedly well
known around this table that negotiations are in progress.
We have not received instructions and are not prepared to
vote now.

73. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius):
If the United States
delegation is not in a position at this stage to vote on the
four draft resolutions,we would agreeto a postponement
of the vote. However, I wish it to be on record that we did
ask for a vote at this stageand that it is only at the request
of the United States delegation that we agreenot to press
for a vote.
74. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): I should like
to add this to what AmbassadorRamphul hasjust said: We
wish the vote on the four draft resolutionsto be taken not
later than Monday. We are ready to be here at any time
when the other membersof the Council are ready to vote,
but, I repeat, we do not wish the vote to be taken later than
Monday.
75. Mrs. HOUNGAVOU (Benin) (interpretation from
French): Like the representatives of Mauritius and the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, we shouldhave preferred the vote
on the four draft resolutionsbefore the Council to be taken
this afternoon, If somemembersare not in a position to
vote today, the Council could meet tomorrow, or on
Monday at the latest. A decisionon thesedraft resolutions
must be taken on Monday at the latest.
76. The PRESIDENT: It is not clear to me whether
anyone is in favour of holding a meetingtomorrow.
77. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): I wish to make it clear
that the three African membersof the Council are quite
willing to work tomorrow.
78. The PRESIDENT: 1 take it that that is not a formal
proposal. On balance,I think that it might be better for us
to spend our week-end,cogitating about these four draft
resolutionsand trying to get our respectiveGovernmentsto
give us their instructions by Monday morning. I should
therefore like to proposethat the next meeting should be
held on Monday at 10.30 am.
The meetingrosent 5.40 pm,

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

. Las publicaciones
de Ins Naciones
Unidas
estAn en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
on todas pa&s
tlcl mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dir-ijase
a: Nsciones
Unidas. Seccidn de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-October

1978-2.200
