S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6153rd meeting
Monday, 29 June 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. İlkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Heissel
Mr. Koudougou
Ms. He Fen
Mr. Guillermet
Mr. Skračić
Ms. Rouelle
Mr. Nakano
Mr. Gebreel
Mr. Puente
Mr. Kravchenko
Mr. Ociti
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. Ahmed
Mr. Ta Nhung Dinh

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-38601 (E)

*0938601*

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers, as I
indicated at the morning session, to limit, if possible,
their statements to no more than five minutes in order
to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
Before I start giving the floor, I would like to
welcome our new Assistant Secretary-General for Field
Support, Mr. Anthony Banbury. He has joined us in the
Secretariat and today in the Security Council. I
welcome him and wish him continued success.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Brazil.
Ms. Dunlop (Brazil): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for the invitation to participate in this
debate, which is very timely. I also thank UnderSecretaries-General Mr. Alain Le Roy and Ms. Susana
Malcorra for their informative briefings.
The considerable increase in the number of
deployed peacekeepers and the greater complexity of
missions show that Governments and peoples
worldwide trust United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Such constancy is a major political asset. It
reflects the observance of the principles of impartiality,
the consent of the parties and the use of force in selfdefence or in the implementation of a mandate.
However, those same features of today’s
operations — larger contingents and greater
complexity — pose several challenges to the
Organization and its Member States. Chief among them
is the need for the Security Council to provide
sustained political attention and guidance, not only to
missions with acute responsibilities and needs but also
to the peace processes that they are requested to
support. As we all know, peacekeeping is no substitute
for the political processes by which parties to disputes
must resolve their differences, nor can or should the
international community lead national reconstruction
or development efforts. But support for and attention to
such efforts are crucial, not only for the countries
themselves but also for the long-term sustainability of
United Nations missions.

2

The above is also relevant to dealing with another
significant challenge, namely the scarcity of troopcontributing countries. There is a real need to identify
new contributors, to encourage former contributors to
resume contributions and to persuade present ones to
increase their contributions.
Brazil has heeded the call. Since 2004, it has
multiplied its contribution tenfold, compared to a
fourfold increase in the overall number of United
Nations peacekeeping troops. It is worth noting that
more than 80 per cent of the troops in United Nations
missions today come from developing countries. It is
crucial that the general membership participate in the
collective response to meet the increased demand for
United Nations peacekeeping.
Although it is important to recognize those
challenges, it is equally necessary to refrain from
generating the sense of an impending crisis in
peacekeeping or from raising doubts about the ability
of the Organization to face such challenges. Rather, we
should strive to reform what must be reformed in a
systematic, inclusive and transparent manner, without
dispersing efforts in too many initiatives, however well
intended.
We should also focus on the full implementation
of decisions that have already been taken. In particular,
it does not seem appropriate to speak of a financial
crisis in peacekeeping. It is true that the budget has
increased considerably and that that is certainly a
burden on all Member States. However, higher
financial costs are but the logical consequence of
establishing new missions and enlarging existing ones,
which, in turn, derives from decisions made in the
Council.
In adopting resolutions, members are obviously
aware of the financial consequences. They should
ensure, in the Fifth Committee, that missions receive
the resources needed to implement their mandates.
Closing missions that are needed or avoiding
establishing missions that the Council considers
necessary to maintain or restore international peace and
security do not seem to be judicious responses to the
financial problem. Rather, host countries and the
United Nations must work together to create the
conditions that will allow for the timely drawdown and
closing of missions. In other words, firm commitment
by the host country to overcome the causes of conflict,
with the concurrent support of the United Nations, will

09-38601

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

help to achieve or restore political stability and
security sooner rather later.
At the same time, it is important that the Security
Council continue to focus on drafting mandates that are
consistent with the needs on the ground. In that
connection, I would like to make a brief but important
conceptual remark. Brazil believes that the expression
“financial contributors” should not be used in
connection with peacekeeping, as it is contrary to the
letter and the spirit of the Charter. All Member States
contribute to the budget in accordance with their
capacity to pay. On an issue directly linked to
international peace and security that is in the interest of
the entire membership, no hierarchies should be
established or encouraged.
Brazil’s experience as a troop-contributing
country started in the 1940s. Since then, it has involved
almost 30,000 troops. Our most recent contribution, in
Haiti, has confirmed our understanding that military
and police activities are insufficient to build long-term
stability. Sustainable peace requires that a
peacekeeping mission also assist in supporting national
reconciliation, strengthening national institutions and
promoting development. Our experience also indicates
that close interaction between the Security Council and
TCCs is essential.
Resolution 1353 (2001) established a wide range
of mechanisms for consultation with troop-contributing
countries. In our current reform efforts, it is preferable
to improve those mechanisms rather than to invent new
ones. The key for a mutually beneficial relationship
between the Security Council, the Secretariat and
troop-contributing countries is to give their views
extensive consideration. First and foremost, that should
translate into making better use of the discussions held
in meetings prior to the renewal of mandates. It
behoves the Council to show the political will to
mainstream suggestions and perspectives derived from
the valuable experience of TCCs. That is crucial to
ensure a convergence between the Council and the
countries with responsibilities on the ground. It is also
relevant to increase ownership of peacekeeping on the
part of States ready to provide troops, thereby
encouraging them to provide the resources needed to
respond to increased demand. In other words,
participation and inclusiveness will also help the
Organization to face the challenges that I have
mentioned.

09-38601

Another important step is to engage troopcontributing countries in a consistent and sustained
manner, and not in a sporadic fashion, as has been the
case in the past. That is particularly true with regard to
reform initiatives. Attentive consideration to the
recommendations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations is also needed.
Brazil stands ready to continue to contribute to
peacekeeping, not only in the field and at Headquarters
but also through participation in the debate on the
necessary measures for its improvement. Such an
endeavour is crucial to the future of the Organization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Shawabkah (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to express our gratitude and
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your initiative to
hold this important meeting, as well as for your wise
and able guidance of the deliberations of the Security
Council. I would also like to thank your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation.
My delegation would also like to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support, for their comprehensive briefings and
consultations with various States to inform them of the
latest developments pertaining to the preparation of the
New Horizon document.
Jordan associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the brotherly
delegation of Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The year 2009 marks two decades of Jordan’s
participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, which began as a result of a royal decree.
Our participation, which continues to this day, has
made Jordan one of the top troop and police
contributors. The current scope of Jordan’s partnership
in peacekeeping operations is a reflection of our
declared principled position with regard to the
Organization and its noble objectives in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
There has been a radical transformation in the
international security environment in the course of the
past two decades. That has resulted in significant
developments with regard to the nature of
peacekeeping operations, mission concepts and

3

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

planning and the mechanisms for mission management
and implementation. By necessity, those major
transformations require new ways for the international
community to respond effectively. Although recent
responses and initiatives in the area of peacekeeping,
whether within or outside the Security Council, have
been steps in the right direction, their success in
achieving the desired objectives continues to depend
primarily upon partnerships among the various parties
involved, in particular the Security Council, troopcontributing countries, donor States and the Secretariat.
Today we have a new opportunity to promote the
relationship between the Council and troopcontributing countries. Members of the Council have
contributed to developing that relationship by calling
for this meeting. That opportunity, which is long
overdue, provides a chance for the Council to expand
and deepen that relationship by involving troopcontributing countries in upcoming initiatives and by
inviting them to participate in the meetings and
consultations to address peacekeeping concerns.
In that regard, it may be worthwhile to make use
of Japan’s recent experience. Thankfully, that
delegation has helped to enhance interaction between
the Security Council and troop-contributing countries
by holding joint meetings in the context of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and by
following up on the results of those meetings and
informing States about them. That has had a positive
impact on relations between troop-contributing
countries and has prompted them to continue their
contacts with the Council.
The success of efforts to develop and support
United Nations peacekeeping operations requires
fostering confidence among the various regional
groups, on the one hand, and between the regional
groups and the Security Council, on the other. The
multiplication of initiatives may lead to fatigue among
States and groups if they are not involved therein and if
no real results are achieved. This may lead to
separation and hardening of positions due to a
weakening of tripartite cooperation and an absence of
communication channels between the main parties
responsible for peacekeeping operations. The role of
regional groups will be pivotal at such a moment,
particularly in the light of the momentum of initiatives
and the concurrent multiplicity of positions and
viewpoints.

4

All groups can combine all of these positions in
one framework that emphasizes collective interests and
at the same time ensure respect for the rights of all
States. Consequently, it may be appropriate to promote
confidence among the various parties by coordinating
diverse initiatives in a transparent manner and falling
back on the mandates and tasks of all peacekeeping
mechanisms. New initiatives must be presented to the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
the General Assembly committees peacekeeping
mandates, while new contacts must be promoted with
regional groups.
Jordan’s role in enhancing its relationship with
the Security Council is not confined to our interest in
taking every opportunity to present our viewpoint on
matters relating to peacekeeping operations. Our role
extends to activities carried out in the framework of the
Small Five’s call for reform of the modus operandi of
the Security Council from various perspectives, most
important among which is the relationship between the
Council and troop-contributing countries. In this
connection, Jordan would like to emphasize the need
for the Group to continue to present its
recommendations to the Council and the larger
membership, which we hope will be seriously
discussed.
Jordan would also like to emphasize the
significance of practical procedures in enhancing the
relationship between the members of the Council and
troop-contributing countries. In particular, Jordan
stresses the need to foster the relationship between the
elements that plan United Nations peacekeeping
operations and determine their mandates and
administration, on the one hand, and those that
implement the mandates, on the other. Troopcontributing countries must participate early and fully
in all aspects and stages of United Nations
peacekeeping operations so as to contribute their
expertise and experience, which can help the Council
to adopt appropriate and effective resolutions in due
course.
Jordan would also like to stress the need for the
effective and full implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1353 (2001) and the note by the President of
the Council dated 14 January 2002 (S/2002/56) in a
manner that will lead to the optimal use of these
mechanisms and deepen the relationship with troopcontributing countries. Jordan is of the view that it is
necessary to hold consultations with troop-contributing

09-38601

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

countries at every stage of peacekeeping operations,
including at their request and especially before the
Council renews the mandate of these operations.
In conclusion, permit me to express, on behalf of
the Government and people of Jordan, our gratitude
and to pay homage to the peacekeepers who fell as
martyrs while discharging their duties. Jordan has lost
22 such heroes in the cause of maintaining
international peace and security.
Mrs. El Alaoui (Morocco): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM). Allow me to begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for arranging this debate on a critical
and a flagship activity of the United Nations. I would
also like to extend special thanks to Under-SecretariesGeneral Le Roy and Malcorra for their comprehensive
briefings.
The Non-Aligned Movement is best placed to
contribute to an objective assessment of the challenges
facing the United Nations capacity in peacekeeping,
since its members have first-hand experience in the
field as troop-contributing countries (TCCs), providing
more than 87 per cent of personnel to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and hosting most of the
current missions.
The sustained surge of today’s peacekeeping has
been emphasized within and outside the United
Nations. The General Assembly, through its Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, is fulfilling its
mandate in addressing all aspects of United Nations
peacekeeping, including the effective planning and
management of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
After the initial reform process launched by the
Brahimi report (S/2000/809), the Special Committee
considered and monitored the implementation of the
agenda for reform for 2010 and, more recently, the
restructuring of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the creation of the Department
of Field Support (DFS).
These reform efforts are recent and Member
States have not had sufficient time to assess their
impact, much less to rectify any shortcomings that may
have resulted from those reforms. In this context, NAM
strongly believes that the merit of any new initiative or
process, whether Member State- or Secretariat-driven,

09-38601

should be carefully gauged in the context of its
relevance to and coherence with the ongoing reforms.
Such coherence, as well as continuity, should be
the guidelines of the Secretariat’s endeavours. All
efforts should ultimately contribute to the common
vision of United Nations peacekeeping that continues
to save lives and prevents States from relapsing into
conflicts.
Following the 26 June briefing to the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the heads of
both DPKO and DFS addressed the Council today on
the New Horizon non-paper as a contribution aimed at
restructuring our thinking and approach towards
peacekeeping. We would have preferred to receive the
Secretariat’s entire non-paper prior to this meeting in
order to engage in a more meaningful debate.
Nevertheless, NAM will provide its views when it
deems necessary.
The Non-Aligned Movement wishes to
underscore the importance of consistently applying the
principles and standards set for the establishment and
conduct of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and stresses that peacekeeping should observe the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter and
abide by the United Nations peacekeeping operations
guiding principles, which are the consent of the parties,
the non-use of force except in self-defence, and
impartiality. The defence of the mandates should be
consistent with United Nations principles.
The Non-Aligned Movement also emphasizes
that respect for the principles of the sovereign equality,
political independence and territorial integrity of all
States and non-intervention in matters that are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State
must be upheld.
These guiding principles are the foundation of
United Nations peacekeeping as they guarantee its
sustainability and its legitimacy as a universal tool for
the maintenance of peace and security.
Last January, in the Council, NAM expressed the
view that the operational planning process deserves
sustained attention and called for rethinking it to
ensure coherence in vision, goals and objectives.
The concept paper prepared by the presidency
outlines some very useful thoughts on the importance
of meaningfully engaging with those countries that
provide troops and police. Indeed, TCCs should be

5

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

involved in the planning process and in all aspects and
stages of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Since mandates are ultimately to be implemented in the
field by troop-contributing countries, they should be
involved as a major partner right from the start — from
the formulation of policy — through the decisionmaking process, and on to the deployment phases as
well.
Troop-contributing
countries’
first-hand
experience, as I outlined previously, would contribute
to an objective assessment of where and when to
deploy and where to strengthen, where to cut or draw
down, having peace and security as the main objective
and benchmark. Resolution 1353 (2001) gave us the
full spectrum of what should be done in this regard.
In the light of the ongoing debate on how
adequately to meet the rising expectations for
peacekeeping today, the mechanism of triangular
cooperation between TCCs, the Security Council and
the Secretariat must be energized in a meaningful
manner. TCCs are bearing the burden of implementing
mandates crafted and authorized without their
involvement in the planning and decision-making
processes. Often they are the sole object of criticism
when missions face difficulties. Therefore, we should
build on the frequency of private meetings with TCCs
and briefings by the Secretariat in order to foster a
culture of interaction in which Security Council
members are fully engaged.
TCC involvement is a key to addressing the
current shortcomings and to ensuring the effectiveness
of United Nations action. Such involvement, formally
operationalized, would assist, inter alia, the Security
Council to better define clear and achievable mandates
and achieve a greater integration of efforts. In this
regard, I would like to thank Japan for all its efforts as
the Chair of the Security Council Working Group of
the Whole on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations.
United Nations peacekeeping operations cannot
continue to be supported by only a portion of the
United Nations membership. All developed countries
must share the burden of peacekeeping and engage
their troops in the field under United Nations command
and control. To ensure the appropriate level of response
in terms of the scope and scale of peacekeeping, the
entire membership should deal with the difficulties
stemming from deployments in hostile environments
and difficult political contexts. Furthermore, much
broader sharing and contribution by all Member States

6

would ensure unity of vision to reach our common goal
of peace and security.
Prioritization entails a political engagement that
is well conceived and supported by all the parties
concerned and by the international community. It also
requires a comprehensive planning process that ensures
mission coherence, clear lines of command and
control, integration between mission components,
training, deployment, and resources and guidance for
DPKO and DFS in the management of the missions.
TCCs can provide much-needed expertise for the way
forward.
The overextended state of United Nations
peacekeeping, along with the increasing demand for
renewed or expanded missions, requires a concerted
and genuine response from the entire membership. We
therefore call on all Member States to continue their
support for this important activity, despite the
challenges being faced as a result of global economic
turmoil. United Nations peacekeeping remains one of
the most important and cost-effective tools in the
United Nations arsenal for achieving international
peace and security.
In conclusion, NAM is proud to have been
represented by its members in almost every
peacekeeping operation since 1948 and will remain
engaged in advancing the cause of peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Armenia, align themselves with this
statement.
First, I would like to thank the Turkish
presidency for organizing this debate and for preparing
a concept paper focusing on the relationship between
the Security Council and the troop- and policecontributing countries and those contributing
financially. We note that the Franco-British initiative
on peacekeeping called for quarterly briefings to the
Council by the Under-Secretaries-General for
Peacekeeping and for Field Support. We therefore

09-38601

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

thank Alain Le Roy and Susana Malcorra for their
briefings and for introducing the Secretariat’s
non-paper, and we hope that more briefings will follow
on a regular basis.

environment has increased, it is important that
decisions about the appropriate United Nations
response be taken in consultations with those who
carry them out.

It is in our collective interest to ensure effective
and efficient United Nations peacekeeping. The
European Union has actively participated in the
discussions on how to address the challenges faced by
United Nations peacekeeping since the initiative was
launched in this Council last January by France and the
United Kingdom.

While recognizing that the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security lies
with the Security Council, the European Union stresses
the need for improving and expanding existing
consultation mechanisms between those who plan and
manage operations and those who contribute troops and
finances. That would ensure more coherent and
integrated mission planning, improved command and
control of operations as well as smoother and more
effective implementation of mandates. The European
Union welcomes the meetings between troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Security Council
on specific peacekeeping missions in accordance with
resolution 1353 (2001), as well as the thematic
meetings of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations.
Those
meetings
enhance
mutual
confidence and cooperation. In order to achieve
tangible results, we believe that strengthened
commitment of both sides is desirable.

The resolve to review United Nations
peacekeeping and find solutions to its problems has
dynamically developed, and today’s discussions should
contribute to the ongoing dialogue among all
stakeholders. The European Union appreciates the
efforts of the Japanese chairmanship of the Security
Council Working Group of the Whole on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which has been
engaging
troop-contributing
countries,
those
contributing financing and regional organizations in
discussions on how best to address gaps between
mandates and their implementation. We also welcome
the consultation process recently launched by Canada.
On the Secretariat side, the New Horizon project
has been launched, and this morning we heard a
briefing on the non-paper, which will provide us with a
comprehensive view by the Secretariat on how best to
cope with the current challenges to peacekeeping.
The European Union welcomes the momentum
that has been created and expects that all these
initiatives will bring substantial results in the coming
months. In this respect, we look forward to further
debate during the August United Kingdom presidency
of the Security Council, which will take stock of the
Council’s efforts at putting its house in order. That
should spark wider debate within the United Nations
later in the year on issues pertaining to complex
mission mandates.
The challenges faced by the United Nations in
safeguarding international security are manifold. They
stem from conflict prevention initiatives, planning and
mandating peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding
initiatives, through resource constraints, military
expertise and effective oversight of the Security
Council, to the actual implementation of mandates and
the closing down of operations. As the complexity of
peacekeeping
missions
and
their
operational

09-38601

The European Union calls for further
improvement of cooperation between troop- and
police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs), the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support. The European Union is
in favour of the Secretariat improving the quality of
information flow, organizing regular troop- and policecontributing country meetings in a timely manner prior
to Security Council consultations and providing the
troop- and police-contributing countries with reports
on a regular basis on the political and military
situations of peacekeeping operations.
The concept of the strategic military cell, as it
exists within the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, is one good example of a possible way
forward. Strengthened communication between the
TCCs and the Secretariat would also enhance
managerial efficiency, operational effectiveness and
accountability of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
Another challenge for United Nations missions is
their peacebuilding tasks and ensuring a smooth
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, as well
as cooperation with other United Nations agencies and

7

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

actors in the field. Strengthened coordination is key to
our common ability to deliver.
The European Union welcomes the summary of
the Secretariat’s New Horizon non-paper and looks
forward to the release of the non-paper itself. We
welcome the main focus of the non-paper on issues
such as strategy and direction, mission planning and
clarity of tasks, command and control, resource
availability and generation. The European Union shares
the view of the Secretariat that partnerships need to be
built to address the challenges of United Nations
peacekeeping.
Let me touch upon some of the Secretariat’s
recommendations. The executive summary makes
widespread reference to a more proficient partnership
with regional organizations, also in planning, operating
and communicating together. The European Union has
a well-established partnership with the United Nations
in crisis management. It is also our priority to enhance
the capacity of other regional organizations, in
particular the African Union.
We fully agree with the need to strengthen
cooperation and reinforce interoperability with regional
organization as a key tool to maximize global capacity
of United Nations peacekeeping. In that regard, we
would draw attention to the need for the establishment
of effective transitional arrangements by the involved
organizations during any handover period.
The European Union agrees that there is a need to
broaden the base of contributors to United Nations
peacekeeping, and we would welcome better-calibrated
incentives for providing necessary capabilities. The
European Union collectively contributes over 40 per
cent of the peacekeeping budget and 12 per cent of
United Nations peacekeepers. Many European Union
member States provide significant financial resources
as well as capacities to United Nations blue-helmet
operations and to other United Nations-mandated
operations, including in Kosovo and Afghanistan.
But we recognize that there may be more that we
can do to make smarter use of available capabilities. In
that regard, the European Union urges efficient
management of available resources, which is more
important than ever at the time of the global financial
crisis. The European Union recognizes that robust
peacekeeping is sometimes needed and we have to
make sure that the United Nations is able to carry it
out.

8

For the European Union, protection of civilians is
a key aspect of United Nations peacekeeping that needs
to be consistently incorporated into all Security
Council mandates and effectively implemented.
Prioritization of mandates or sequencing of their
implementation needs further analysis and careful
consideration. We recognize the importance of
ensuring that deployed peacekeepers are fully capable
of fulfilling demanding mission mandates. Effective
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008), protection of civilians and other key mandated
tasks require appropriate training. The European Union
provides substantial financial and technical support to
many troop- and police-contributing countries in those
areas.
In conclusion, let me assure you that the
European Union, as one of the leading contributors,
remains committed to making United Nations
peacekeeping more efficient and more effective. We
look forward to specific results based on the current
debates and to recommendations on how to move this
agenda forward.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Amil (Pakistan): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for organizing this important debate on
peacekeeping and for this opportunity to share our
views. As the top troop-contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations and a long-time participant in
the policy discussions, Pakistan brings a rich and
diverse perspective to this discussion. We are a major
stakeholder in the success of United Nations
peacekeeping. This is a collective endeavour of the
Security Council, the United Nations Member States in
particular, the troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat. Let me also thank the two Under-SecretariesGeneral — Under-Secretary-General Le Roy and UnderSecretary-General Malcorra — for their briefings.
Peacekeeping is today the face of the United
Nations and its flagship activity. It is a major tool for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
While retaining its original purpose, peacekeeping has
also evolved over time in response to the changing
nature of conflict. Success in recent years, particularly
of multidimensional operations, has led to raised
expectations, increase in demand and corresponding
challenges of planning and management, bridging the
gap between mandates and resources and effective

09-38601

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

integration of conflict prevention and peacebuilding
elements to achieve lasting and self-sustaining peace.
The shared objective of making United Nations
peacekeeping work better has brought Member States
together on several important initiatives and efforts on
policy issues, reform, restructuring and capacitybuilding over the last couple of years. The latest of
these — the Secretary-General’s reform proposal —
resulted in a major overhaul and reconfiguration of the
United Nations peacekeeping architecture, which
focused in particular on strengthening capacity at
Headquarters. Of course the proposal was presented as
a necessary sequel to the Brahimi process and peace
agenda for 2010, and was considered a comprehensive
response to the challenges confronting peacekeeping.
Member States have not yet had the opportunity
to fully and properly assess and review the result and
impact of that reform exercise. We do not have a clear
idea of how effectively the new mechanism and
structures are performing. In the meanwhile, several
new initiatives by some Member States and the
Secretariat — such as the New Horizon initiative —
have been put forward.
Our preliminary analysis of those initiatives is
that while they could become catalysts for discussion,
there is little new as regards the major issues and
challenges. And we wonder whether it is a question of
exposing the limitations of past reforms, or a question
of fully implementing them through a sustained effort.
Nevertheless, the value of these initiatives lies in
considering them in an open and transparent manner
within the framework of the ongoing process to ensure
coherence and best results. Apart from the Security
Council, the Committee of Thirty-Four remains the
best forum to discuss all these issues in a
comprehensive fashion.
Pakistan welcomes the special focus that the
presidency’s concept note puts on cooperation and
partnerships with the troop-contributing countries
(TCCs). The TCCs contribute the basic building blocks
of the partnership for peacekeeping. The role and
engagement of the TCCs cuts across the whole range of
activities in the mission cycle from early planning to
deployment, management, drawdown and withdrawal
of operations. It is therefore inconceivable that the
effectiveness and success of the missions could be
achieved unless that partnership is made more
substantive and visible.

09-38601

There is a clear need to enhance the level and
frequency of interaction and consultations with the
TCCs. Debates such as this one provide good
opportunity. The Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations is also an important avenue
for providing trilateral cooperation, as its recent
meetings have shown. It would be more productive if
those meetings were held more regularly and coincided
with the Council’s direction of new missions as well as
the review and renewal of ongoing mandates.
Moreover, focused discussion of the situation on the
ground, operational issues and challenges can really
add value by promoting interaction with and feedback
from the TCCs. In our view, enhanced consultations in
the Working Group could also catalyse the hitherto
somewhat lacklustre private meetings held under
resolution 1353 (2001).
There is general agreement that to ensure
successful implementation of the mandates, we need a
high degree of coherence between those who conceive
and write mandates and those who implement them on
the ground. How can we achieve that in practice? We
should try to address the issue in a more innovative
way through a more dynamic interplay and sharing of
roles and responsibilities between the designers and
implementers of mandates.
Take the issue of resources, for example.
Shortfall of resources, particularly personnel and
equipment, can be met by broadening the contributors
base, with more burden-sharing in the field by the
developed countries. Not only will they bring the
required niche capabilities, the developed countries
will also get first-hand experience of the resource gaps
in the missions, which will better inform them in
designing mandates. The existing major troop
contributors, who are mostly developing countries,
should, on the other hand, be accorded an increased
role in the design and decision-making process in the
Council, through consultations and increased
representation in the Security Council.
Diversifying and expanding the contributors base
and the decision makers base is also important in
promoting a common understanding of the concepts,
basic principles and guidelines for peacekeeping. This
is essential for maintaining the credibility, legitimacy
and neutrality of the United Nations, which are so
essential for the continuing success of peacekeeping.
We do not think there is a problem of evolution of new
concepts and tools to adapt peacekeeping to changing

9

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

requirements. The membership, particularly those who
are contributing troops, have played an important role
in facilitating the evolution and transformation of
peacekeeping, including complex missions and robust
mandates. That evolution, in our view, does not affect
the basic principles of peacekeeping, which remain
valid and relevant.
Surprisingly, some of the objections with regard
to concepts and principles, and the push for certain
ideas that lack consensus, come from those who are not
among the contributors in the field. This participation,
we believe, will provide them better insight into the
possible complications and difficulties in the field.
There should be no monopoly on policy- and decisionmaking. Let me add, from the perspective of the TCCs,
that the question of decision-making and command and
control is not limited to dialogue or consultations. We
call for an enhanced and visible representation of
major TCCs at highest-level positions at Headquarters
and in the field.
Finally, in the context of a comprehensive
approach, the political process and peacebuilding
efforts must be pursued in parallel to the peacekeeping
activity in order to ensure speedy fulfilment of
mandates and to prevent relapse. The financial crunch
and finite resources are all the more reason to focus on
conflict prevention and resolution in the first place, not
to undercut peacekeeping.
Let me conclude by saying that if the Member
States regard peacekeeping as an indispensable
instrument, then we should all take a strategic decision
to support it fully and wholeheartedly, with the
political will, burden-sharing and pooling of resources
and equitable decision-making to ensure its success.
The President: I call next on the representative
of Rwanda.
Mr. Ndabarasa (Rwanda): My delegation wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
participate in this debate. We highly appreciate your
efforts and congratulate you for ably guiding the work
of the Security Council for the month of June.
We also take this opportunity to thank UnderSecretary-General Alain Le Roy and Under-SecretaryGeneral Susana Malcorra for their presentations and to
acknowledge the laudable work that their respective
departments continue to carry out.

10

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the delegation of Morocco on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
Rwanda’s
fundamental
commitment
to
peacekeeping is borne out of our national experience of
the 1994 genocide and the failure of the international
community to respond in a timely and decisive manner.
It is our conviction that our experience should not be
revisited anywhere, and as result we are proud to
support United Nations-mandated peacekeeping
operations in the Sudan, Liberia, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire
and Haiti.
The nature of conflicts has significantly changed.
The increasing role of non-State actors engaged in
conflict with other non-State actors or with legitimate
Governments has had a tragic impact on civilians. We
also meet at a time when United Nations peacekeeping
operations are under severe strain due to possible
reduction in resources as a result of the global financial
and economic crisis and the continued lack of clarity in
peacekeeping mandates. It is therefore imperative that
there be a complete rethinking of peacekeeping
operations.
My delegation believes that given the challenges
faced in conflict-affected areas, force preparation is an
essential factor. As a troop-contributing country,
Rwanda is of the considered view that a well-prepared
peacekeeping force is in a much better position to
adequately effect the mandate assigned to it.
A number of Member States, particularly from
the African continent, are committed to peacekeeping
but require the support of the international community
in providing equipment that they are not able to muster
because of minimal resources and competing priorities.
Equipment such as helicopters, which the international
community has failed to provide to missions like the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), is a necessary force multiplier that
would greatly impact the mobility and effectiveness of
peacekeeping in that region.
The availability and provision of equipment
equally has a bearing on force protection which is a
prerequisite for effective and robust peacekeeping. The
timely reimbursement of troop- and police-contributing
countries would certainly go a long way in sustaining
and maintaining available equipment and ensure that
peacekeepers are able to execute their mandates.

09-38601

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

The ability of peacekeeping missions to have
access to real-time and accurate information in conflict
areas would significantly impact their ability to
respond in a timely and decisive manner to threats
against civilians. In this regard we would urge the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to urgently
explore partnerships with regional organizations and
countries, in line with the recommendations of the
Brahimi report (S/2000/809), to share information in
conflict-afflicted zones.
In view of the Prodi report, the international
community should consider strengthening regional
standby forces, particularly in the Africa region, in
coordination with regional organizations such as the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and others. This would resolve the
challenge of quick response to emerging peacekeeping
requirements. In this regard, we are pleased to hear
reassuring statements by members of the Security
Council and the emphasis by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Le Roy, on
the Department’s commitment to strengthening the
African Union’s peacekeeping capabilities.
A review of peacekeeping policy through
consultations with Member States and relevant United
Nations organs is crucial. For example, it would be
advisable for the Secretariat to have the flexibility to
review the policy on contingent-owned equipment
instead of waiting for the relevant working group to sit
after three years. If in that period it is necessary to
improve or adjust any aspect of the provisions for
contingent-owned equipment, the Secretariat could
advise Member States through relevant organs and take
appropriate action.
Security Council resolution 1353 (2001)
recognizes the need to strengthen cooperation between
the Security Council and troop-contributing countries
in order to enhance United Nations peacekeeping for
efficient and effective peacekeeping operations. My
delegation is firmly of the view that through
strengthened cooperation and political will we can
achieve effective and credible United Nations
peacekeeping operations into the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Oyarzun (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
first to thank the Security Council presidency for
having organized today’s discussion of peacekeeping

09-38601

operations. I thank the Permanent Representative of
Turkey, in his capacity as President of the Council, for
having kindly invited the delegation of Spain to
participate. My thanks go also to Ms. Malcorra and
Mr. Le Roy for their briefings on the New Horizon
initiative, which is being developed in order to
continue enhancing the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations.
Spain endorses the statement made earlier this
afternoon by the Permanent Representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union and
shares the interest in enhancing the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and
continuing to convene open debates on this theme to
discuss the various challenges we face. My delegation
considers that at least three debates on peacekeeping a
year would be reasonable in order to appropriately
update the information on the initiatives under way and
to assess the level of compliance with the provisions of
resolution 1353 (2001), on measures for cooperation by
the Council with countries contributing troops to
peacekeeping operations. Spain encourages the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations to make more in-depth efforts on the
implementation of the recommendations regarding
cooperation with troop-contributing countries, as
contained in its December 2006 report (see S/2006/972).
These open debates of the Security Council make
it possible to consider in depth the various factors
affecting the maintenance of international peace and
security, primary responsibility for which lies with the
Security Council, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. But we should also recall that under
paragraph 2 of Article 11 the General Assembly can
discuss any issue relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security brought before it by
any State Member of the United Nations. The Charter thus
establishes interaction between these two principal organs,
on which I wish to say a few words.
I recall in particular Article 15 of the Charter,
which provides that the General Assembly shall receive
and consider annual and special reports from the
Security Council and that these reports shall include an
account of the measures that the Security Council has
decided upon or taken to maintain international peace
and security. It would also be desirable to improve
coordination between the Security Council and other
General Assembly bodies, in particular its Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which, as

11

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

members know, was established pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965
in order to comprehensively consider peacekeeping
operations in all their aspects.
Spain is marking the twentieth anniversary of its
participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, which began in January 1989 with the
deployment of military observers to the first United
Nations Angola Verification Mission. Since then, more
than 30,000 Spanish soldiers have participated in 20
United Nations peacekeeping operations and have
suffered 29 deaths in the course of those operations.
Spain is the eighth-largest contributor to the United
Nations peacekeeping budget. My country is
participating with a total of approximately 1,200 troops
and police officers in five United Nations operations.
Spain has welcomed with high interest the
various initiatives under way to strengthen and
improve the management of peacekeeping operations.
These include the joint Department of Peacekeeping
Operations/Department of Field Support New Horizon
initiative, about which we heard today, along with
initiatives of the Council itself and those of Member
States. In that regard, we attach high priority to
harmonizing all initiatives in order to optimize efforts
and avoid duplication. This would make it possible to
optimize and rationalize the use of resources, which is
a key goal during the present economic crisis.
Spain wishes also to stress one aspect of the New
Horizon initiative: that it is a priority to maximize the
overall capacity of operations, both in terms of
numbers of personnel deployed and in terms of
responding to the challenges posed to operations by
difficult logistical and security conditions. We must
bear in mind that the experience of countries
contributing troops and other personnel provides us
with a clearer view of what is taking place on the
ground. We cannot forget that those who truly forge
peace are the men and women at work in conflict
zones.
As the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) has already
stressed, in order to improve the effectiveness and
scope of peacekeeping operations it is essential that the
United Nations work in collaboration with regional
organizations. Peacekeeping operations are very costly,
and we must make them as effective as possible. For
that reason, in addition to using diverse conflictprevention measures, it is also of fundamental

12

importance to
organizations.

share

tasks

with

other

regional

The European Union and the United Nations have
attained a high level of cooperation, as recently
exemplified by the successful handover from the
European Union military operation in the Republic of
Chad and in the Central African Republic and the
effective protection provided by vessels of European
Operation Atalanta, which is making possible the
provision of United Nations humanitarian aid to the
Somali people. Our cooperation has progressed
markedly and imaginatively, and we hope that in the
future the European Union will further strengthen its
role in all conflict-prevention, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping processes.
Possible future areas of cooperation with the
United Nations under consideration include support for
Africa’s peacekeeping capacity, in particular with
respect to training, and strengthening existing
cooperation on security sector reform.
Spain recognizes the special importance of the
protection of civilians in the peacekeeping sphere. We
believe that such protection should be clearly defined
in the mandates of operations approved by the Security
Council. We attach great importance to the inclusion of
this concept in mission mandates, and consider that
these should also include provisions for the effective
oversight of compliance and that sufficient capacity for
successful implementation should be allocated.
Spain believes that it is essential that potential
contributors of troops and financial resources
participate in the integrated planning process for
United Nations peacekeeping operations, along with all
other necessary actors within the system. They should
also participate in identifying objectives for properly
assessing the exit strategy for a peacekeeping operation
in a given region or country. In our view, the consistent
involvement of all players in the integrated planning of
a peacekeeping operation is of decisive importance in
giving proper direction to a country’s recovery.
Spain wishes finally to stress its recognition of
and full support for the efforts being made by the
Department of Field Support to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of logistical support for
peacekeeping missions.
I conclude by reaffirming Spain’s fundamental
commitment to the principles and purposes of the

09-38601

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

United Nations, especially to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Puri (India): In the interests of the efficient
use of time, I propose to deliver a condensed version of
my statement. The complete text will, however, be
circulated.
I thank you, Sir, for organizing this thematic
debate. With over 100,000 peacekeepers, an $8 billion
budget and expanded mandates, peacekeeping remains
at the heart of the activities of the United Nations.
India aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
India has been an active participant in
peacekeeping since the word itself was invented in
1956. We have, over the past five decades, contributed
more than 100,000 peacekeepers to 40 United Nations
operations. We continue to provide troops and
policemen to the most difficult operations that the
United Nations conducts. Let me put things in
perspective with one example. Even as I speak, more
than 5,000 Indian soldiers and policemen are deployed
in the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They are the
cutting edge in translating this Council’s words into
deeds, and they do so in exceedingly challenging
circumstances. India is also one of the largest
contributors of air assets to United Nations operations.
We therefore bring to this table a unique combination
of commitment to peacekeeping and of knowledge and
experience of peacekeeping of which we are very
proud.
The world of peacekeeping today is very different
from what it was two decades ago. In 1986, one UnderSecretary-General, an Assistant Secretary-General,
three D-2-level officers and three Professional officers,
with a budget of approximately $240 million, managed
about 10,000 peacekeepers. The number of
peacekeepers is now about 140,000; the budget for the
present year is $8 billion; and the Under-SecretaryGeneral and his staff have become the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the Department of
Field Support (DFS) and the Peacebuilding Support
Office, with 1,300 jobs being sought for peacekeeping
on the support account last year.

09-38601

In his statement to the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations on 23 January, 2009,
Mr. Alain Le Roy highlighted a number of areas in
which peacekeeping faces problems. These include
sheer overstretch, a wide gap between supply and
demand for the numbers and types of personnel; and
the absence of critical enabling capacities, such as air
assets.
There is no scarcity of the personnel and
capacities of the type that the United Nations requires.
There are enough troops, enough policemen, enough
civilian experts, enough capacities and enough
helicopters available to the international community.
That is not the problem. The problem is that there is
reluctance on the part of Member States to make these
available to the United Nations.
A major issue is the nature of the Security
Council’s mandates and the manner in which they are
generated. Related to this is the question of whether the
mandates have any correlation to the ability of the
Organization to deliver. Mandates are increasingly
robust and place peacekeepers, most of whom come
from Member States not represented in this Council, in
non-permissive environments. They are faced with
situations in which they are more frequently being
called upon to use force not just to defend but to
enforce mandates. Peacekeeping mandates have
become too broad and too all-encompassing. These
difficulties are compounded by the fact that robust
peacekeeping has not been properly defined.
We reiterate the Brahimi recommendation that
mandates be clear and achievable. We also reiterate
that this will not be possible without substantively
involving countries that contribute manpower and
resources to peacekeeping operations. Consultations
with and briefings for troop- and police-contributing
countries do take place more frequently, but they are
pro forma in nature and skirt substantive issues with
little or no scope for meaningful discussion. The most
recent change in the rules of engagement and concept
of operations in the case of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was communicated to the troop-contributing
countries after they had been notified by the UnderSecretary-General during a consultation meeting.
It will be agreed that being informed is not the
same as being consulted. This exemplifies the manner
in which the spirit of resolution 1353 (2001) is being

13

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

systematically undermined and raises doubts about the
seriousness of the Security Council in addressing the
reasons behind the crisis.
India believes that the future of peacekeeping,
and at least a part of peacebuilding, lies in the
development of police and rule of law capacities in
United Nations missions. The development of these
capacities must be relevant to the situations in which
they are to be applied. The most relevant capacities are
present in Member States that have gone through
successful post-colonial nation-building exercises. The
experience that these nations have in building and
nurturing institutions, particularly those relating to the
development of robust security mechanisms that
operate in visible, open and democratic environments,
need to be taken into account as the DPKO develops its
capabilities in this area.
My delegation believes that mission support is
another area that requires sustained attention. As a
general principle we believe that DFS needs to model
itself on well-run, simple and efficient military
logistical operations.
We have taken note of the New Horizon report
process. We would like it be an exercise that takes a
clear, hard look at where DPKO and DFS require
focusing. We have engaged with DPKO on the study
and are looking forward to continuing this engagement
in a constructive manner during the process of
generating the report. It is not, however, our
impression that the product of this study will influence
the manner in which the fundamental issues I raised
earlier are being addressed.
In concluding, I reiterate India’s commitment to
participating in the process of strengthening
peacekeeping in order to increase its relevance and
effectiveness. We will also, where we deem it
necessary and relevant, be willing to consider the
deployment of capacities that are required by
peacekeeping operations in the years to come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Sir, for organizing this meeting today and inviting
my delegation. I would also like to extend my
appreciation to Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le Roy
and Susanna Malcorra for their comprehensive and
informative briefings.

14

For the past six decades, United Nations
peacekeeping operations have evolved to successfully
address diverse challenges arising from various
conflicts in a rapidly changing political landscape. The
ever-growing demand for peacekeeping with
increasingly complex and multidimensional mandates
represents the hopes for our peacekeeping operations
and high opinion in which the world holds them.
The overall number of United Nations
peacekeeping personnel in the field has increased
nearly tenfold over the past seven years. The Fifth
Committee has just approved a record high budget of
$7.7 billion for peacekeeping missions for the 20092010 biennium. However, this increasing demand also
means that United Nations peacekeeping operations are
clearly being overstretched, while complex and
multidimensional mandates present a new set of
challenges.
This magnitude and complexity transcend what
the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) envisaged 10 years
ago. Considering the ever-growing demand for United
Nations peacekeeping operations, it is clear that this
overstretch will continue to be aggravated in the
coming years, and we need reform to cope with this
trend.
My delegation welcomes the New Horizon
project as one of the answers to the new set of
challenges. Canada, Korea and many other Member
States recently organized brainstorming sessions to
discuss and share views and insights on the future of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. My
delegation hopes that these initiatives of the Member
States will steer us forward as we continue our
discussion. In this vein, I would like to highlight the
following points.
First, a clear mandate, priorities and political
strategy should be given to peacekeeping missions. The
importance of clear, credible and achievable mandates
has already been raised in the Brahimi report, but only
a few missions have been given a developed list of
mission priorities. Without clear mandates or priorities,
we cannot expect efficient and effective mapping of
resources through mandates. As the mandates of United
Nations
peacekeeping
operations
grow
more
encompassing and complex, it becomes imperative to
establish agreed and clear mandates. In that process,
maintaining the critical balance between consensus and
efficiency will be crucial.

09-38601

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, we need to set up a clear exit point and
a responsible exit strategy. The necessity for reliable
benchmarks and indicators to determine the exit point
of United Nations peacekeeping operations has been
referred to repeatedly over the years, and overstretch is
evidently generating pressure for early exit by some
missions.
To address that issue, the role and early
engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
could be explored. The potential capacity of the
Commission is not being fully realized. Among the
many functions that it has, the country-specific
mechanism of the Commission can work as a
responsible exit. To fully utilize that potential, the
peacebuilding activities should be integrated in the
peacekeeping operations from the earliest stage, and a
strategic partnership between the Security Council and
the PBC should be activated in a more genuine sense.
Fourthly, preventive actions or alternatives to
heavy peacekeeping operations need to be actively
pursued. Although peacekeeping operations are less
costly than other military options, we need to explore
and integrate other more cost-effective means, such as
mediation and preventive deployment. Moreover,
mediation and other political means should be a
complementary and integral part of everyday
peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we welcome
the Mediation Support Unit, recently set up in the
Department of Political Affairs.
Fifthly, partnerships with regional organizations,
civilian partners and private sectors need to be further
developed. Regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union and the European Union,
have become crucial partners of the United Nations,
especially in sharing the burden of peacekeeping
operations. A concrete and comprehensive model or
modality of cooperation with those organizations
should be developed. The Prodi report (S/2008/813)
would serve as a good basis for the discussion, and we
look forward to the relevant report by the SecretaryGeneral. Regional organizations are not only valuable
as partners to share the overstretched burden, but also
as strategic partners that can engage where the United
Nations cannot because of political complexities.
Sixthly, a global, responsive and rapid
deployment system is key to effective and efficient
operations. The support system should also correspond
to the nature of the peacekeeping operation. The

09-38601

Government of the Republic of Korea, as the tenth
largest financial contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, is considering establishing a
standby force that can be deployed in a timely manner.
I hope that that new standby force will help to enhance
our readiness and responsiveness.
On the support side, the creation of the
Department of Field Support (DFS) is one of the major
successes of the reform drives by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and was instrumental in providing
integrated field support. I expect that the strategic
support plan that the DFS is developing will raise the
field support capabilities of the United Nations to
another level.
The points that I have raised thus far are
concerned with how we will enhance the efficiency and
effectiveness of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations. However, it is evident that, with growing
demand, a broadening of the contributor base and an
expansion of the partnership with contributors will be
required. Accordingly, the relations and partnerships
between the Security Council and the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and financial contributing countries
need to be strengthened.
In that regard, I again thank the President for
inviting the TCCs and the financial contributing
countries to share our views with the Security Council,
and I believe such opportunities to hold more frequent
and regular consultations on major issues of the United
Nations should be further expanded and institutionalized.
The increasing demand for United Nations
peacekeeping
operations
represents
the
high
expectation and support of the international community
for such operations. However, if we cannot effectively
deal with the overstretch issue and fail to meet the
demand, collective support for peacekeeping will be
severely weakened.
We should not and must not fail.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ghana.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): Permit me, at the outset,
to commend the Permanent Representative of Turkey
for successfully steering the affairs of this Council
during this month and for organizing this meeting,
given the close link between the theme and the
Council’s fundamental responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security. Let me also thank

15

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le Roy and Susana
Malcorra for their eloquent presentations, which not
only focused on the status of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, but elucidated the strategies
to surmount challenges posed by the multidimensional
facet of United Nations peacekeeping operations. I
would also wish to express my delegation’s gratitude
and honour for the invitation to participate in this
important meeting.
It is without doubt that United Nations
peacekeeping operations have contributed immensely
towards our Organization’s efforts in attaining its
fundamental goal of maintaining international peace
and security, as well as the promotion of sustainable
development and human rights. Its accomplishment,
widely acknowledged as one of the indisputable
hallmarks of the Organization, has also raised
expectations, even as it takes on complex and
multidimensional mandates in more challenging
environments. Indeed, the ever-growing demand for
United Nations peacekeeping operations is affirmed by
the confidence and respect that the Blue Helmets enjoy
worldwide, despite the inherent constraints and
weaknesses, as well as some regrettable shortcomings.
Unquestionably, it would have been more
difficult for the United Nations to discharge that
onerous responsibility creditably without the
appropriate reforms, starting with those outlined in the
Brahimi report (S/2000/809). Although my delegation
applauds the great strides that have been made to
strengthen United Nations peacekeeping operations, we
also acknowledge that much remains to be done if we
are to attain the ultimate goal.
The ability of the United Nations to surmount
current and emerging challenges, and also to bridge the
gaps between United Nations capacities and the
expectations of the world community, depends largely,
but not exclusively, on the adoption of unambiguous,
realistic and achievable mandates and exit strategies in
tandem with a parallel and inclusive peace process.
With the ever-evolving nature and scope of
peacekeeping operations, it is incumbent on the
Council, within the purview of its responsibility, to
consider refining mission mandates to account for the
envisaged challenges of the field, including by
adjusting the rules of engagement for field personnel as
and when the need arises, practical deployment
timelines and increased authority for field operations.

16

As a mandate is not an end in itself, its objective
can only be realized through the provision of the
requisite human and financial as well as logistical
resources. Logistics difficulties confronting most
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and policecontributing countries (PCCs) in mission areas have
been identified as a major impediment to prompt and
effective deployment.
We consider Security Council resolutions 1327
(2000) and 1353 (2001), dealing with cooperation and
consultations among TCCs and PCCs and the Council
and the Secretariat, as critical to the ultimate outcome
of peacekeeping operations. While we welcome the
deepening of that trilateral framework, we are
convinced that that could further be enhanced to ensure
the attainment of the optimal goal. TCCs and PCCs
should be involved early and fully in all stages and
aspects of mission planning, since that would
contribute to a more inclusive decision-making
process.
It therefore behoves the Council to critically
examine the current working methods, with the aim of
eliciting the views of potential TCCs and PCCs before
its consideration and adoption of mission mandates, as
well as prior to the renewal or review of existing
mandates. Another important factor to that end is the
extension of political support and commitment to
missions
by
Member
States.
History
has
unambiguously demonstrated that the existence or
absence of that element determines the success or
failure of peacekeeping operations.
In the wake of the surge in demand and
complexity of peacekeeping operations, it is an
irrefutable fact that regional and subregional
organizations can play a vital role in ensuring a more
effective and comprehensive response to conflict
situations in the world. The proximity of the member
States of regional organizations to conflict areas gives
them a better understanding of the complexity of the
issues. It also enables them to respond to crises in a
timely manner. We should bear in mind, however, that
regional actors can sometimes complicate the
resolution of conflicts. The Council should therefore,
as a matter of urgency, consider further strengthening
cooperation with those bodies within the framework of
Chapter VIII in order to make the best use of the
comparative advantages of the United Nations and
regional arrangements, with a view to maximizing the
effectiveness and synergies for peacekeeping

09-38601

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

operations. In that regard, we express our support for
the continuing efforts to strengthen African
peacekeeping capacities, and emphasize the importance
of joint action plans to address constraints identified by
African Member States.
The safety and security of peacekeepers is of
paramount concern to my country, and indeed to all
troop and police contributors. The continued fatalities
are regrettable and indefensible, given the selfless
services rendered by peacekeepers. Undoubtedly, in
this current era of intra-State conflict, peacekeepers are
required to operate in precarious security environments
where non-State entities and spoilers act with impunity.
Given that grave atmosphere, it is unrealistic and
incongruous to place the responsibility for the safety
and security of peacekeepers in the hands of host
authorities or signatories to a peace accord. In my
delegation’s candid opinion, the United Nations should
assume that responsibility until relative normalcy is
restored to conflict areas.
In that connection, we commend the progress
made so far to address that challenge and encourage
the Secretariat to continue to enhance its capacity,
especially with regard to the gathering of operational
and tactical intelligence, which is essential to
pre-empting potential threats and ensuring the safety
and security of both peacekeepers and civilians. We
owe it as a duty to the gallant men and women who
have paid the ultimate sacrifice in the service of United
Nations operations to strive to reduce fatalities,
especially those resulting from hostile acts.
Regrettably, a critical assessment of current
geopolitical developments indicates that United
Nations peacekeeping activities are not likely to abate
in the coming years. Rather, they could experience an
increase in both scope and nature. The United Nations
can only continue to be a source of hope for the
unfortunate victims of conflict by adapting to the everchanging nature of peacekeeping through innovation
and flexibility. Indeed, ongoing reforms will invariably
determine the continued capacity of the United Nations
to sustain its flagship undertaking. It is our collective
responsibility to ensure a favourable outcome to the
process. The Council’s critical role cannot be
overemphasized.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Nepal.

09-38601

Mr. Acharya (Nepal): I would like to
congratulate the Turkish presidency for organizing this
important thematic debate on peacekeeping.
It is true that peacekeeping is under increasing
strain. There is political, logistical, financial and
managerial overstretch. We are deploying missions in
increasingly complex environments, with increasingly
difficult mandates and often with the limited consent of
the State or the parties concerned. In some cases,
mandates related to the protection of civilians and the
extension of State authority encroach upon the
traditional functions of States and generate resistance
on the part of the parties concerned.
The capability of the United Nations to deploy
missions in time, when they are needed most, is under
severe stress. In many cases, missions are left without
appropriate political support or a workable exit
strategy. In others there is a gap between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. In still others both the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council
are engaged, without a proper delineation of
responsibilities.
That calls for a serious review of United Nations
peacekeeping as a tool for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as a concept for
resolving conflicts and as a strategy for filling in gaps
in failed or failing States and societies transitioning out
of conflict. It also deserves an in-depth analysis as a
complex managerial endeavour.
Current practices in developing doctrine and
mandating, budgeting, supporting and managing
peacekeeping operations, including their links to other
activities such as preventive diplomacy and
peacebuilding, need a strategic review. Although there
has not been a serious in-depth study of United Nations
peacekeeping operations since the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809) of 2000, we should not forget that some
of its key principles still remain valid and are yet to be
fully implemented. On Nepal’s behalf, I welcome the
various initiatives, including this one, to more broadly
review the subject. Clearly, there is a need for
convergence in the various initiatives within and
outside the Security Council and that of the New
Horizon project, initiated jointly by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the Department
of Field Support (DFS). I must stress here that any
review or recommendation will have real meaning only
when it receives broad-based support from the

17

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

membership, including the members of Council, the
General Assembly and finance- and troop-contributing
countries.
As matters stand now, as a troop-contributing
country, we are at the end of the spectrum. Our troops
are called on to participate in missions in whose
mandate development and planning we are not
involved, let alone the determination of political
strategy. Our troops are tasked with implementing
complex mandates, without too much operational
flexibility, as well as with applying rules of
engagement they did not themselves develop.
We are also being stretched in the area of
deployment, in particular in terms of logistical
resources. By the end of this year, Nepal’s current
strength of 3,800 military and police personnel will
have increased by one third, once our troops are
deployed to Darfur and Chad, with an additional
company to Lebanon. Our capability to deploy troops
has also been severely constrained by the increasingly
complex requirement of contingent-owned equipment,
including equipment that we do not normally operate at
home. It also involves a long procurement process that
reduces our capability to deploy in time.
There is therefore a strong case to be made for
building the capacity of willing troop contributors to
deploy swiftly and with the required contingent
equipment and professional capability for complex and
robust peacekeeping operations. That would entail
critical logistical and training support from the United
Nations and bilateral sources. Enhancement of the
United Nations strategic logistic pool of key equipment
for mission start-up or filling in the gaps experienced
by some troop-contributing countries would be part of
the solution. We should also not underestimate the
importance of having developed countries share some
of the burden of contributing troops in difficult
peacekeeping missions, so as to make peacekeeping a
truly effective global partnership.
Peacekeeping is still an evolving and dynamic
concept. In recent years, the conflict environment and
the challenges to peacekeeping have changed
dramatically,
requiring
new
approaches
and
partnerships. In order to overcome some of the key
challenges, an enhanced and institutionalized
relationship between the Security Council, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat is of
paramount important to reshaping the model of

18

partnership. That would entail the involvement of
troop-contributing countries from the time that a
mandate is formulated to key stages in the mission
planning process. That should be done through close
interaction, information-sharing and participation. The
Security Council should also focus on establishing
unambiguous and achievable mandates. Missions
should be equipped with matching resources
commensurate with the tasks in the field.
Some of the challenges to peacekeeping are
related to the environment in host nations, especially
challenges resulting from fragile peace agreements and
a lack of commitment on the part of the parties during
the implementation phase. That requires more
proactive engagement and greater political support
from the international community, especially the
Security Council. In that connection, I would hope that
the New Horizon project, being undertaken jointly by
DPKO and DFS, will rectify the problems that we are
facing today by adequately and effectively addressing
them.
We are of the view that, during the review, core
values of United Nations peacekeeping operations such
as adherence to the Charter, the consent of the parties,
non-interference in the affairs of sovereign States and
the non-use of force except in self-defence should not
be undermined. Those principles should not be
compromised, even in the context of so-called robust
peacekeeping operations.
On behalf of Nepal, I would like to pledge our
active involvement in and support of the necessary
review process of peacekeeping operations so that
current strains can be rectified in existing and future
missions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Ney (Germany): Please allow me to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for
providing the opportunity for major contributors to
peacekeeping to actively participate in the review of
United Nations peacekeeping. I would also like to
thank the Under-Secretaries-General, Susana Malcorra
and Alain Le Roy, for presenting their views on
necessary adjustments in peacekeeping at the very
beginning of a hopefully fruitful dialogue with the
main stakeholders.

09-38601

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

Germany fully supports all the points stated
earlier by the European Union Presidency.
From Germany’s point of view, today’s
discussion is an important step in a dialogue on
peacekeeping encompassing the various initiatives that
have been generated over the past months. We thank
the Secretariat for its concise analysis of the current
state of peacekeeping, an analysis that intelligently
walks the fine line between maintaining the beneficial
approaches of the Brahimi report while at the same
time pointing to necessary adjustments.
It has often been said that peacekeeping is the
United Nations flagship enterprise. This is true,
because a unique responsibility for the stability and
peace of the entire world lies and remains with the
United Nations. While peacekeeping is not the only
means at hand, it is a decisive tool for mastering that
challenge. The execution of this task is a success story,
while not free of setbacks and criticism. We all admit
that we have a responsibility to improve peacekeeping
even further.
Such an endeavour requires focus, a focus that
helps to separate the urgently necessary from the longterm desirable, a separation made necessary in part by
there being limited resources available for coping with
all the crises at hand. Our discussion should
concentrate on those adjustments required to
strengthen peacekeeping as a credible means in crisis
management. The reason why Germany puts emphasis
on a thorough, focused process is that the people
affected by the crises deserve the best.
Many thoughts expressed in today’s discussion
find our support. I would like to emphasize four
particular ones that are central in our mind.
First, the need to improve and expand the existing
consultation mechanisms has already been addressed
by the EU Presidency. This is crucial. An intensive
dialogue with all stakeholders, above all the Member
States contributing to peacekeeping, is absolutely
essential.
Secondly, before the Security Council adopts a
resolution, a clear understanding of operational assets
available is necessary. It is a cornerstone for
developing
clear
and
achievable
mandates.
Consequently, Germany fully supports the Committee
of Thirty-Four statement in this year’s report that:

09-38601

“The
Special
Committee
strongly
recommends that the Security Council be fully
advised on the availability of the operational and
logistical capabilities which would be necessary
for the success of a peacekeeping operation, prior
to making a decision on a new or major change to
an existing mandate.” (A/63/19, para. 67)
Thirdly, with regard to the New Horizon
initiative, Germany proposes that this project not end
with another non-paper. I recommend aiming for a
document, based on the consent of all of us, thus
providing a tangible basis for decision-making and
execution.
Fourthly, work has been done regarding the
compilation of basic documents so as to transform the
document entitled “United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations: Principles and Guidelines” into a library of
documents that can assist all who work in
peacekeeping. Germany would like to see that finalized
and made accessible for all contributors sooner rather
than later.
In conclusion, Sir, allow me to thank you and the
Under-Secretaries-General for taking this initiative and
allow me to reiterate Germany’s willingness and
dedication to contribute meaningfully to the adjustment
process, so that peacekeeping remains a credible tool in
the hands of the United Nations, a body with the
unique legitimacy to manage crises.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
initiative of holding this important debate at a time
when United Nations peacekeeping operations are
witnessing accelerated developments and questions
regarding the capability of the Organization to bear the
increasing burden of expanding peacekeeping
operations and implementing their complex mandates. I
would also like to thank the two Under-SecretariesGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations and for Field
Support for their briefings on the two Departments’
visions for reform and related ideas contained in the
New Horizon non-paper.
Undoubtedly, the expansion of United Nations
peacekeeping activities during recent years and the
deployment of over 115,000 personnel with an annual
peacekeeping budget of over $8 billion necessitates an

19

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

urgent and comprehensive review by the relevant
United Nations bodies. Such a review must examine
ways to respond to the increased demand for
peacekeeping, which shows no sign of diminishing in
the near future. It must also evaluate successes and
failures and must indicate ways for addressing the gap
between mandates decided by the Security Council and
what peacekeeping operations can implement on the
ground. This must be done through a practical vision
that enhances the role of the United Nations by
ensuring clarity in mandates and providing for the
deployment needs of troops in terms of equipment,
finances and logistical support in the field.
How well we address this problem will depend on
how well we identify its causes. Egypt believes that a
major part of what we face is a result of the lack of
success that the United Nations has had in fulfilling its
expected role in terms of preventive diplomacy and
efforts to prevent conflicts from erupting and evolving
to the point where they become threats to international
peace and security. It is also due to the inability of the
Organization to address the root causes of existing
conflicts and to the transformation of peacekeeping
missions into missions for managing conflict.
In addition, there is an increased dependence on
the part of host countries on the role and capacities of
these missions, including their military and police
capacity, in supporting fragile national capabilities in
the areas of defence and internal security. When the
United Nations does not work hard enough at building
the capacities of post-conflict countries in these areas
and other fields of development, peacekeeping
operations end up having to be prolonged, and there is
a lack of strong national alternatives for undertaking
the same tasks, for preserving the stability and security
achieved and for dealing effectively with peacebuilding
and comprehensive economic development.
The root of the problem lies also in the lack of
resources and capacities required to implement
peacekeeping operations, resulting in donor fatigue on
the part of the troop-contributing countries and major
contributors to the peacekeeping budget. This financial
dimension threatens the United Nations ability to
immediately respond to all cases that require
peacekeeping operations. It may regrettably oblige the
Organization to choose between deteriorating
situations in various countries and select only some of
them for peacekeeping operations owing to a lack of
necessary funds. This would threaten the credibility of

20

the Organization in the field of the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Now that we have dealt with our diagnosis of the
problem and the reasons for not achieving the desired
progress, there are a variety of initiatives to address the
issue. These have different objectives and the various
main bodies of the United Nations play their role in
them, pushing for reform and strengthening the
organizational structures to address the issue. This
requires that we unify the Organization under one
vision, as proposed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support in the
New Horizon non-paper, and that we contribute to
discussing and drawing up plans to achieve these
objectives.
Here, Egypt proposes a number of elements that
we hope will be taken into consideration in putting
together the final elements of the non-paper. First, we
must address peacekeeping as one of several tools
available to the United Nations within a series of
political tools including preventive diplomacy,
mediation and reconciliation, peacekeeping. and
peacebuilding and long-term development. Second, we
must ensure the clarity of mandates and cohesive
political and military planning as means for achieving
peacekeeping success and the goals for which these
operations were established.
Third, we must ensure the existence of an exit
strategy and a parallel political process, as
peacekeeping is part of the political solution, not an
alternative to it. United Nations peacekeeping
operations should be accompanied by an active
political strategy that provides tools for support and
backing from the international community so that there
is a peace to keep, as the Secretary-General mentioned
in his report on the work of the Organization to the
sixty-third session of the General Assembly (A/63/1).
Fourth, we must work to enhance trust among
peacekeeping parties represented in the Security
Council, the TCCs and the Secretariat, as well as trust
and consent on the part of the host countries. Fifth,
partnership between those parties is the basis for the
legitimacy and sustainability of United Nations
peacekeeping. That requires more interaction with
TCCs and expansion of their participation from the
outset, as described in the Brahimi report, in reports by
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
and in recommendations by the international panel of

09-38601

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

experts on African peacekeeping operations. Efforts to
address problems with peacekeeping should not be
limited to its financial aspects but should also seek to
strengthen the link between peacekeeping, financial
and political plans, peacebuilding and comprehensive
development.
Sixth, we must ensure the strengthening of
cooperation on the part of regional organizations under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and
the enhancement of their capacities to develop
structure and capacities for achieving the peaceful
settlement of conflicts and fulfilling peacekeeping
tasks at the regional level pursuant to a mandate from
the Security Council under the umbrella of the United
Nations and funded by it, particularly the African
Union, which represents an unqualified success.
Seventh, we must ensure the improvement of the
procurement system and mission field support. Eighth,
we must pursue development in the security sector and
increase coordination and interaction between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Field Support and the Department of
Political Affairs.
Ninth, we must avoid addressing the issue of
peacekeeping from the perspective of dispute over
competency between the Security Council and the
General Assembly and instead promote the role of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations as the
main body responsible for peacekeeping operations in
all its aspects in the Organization. We must also
encourage the Security Council not to micromanage the
Secretariat’s work.
Finally, Egypt is honoured to be carrying the flag
of the United Nations and to be contributing military
troops and police to nine United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We support improvements in our
Organization and look forward to receiving the New
Horizon non-paper being prepared by the two
Departments and to the start of a substantive and
in-depth discussion in the coming session of the
General Assembly.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): At the outset,
allow me to thank the Turkish presidency for
organizing this debate on the relationship between the
Security Council, the troop-contributing countries

09-38601

(TCCs) and the countries contributing financing, and
on the way such relations could be further
strengthened. I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting my delegation to speak on this occasion. I
would also like to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Ms. Susan Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support, for their very useful briefings. My
delegation aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Morocco, who spoke on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Nine years back, in November 2000, the
Bangladesh delegation, while speaking on the
recommendations of the Brahimi report to this Council,
emphasized in the context of the commitment gap the
need for all Member States to provide troops for
United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
delegation, referring to the tragic incident of genocide
in Rwanda and the Secretary-General’s earnest
canvassing, which could in two months gather only one
tenth of the authorized strength for the second United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR II),
asked “where will these troops come from unless all of
us chip in?” Now, after almost 10 years, the relentless
and unwavering support that Bangladesh has been
providing to United Nations peacekeeping operations
for the last two decades can amply testify that we, with
our limited resources, have been able to live up to our
commitment to international peace and security.
Peacekeeping today has evolved into a complex
and multidimensional phenomenon incorporating
military, police and increasing numbers of civilian
personnel to implement robust mandates. The size of
human and financial resources has also seen
exponential growth. Under the present circumstances,
it is more necessary than ever to establish a genuine
and meaningful relationship between those who plan,
mandate and manage United Nations peacekeeping
operations and those who implement the mandates.
Such a relationship is needed in order to respond
effectively to the increasingly complex challenges.
It has been almost two decades that a debate on
the issue of consultation with the TCCs has been
ongoing, and the process has traversed through many
initiatives and arrangements based on them. Following
the Brahimi report, which emphasized the need for
better coordination among the Security Council, TCCs
and the Secretariat, in June 2001, under the Bangladesh
presidency, the Security Council adopted the landmark

21

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

resolution 1353 (2001), which provided the formats for
such consultation. After eight years, while we have
once again embarked on the debate on that same
necessity, my delegation considers it prudent to
examine whether or not the full scope provided under
resolution 1353 (2001) has been explored.
Resolution 1353 (2001) emphasized the need to
continue consultations with TCCs as the principal
means of consultations that may be convened at
different stages of peacekeeping operations, including
mission planning, change or renewal of mandate, rapid
deterioration of the security situation on the ground,
termination, withdrawal or scaling down in size of the
operation, transition from peacekeeping to postconflict peacebuilding, and so on. In this regard, my
delegation believes that, when decisions need to be
taken on peacekeeping operations, it is important for
the Secretary-General to include in his regular reports
to the Council information on the views expressed by
the TCCs.
At the same time, it is necessary to take into
consideration the provisions of resolution 1327 (2000),
which underlines the importance of an improved
system of three-way consultations to foster a common
understanding of the situation on the ground with
regard to the mission’s mandate and its
implementation. That resolution provided for holding
private meetings with the troop-contributing countries
when considering a change, renewal or completion of a
peacekeeping mandate or when a rapid deterioration in
the situation on the ground threatened the safety and
security of United Nations peacekeepers.
This point was reiterated in presidential statement
S/PRST/2001/3, which established a Working Group of
the Whole on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. It is important to mention, however, that
briefings by the Secretariat intended for the TCCs
should take place well ahead of mandate renewals and
new mission mandates.
In order to develop a mechanism for effective
interactions, it is important to make explicit the
available courses of action as specified by the Security
Council and other intergovernmental bodies like the
Committee of Thirty-Four (C-34). The possibilities of
the Working Group of the Whole on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations are underutilized. The
Working Group is supposed to address general and
technical issues without prejudice to the competency of

22

the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of
the General Assembly.
My delegation would like to recall here that the
Committee of Thirty-Four has encouraged the Working
Group to implement recommendations concerning
cooperation with TCCs, as contained in document
S/2006/972. Meaningful consultation with the TCCs is
not merely a customary practice but a necessity in the
greater interest of peacekeeping operations. It is
therefore of utmost importance that their views be
taken into account. Given their wealth of experience
and expertise, as well as the commitments they have
made, the TCCs are in the best position to contribute to
the process of mandating, planning and implementing
peacekeeping operations. Needless to say, the sense of
ownership of the TCCs, which is due to be further
strengthened in the process, could be an added asset.
Turning to the briefings by Under-SecretaryGeneral Le Roy and Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra, we take note of the New Horizon concept,
which is likely to be presented for consideration by
Member States in the near future. As a preliminary
remark, I would like to refer to the reform initiatives
considered by Member States in recent years and
mention that the benefits of the reforms are yet to be
fully assessed; any new reform initiative should take
into account a thorough assessment of those earlier
initiatives.
We also take note of the challenges faced by
United Nations peacekeeping operations. It is the
prerogative of Member States to consider any proposal
to enhance the efficiency of peacekeeping operations.
My delegation is looking forward to working with the
other Member States on this matter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, Mr. President, I would like to thank you for
convening this important debate and for inviting my
delegation to participate. My delegation is also grateful
for the presentations of Under-Secretaries-General
Susana Malcorra and Alain Le Roy.
This debate takes place at a time when various
initiatives have been undertaken by Member States and
the Secretariat, for they realized that the United
Nations peacekeeping system is facing a difficult

09-38601

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

situation and wanted to transform this situation into an
opportunity to improve things.
We particularly appreciate the fact that the main
theme of this debate is the interaction between those
who plan and mandate peace operations and those who
must implement those mandates. This is a matter of
crucial significance for troop-contributing countries
(TCCs).
Much has been said about the importance of
increasing the exchange of information and
consultations with TCCs at the time of formulating and
reviewing the mandates of peacekeeping operations.
That is a clear recommendation of the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809). However, those countries have had to
participate effectively in those processes.
It might be thought that this would simply mean
one more complication in the already difficult process
of reaching agreement on a Security Council
resolution. But lately, this has become a common
denominator in various forums where the future of
peacekeeping operations is under consideration. There
would thus appear to be a consensus about the need for
a more fluent, substantive and consistent exchange
among the main actors within the system.
In that respect, Uruguay believes that obtaining
first-hand information and experience and obtaining
the perspective of countries whose troops are deployed
in conflict zones could be extremely useful to the
Security Council when it seeks to understand a
situation and weigh the opportunities and threats on the
ground.
We should not underestimate the value of having
broad support for mandates approved by the Council,
in particular taking into account the nature of the new
tasks which have been incorporated into mandates.
These are more complex and require more robust rules
of engagement, as for example in the case of the
protection of civilians.
While we also recognize that the Council has
promoted that approach, seeking the widest possible
consensus among all Member States would not only
lead to greater legitimacy and less resistance to such
actions being undertaken, but would also create greater
commitment
among
all
actors
involved
in
implementation.
For example, it should not be forgotten that the
large majority of those who must implement civilian

09-38601

protection mandates in peacekeeping operations are
troop-contributing countries that are developing
countries with little opportunity to participate in or
influence how those mandates are to be carried out. In
another vein, and in agreement with what could be
interpreted from the Secretariat’s summary of the New
Horizons document, the idea of creating a new agenda
for partnership seems to be heading in that direction.
Having said that, the next question is how we can
make that interaction more effective and more
in-depth. In the first place, Uruguay is aware that, as a
troop-contributing country, we must make the most of
each opportunity presented to us. For that reason we
place special emphasis on our participation in the most
substantive and constructive manner possible in each
of the initiatives in which we have been invited to
participate.
Secondly, my country believes that open, direct
and substantive dialogue that goes beyond existing
formal mechanisms, between those who plan and
mandate peacekeeping operations and those who must
implement them, would benefit all of us for the reasons
I have indicated and would help to build trust among
the parties. That dialogue should take place before
approving or renewing mandates.
Along those lines, we wish to recall the good
experience we had when we participated in a meeting
of the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, convened by Japan a few
weeks ago. There my delegation had an opportunity
both to state its views and to listen to other troopcontributing countries. We were able to listen and to
explain our perspective and our main concerns about
two missions in which we are heavily involved: the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On that issue, I wish to stress that the search for
greater interaction and more consultation should not be
limited to the relationship between Council members
and troop-contributing countries. It should be extended
to include the Secretariat, both at Headquarters and on
the ground. There is ample room for improvement in
that area. Undoubtedly, that issue has been influenced
by the clear and incomprehensible situation of the
underrepresentation of the nationals of TCCs in staff
positions on the ground and in senior Secretariat posts.

23

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

Allow me now to turn to a topic which I would
have preferred to avoid, but which under the
circumstances find myself obliged to address. Like
everybody else here, Uruguay is deeply committed to
the success of this system. For that reason, and despite
the complex circumstances in which peacekeeping
operations are carried out, it has continued to
systematically renew its commitment, which is
basically to contribute Blue Helmets. However, a small
developing country like ours, which assigns a very
high percentage of its military personnel to United
Nations peacekeeping, finds it very difficult to
maintain that level of participation when the delays in
the reimbursements are as long as those that we are
currently experiencing.
We understand that that state of affairs affects
many troop-contributing countries, which, in the vast
majority, are developing countries. That is why we
urge all Member States, in particular the main financial
contributors, to redouble their efforts in order to ensure
normal performance of the missions and to provide our
countries with the usual compensation for putting their
personnel and materiel at the service of the United
Nations.
We are aware that the global economic crisis,
which affects us all, makes it difficult to fulfil financial
commitments. However, we must not forget that United
Nations peacekeeping, apart from its legitimacy, is a
system with a high benefit-to-cost ratio, especially
when compared with the cost in human lives and the
high economic and social cost of conflicts. Despite the
fact that the budget for peacekeeping operations has
been rising and this year is close to $8 billion, that
amount, although considerable, represents only
0.55 per cent of the global military expenditure of
2008, which was $1.47 trillion according to the data of
the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute.
Lastly, allow me to state that Uruguay reiterates
its commitment and its readiness to continue
participating in the discussions on peacekeeping. It
looks forward to the exchanges of views and the
constructive proposals that will surely arise out of our
discussion once the New Horizon document has been
submitted by the Secretariat.
The President: I now give the floor to Mrs. Alice
Mungwa, Senior Political Adviser at the Office of the
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations.

24

Mrs. Mungwa: Allow me to join previous
speakers in commending you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important meeting and for the invitation
extended to our Mission to participate. Thank you also
for the concept note to facilitate the meeting. Our
appreciation also goes to the Under-SecretariesGeneral for Field Support and for Peacekeeping
Operations, Ms. Susana Malcorra and Mr. Alain
Le Roy, for so kindly sharing the executive summary
of their non-paper on the New Horizon and for their
briefings to the Security Council this morning. The
African Union certainly looks forward to receiving the
full non-paper in order to continue engagement in that
process.
This important meeting is taking place at an
equally important moment for the African Union
because the preparatory meetings for the thirteenth
ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union are already under
way in Sirte, Libya. I would therefore like once again
to extend our apologies for the absence of my
Ambassador, Her Excellency Mrs. Lila Hanitra
Ratsifandrihamanana, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations, who is away
from New York this week to attend those meetings.
Issues of peace and security rank high on the
agenda of the ongoing summit meetings of the African
Union, and so, as we launch the discussions on the
New Horizon for United Nations peacekeeping, we
wish, at this initial stage, to express to the Security
Council through you, Mr. President, the appreciation
and strong support of the African Union for that
important process.
As the Security Council is aware, since its
inception in 2002, the African Union has been actively
involved in efforts for the resolution of conflicts and
the furtherance of peace and security around the
continent, building on the experience of the former
Organization of African Unity. We wish to seize this
opportunity to restate the profound appreciation of the
African Union to the Security Council for its vital and
continuous support for and cooperation with the
African Union. We would also like to restate the
appreciation of the African Union to all international
partners and donors for their generous logistic, materiel
and other assistance, as well as for their support for the
peace efforts of the African Union.

09-38601

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

We would also like to take this opportunity to
commend the role and the sacrifices of the troopcontributing countries (TCCs) and the policecontributing countries (PCCs), and, in particular, to
pay tribute to the valiant men and women who have
given their selfless service and paid the ultimate price
in the service of peace and security in Africa and
around the world.
As you are aware, Mr. President, the relevant
experiences and the lessons learned from the African
peace support efforts helped inform the shaping of an
enhanced vision for confronting peace and security
challenges in Africa. That is the African Peace and
Security Architecture, a major step of which was the
establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union as the standing decision-making organ
for the prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts, and as the collective security and early
warning arrangement to facilitate timely and efficient
responses to conflict and crisis situations in Africa.
The Council will be supported by the African
Standby Force, the Panel of the Wise and the African
Continental Early Warning System, which are currently
being established. Various components of that African
Peace and Security Architecture are, however, still in
their infancy and experiencing teething problems. Thus
African Union peace support efforts in the field are
facing challenges in terms of mission planning, the
mobilization of logistic, technical and other support,
and there are weaknesses in the administrative
capacities of the Organization.
Those problems have been well articulated in
various frameworks of the engagement between the
African Union and the United Nations and, most
recently, in the report of African Union-United Nations
panel (S/2008/813), established by the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to Security Council resolution 1809
of April 2008. As is known, at its 172nd and 178th
meetings, held on 24 February and 13 March 2009
respectively, the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union considered the report of that panel.
The Peace and Security Council further
participated in the debate of the Security Council on
the report, held on 18 March 2009 (see S/PV.6092),
and, as requested by the Security Council during that
meeting, the African Union Commission has been
working closely with the United Nations Secretariat, in

09-38601

particular towards the preparations for the report to be
submitted by the Secretary-General later this year.
We therefore encourage the Security Council to
place special emphasis on the need to strengthen
cooperation between the Security Council and regional
organizations, and, in particular, the need for the
Council to strengthen its support for peace support
initiatives of the African Union in this new process of
the New Horizon of United Nations peacekeeping. We
wish to thank all previous speakers who have also
echoed that call during this meeting.
Finally, as you are aware, Mr. President, in the
conceptualization of the African Peace and Security
Architecture and in the conduct of its peace support
operations, the African Union has always reaffirmed
the primary responsibility of the Security Council for
the maintenance of international peace and security. In
that light, the African Union has maintained the
conviction that its peace-support operations deployed
with the authorization and the consent of the Security
Council are conducted on behalf of the Council and the
international
community,
in
furtherance
of
international peace and security. We are therefore
pleased to note that the executive brief of the nonpaper by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support rightly couches
the New Horizon for United Nations peacekeeping in a
partnership framework — a partnership in terms of
purpose, action and the future.
The African Union clearly sees itself as a natural
and integral part of that partnership. Indeed, we believe
that the peace-support operations and efforts of the
African Union have clearly demonstrated Africa’s
resolve to assume its fair share of the burden of
international peace and security. In other words, the
African Union stands fully ready to play its role in
such a partnership with the United Nations and other
stakeholders of the international community as a matter
of shared vision, responsibility and ownership, in order
to strengthen new hopes and confidence in efforts to
pursue peace, security and development in Africa and
around the world.
Indeed, the launching of the first African UnionUnited Nations hybrid operation, in Darfur, was an
important step in the evolution of peacekeeping
operations. It revealed what the international
community can achieve when working together in a
coordinated and coherent partnership. We therefore

25

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

strongly encourage the Security Council to draw on all
the related, relevant and constructive ideas that have
emerged from that special peacekeeping mission and
from the work of other United Nations-related
processes, such as that of the United Nations Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the Council’s
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and other
initiatives taken by Member States, as well as on the
strategic exchanges that have taken place in the past
few years between the African Union and the United
Nations. We also encourage the Security Council to
draw from the overall process of United Nations
reform, and in particular Security Council reform.
The President: I now give the floor to UnderSecretary-General Le Roy to respond to some of the
comments made.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): In order not to
prolong this debate, which has already been very
lengthy, I should just like to say a few words of
gratitude for the richness of the numerous statements
that have been made. Those interventions clearly
illustrate the sustained interest that exists with regard
to peacekeeping operations. This meeting has been
particularly useful for us in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support at a time when we are putting the finishing
touches on our New Horizon non-paper on
peacekeeping.
I can assure all the Member States that have
spoken today that we are going to do our best to cover
in our non-paper all the comments that have been made
today, especially those on the need to make full use of
existing instruments and the reforms that have already
been announced. We have also taken due note of the
references to resolution 1353 (2001), which clearly
emphasizes consultations with troop-contributing
countries. All of that will be reflected in our non-paper.
The last point that I wish to stress relates to an
issue that has been referred to several times. Clearly,
the non-paper is not an end in itself; on the contrary, it
is the beginning of a process of dialogue. In the next
two weeks, we will be putting forth the non-paper to
launch a discussion in various bodies, including of
course with the Security Council and the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which has the
primary responsibility for this issue. Following
consultations with the various stakeholders, we will

26

issue a formal report for the next session of the General
Assembly.
I believe that Ms. Malcorra would also like to say
a few concluding words.
The President: I now give the floor to
Ms. Malcorra to respond to comments and questions
made.
Ms. Malcorra: I would like to thank all the
members of the Council and the other representatives
who were involved in this very useful conversation.
Let me just say, very briefly, what our next steps are
going to be.
Clearly, the New Horizon non-paper, to which
Alain has just referred, is a chapeau work that will be
derived from different initiatives, in particular the
support strategy that we have briefly discussed today.
The initial non-paper that we are going to issue in July,
which we referred to earlier today, will be an initial
step to serve as a basis for consultation, not a final
document. It will be a way to start a feedback
mechanism that will provide reasonable grounds on
which we can base discussions.
Of course, as I said earlier today, our idea is to
have a document to submit at the next session of the
General Assembly for adoption. We have no doubt that
the support strategy will have some implications that
will require General Assembly approval.
We have listened today. We will continue to
listen. We hope to be very engaged so that, by the time
we have to issue a formal document for approval by the
General Assembly, we will have sufficiently
understood the concerns and views of Member States
and have come to a conclusion that Member States are
ready to endorse. This will continue for the next few
months, during which we will be speaking a lot with
Member States.
The President: I thank the Under-SecretariesGeneral for the additional comments.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. Before I adjourn the meeting, I would like to thank
everyone for their participation in, and contribution to,
today’s debate. I am particularly indebted to UnderSecretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra, as well as to
the representatives of the major troop, police and
financial contributors for their insightful and thoughtprovoking comments and proposals. I am confident

09-38601

S/PV.6153 (Resumption 1)

that the views expressed today around the table will
contribute to the many parallel debates under way in
various forums. We particularly look forward to the
Secretariat’s New Horizon non-paper, which will
constitute an important basis for our work ahead.

Last but not least, we remember fondly all the
United Nations peacekeepers who have lost their lives
in the line of duty.
With those thoughts, I shall now adjourn the
meeting.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

09-38601

27
