S/2016/729

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 August 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on
the United Nations Mission in Colombia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2261
(2016), in which the Council requested that I present detailed recommendations
regarding the size, operational aspects and mandate of the United Nations Mission
in Colombia within 30 days of the signing of the ceasefire agreement between the
Government of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia People’s Army (FARC-EP). It follows my letters dated 4 March and 22 July 201 6
(S/2016/211 and S/2016/643). In the latter, I requested an extension until 19 August
of the original deadline given in resolution 2261 (2016) to present my
recommendations, owing to the postponement of the scoping visits by the
Government, FARC-EP and the Mission to the proposed local monitoring and
verification sites.

II. Mandate
2.
On 23 June 2016, the Government of Colombia and FARC -EP signed the
Agreement on the Bilateral and Definitive Ceasefire and Cessation of Hostilities and
Laying down of Arms. The Agreement reaffirmed the mandate outlined in their joint
communiqué No. 65, which was conveyed by the President of Colombia,
Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, to me and to the President of t he Security Council in
identical letters dated 19 January 2016 (S/2016/53) and which provided the basis for
resolution 2261 (2016). As part of its overall responsibility for international
verification of the Agreement, the United Nations Mission will assume
responsibility for the verification of the laying down of arms. It will coordinate the
national, regional and local headquarters of a tripartite monitoring and verification
mechanism with the participation of the Government, FARC-EP and the United
Nations, which will monitor and verify implementation of the ceasefire and
cessation of hostilities. The Mission will be responsible for settling disputes
between the parties and will formulate recommendations with reg ard to the
implementation of the ceasefire and cessation of hostilities and the laying down of
arms. Finally, it will report independently on compliance with the commitments
made by the parties in the Agreement.

16-14368 (E)

240816

*1614368*

S/2016/729

III. Developments
3.
On 5 August 2016, the delegations of the Government of Colombia and
FARC-EP to the peace talks under way in Havana agreed on a number of protocols
concerning the implementation of the Agreement, in relation to both the ceasefire
and the cessation of hostilities, and the laying down of arms. The protocols were
developed in consultation with the Mission, which has expressed its satisfaction
with their quality. They include, in particular, the rules that each party is committed
to observing under the ceasefire and cessation of hostilities. The rules include
provisions on the separation of forces, the unhindered activities of the monitoring
and verification mechanism and the cessation of hostilities between the parties,
including hostile propaganda. They also include provisions that prohibit any act or
threat of violence against the civilian population, in particular gender -based
violence; and any action undermining the population’s human rights and basic
freedoms. The protocols provide detailed provisions to guide the work of the
mechanism, including reporting standards, the settlement of disputes and a code of
conduct common to all mechanism members. Finally, the protocols contain a broad
set of security procedures applying to different phases of the process, the
mechanism personnel, government delegates and civil servants, the members of
FARC-EP and the civilian population.
4.
Both parties have underlined the importance of the Mission ’s role in bringing
impartial information on the process to the broadest possible audience. At the
national level, the Mission’s leadership has been sharing positive assessment by the
United Nations of the Agreement and its verification procedures with
representatives of institutions, political parties, the Catholic Church, civil society,
women’s organizations and ethnic groups. Efforts to explain the Agreement, the
mandate of the Mission and the role of the monitoring and verification mechanism
have also been undertaken in the departments and municipalities, where Mission
staff have been meeting with Governors, mayors and organizations representing
civil society, women and indigenous and Afro-Colombian groups. This first round of
dialogue has confirmed the importance of providing detailed information on the
implementation of the Agreement and the ongoing preparatory work. Through
continuing liaison with authorities and civil society, the Mission will play an
important role in addressing questions, dispelling misgivings and responding to the
eagerness of national actors, particularly in the conflict areas, to be taken into
account.
5.
At this point, I want to express my gratitude to the United Nations country
team, and, in particular, to the United Nations Development Programme, whose
extensive peace programme has paved the way for the building of peace,
particularly in the interior of the country. The agencies, funds and programmes have
spared no effort to support the establishment of the Mission. In the regions, their
staff have used their good offices to introduce the Mission to the local populat ion
and authorities, and generously lent the legitimacy they have gained over the years
to help build the credibility of the Mission throughout the country. The country team
has already made many important contributions to the peace process. I salute the
important role that it will continue to play in promoting peace in Colombia.
6.
From 8 to 15 August, tripartite delegations including representatives of the
Government of Colombia, FARC-EP and the Mission, accompanied by delegates of
the International Committee of the Red Cross and the guarantor countries of the

2/11

16-14368

S/2016/729

peace process (Cuba and Norway), carried out visits to the transitional local zones
for normalization and transitional local points for normalization where the
separation of forces and the laying down of arms is to take place. The United
Nations party included a senior observer, a representative of the Department of
Safety and Security and a logistics officer. The primary goal of the exercise was to
agree on the physical boundaries of those areas so that the zones and points and the
security zones around them could be effectively observed by the monitoring and
verification mechanism. In addition, the delegations sought to determine the area
where the local headquarters of the mechanism would be establi shed, and to
ascertain the logistical and security challenges involved in the implementation of
the Agreement, in particular in terms of physical access to the zones, radio and
telephone communications, life support services and basic security conditions.
While the security conditions have proved generally conducive in the zones and
points, the lack of infrastructure, basic life support services and communication will
be a significant challenge to the deployment of the mechanism and the Mission at
the local level.
7.
The tripartite delegations were, on most visits, joined by representatives of the
municipal authorities. Led by the delegate from the Government ’s High
Commissioner for Peace, interaction took place with local authorities, civil society
organizations and community members, all of whom expressed their desire to be
kept fully informed and their positive attitude towards the implementation of the
Agreement. Several adjustments to the initial plans were proposed, including on the
basis of concerns raised by indigenous authorities. The exercise brought together the
members of the Government, FARC-EP and the Mission who will be working side
by side in the observation of the ceasefire. It was a positive experience, which will
be further reinforced during the joint training exercise to be held in the coming
weeks. Overall, this complex logistical and political undertaking proved very
successful and augurs well for further preparation for the implementation of the
Agreement.

IV. Tasks
8.
As I mentioned in my letter of 22 July 2016, the broad parameters of the
Mission will be informed by the terms of the Agreement on a Bilateral and
Definitive Ceasefire and Cessation of Hostilities and Laying Down of Arms.

Verification of the laying down of arms
9.
The laying down of arms will require the United Nations to engage in the
following tasks, related to a number of overlapping processes, as follows:
(a) The first task, which is to be completed within 30 days of the entry into
force of the Agreement, will consist of verifying the retrieval by FARC-EP of
collective weapons, grenades and munitions and their transportation to their camps.
(b) The second task, which is to be completed within 60 days of the entry
into force of the final peace agreement, will consist of verifying the destruction by
FARC-EP of unstable weapons in the areas where their units were deployed prior to
the movement to the transitional local zones and points for normalization. This will

16-14368

3/11

S/2016/729

be particularly challenging. In most cases, it is anticipated that these verification
tasks will be carried out by United Nations observers with the appropriate expertise
who will be based in the eight regional headquarters at which the monitoring and
verification mechanism and the Mission will be co-located.
(c) The third task will consist of monitoring individual and collective
weapons held by FARC-EP in their camps in the transitional local zones and points
for normalization. This task will be carried out by United Nations observers
permanently based in those camps.
(d) The fourth task, from day 60 to day 150 after the entry into force of the
final peace agreement, will consist of receiving individual and collective weapons,
grenades and munitions from FARC-EP and storing them in containers or equivalent
secure facilities under permanent United Nations observation. The process of
receiving individual weapons will unfold sequentially and will be concluded by day
150, when all weapons, grenades and munitions will be in containers. This task will
be carried out by United Nations observers assigned to a single camp in each
transitional local zone and point for normalization where weapons and ammunition
containers will be placed.
(e) The fifth task will consist of transporting the weapons out of the
transitional local zones and points for normalization following the destruction of
ammunition and the decommissioning of weapons.
Throughout the process, United Nations observers at the regional and national
level will be dedicated to processing information relating to the monitoring and
verification of the laying down of arms and to supporting local United Nations
observers, using secure storage and backup for sensitive information related to
weapons and ammunition collection, classification and disposal. They will be
responsible for ensuring that, in accordance with the Agreement, the mechanism is
kept properly informed. At the end of the process, the Mission will certify the
completion of the laying down of arms, and inform the Government, the Security
Council and the public accordingly.

Observation of the ceasefire and coordination of the tripartite
monitoring and verification mechanism
10. The Mission is the international component and coordinator of the tripartite
monitoring and verification mechanism responsible for the monitoring of the ceasefire.
Detailed discussions with the Government of Colombia and FARC-EP have led to an
agreement on the tasks, structure and composition of the mechanism at all levels. The
bulk of the activities of the mechanism will take place at the local level, where it will
monitor compliance with the rules of the ceasefire and cessation of hostilities by
deploying tripartite monitoring teams. The tripartite teams will be based in the local
mechanism headquarters and will carry out five basic tasks as follows:
(a) Organizing the operations of the mechanism, taking into account the
coordination of tasks, threat analysis and logistical requirements.
(b) At the start of the ceasefire process, from day 5 to day 30 of the e ntry
into force of the Agreement, monitoring the redeployment of army units and the
movement of FARC-EP units to the transitional local zones and points for
normalization along agreed routes.

4/11

16-14368

S/2016/729

(c) Monitoring the transitional local zones and points for nor malization and
visiting FARC-EP camps.
(d) Monitoring the security zones around the transitional local zones and
points for normalization, and visiting redeployed army units.
(e) Visiting neighbouring population centres, when such centres exist in the
vicinity of the transitional local zones and points for normalization, in order to
interact with the local population and authorities.
11. Precise guidelines have been agreed upon to help the tripartite teams carry out
their functions, including the assessment of incidents and the preparation of reports.
According to the Protocols, the primary sources of these reports will include local
authorities, churches, local leaders, civil society, women’s organizations and local
human rights committees.
12. Monitoring by the monitoring and verification mechanism teams will be
proactive: not only will they report on possible incidents, they will also seek to
bring any situation of non-compliance back into line with the implementation of the
provisions on the ceasefire and cessation of hostilities. A strong code of conduct,
including on aspects related to the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, has
been approved, which supplements the rules of behaviour of each component.
13. The United Nations coordinator of the local headquarters of the monitoring
and verification mechanism will organize with his or her counterparts the daily
tasking of the monitoring teams. For the purpose of ensuring appropriate logistical
support to the transitional local zones and points for normalization, a small unit
coordinated by a United Nations observer will bring together a representative from
the Government, who will assume the main responsibility for the logistical chain,
and a representative of FARC-EP. As indicated above, United Nations observers will
bear the specific responsibility of helping resolve disputes between the parties if
they should arise, and making recommendations to ensure better compliance with
the Agreement. Differences between the parties that cannot be resolved at the local
headquarters level will be referred to the regional headquarters and ultimately to the
national headquarters.
14. The monitoring and verification mechanism will be deployed in eight regional
headquarters. In addition to resolving disputes that may arise in the transitional
local zones and points for normalization under their supervision, regional
headquarters will perform communication, threat analysis, operations, planning and
logistical coordination functions. At the regional level, the mecha nism headquarters
will also interact regularly with authorities, communities and civil society
organizations that may wish to share their views and proposals.
15. The national headquarters of the monitoring and verification mechanism, located
in Bogotá, will lead the tripartite mechanism. Like the regional headquarters, it will
perform communication, threat analysis, operations, planning and logistical
coordination functions. Public pronouncements will be issued only at the national
level. An investigation team with expertise in a variety of fields will be available to
local and regional headquarters to investigate alleged violations of the ceasefire and
cessation of hostilities. Information on the implementation of the ceasefire and
cessation of hostilities across the country will be compiled and analysed, and periodic
public reports will be issued. The national mechanism headquarters in Bogotá will
interact regularly with authorities and civil society organizations.

16-14368

5/11

S/2016/729

V. Mission structure and size
16. On the basis of the mandate of the Mission as set out in resolution 2261
(2016), the Agreement and the Protocols thereto, the knowledge gained during the
Mission’s preparatory work since February 2016 and the experience of previous
United Nations verification missions, and following a structured planning process, I
recommend the following structure and size for the United Nations Mission in
Colombia so that it can carry out its functions fully and effectively.

Overall structure
17. Overall political responsibility for the international verification of the
Agreement, and for the dispute resolution, recommendation and reporting functions
of the Mission will rest with my Special Representative and Head of Mission. He
will be supported by a Deputy Special Representative, a Chief Observer, a Director
of Mission Support and a Chief of Staff. The Office of the Special Representative
will require capacity across five areas: reporting, planning, information management
and analysis, public information and liaison with national actors. These functions
will require a relatively small number of staff, based in Bogotá.
18. Under the leadership of the Special Representative, the Mission will comprise
four components, covering observation, coordination and substantive support, field
support and security.

United Nations observer component
19. The United Nations observer component will be headed by the Chief Observer,
who is responsible for the tasks of the Mission relating to the laying down of arms.
The Chief Observer will serve as coordinator of the monitoring and verification
mechanism, and as such will also bear responsibility for the verification of the
ceasefire and cessation of hostilities. The full functions of the observer component
are outlined in the section above on tasks. To fulfil its tasks, the Mission is
estimated to require about 40 observers at the national level, 90 observers at the
regional level and 320 observers at the local level. Overall, the Mission will require
about 450 observers, in addition to a number of civilians who will be deployed in
the transitional local zones and points for normalization.

Coordination and substantive support component
20. The Mission will operate in 40 widely dispersed locations: a national
headquarters, 8 regional headquarters and the 23 transitional local zones for
normalization and 8 transitional local points for normalization established under the
Agreement. It will include international observers, national and international civilian
staff and United Nations Volunteers. The Mission will require effective operation and
coordination of field offices to ensure that all parts of the Mission are able to provide
timely and effective support to the activities of the observer component. In addi tion,
the Mission staff will be coordinating closely with the United Nations country team.
The coordination and substantive support component will also provide support to the
Mission on training, legal affairs, conduct and discipline and gender mainstreami ng.

6/11

16-14368

S/2016/729

Field support component
21. The provision of logistical and administrative support to the Mission presents
some peculiarities. As previously mentioned, the Mission will have a number of
activities that it undertakes independently of the monitoring and verification
mechanism, such as the verification of the laying down of arms. At the same time,
as part of the mechanism, it will undertake operational activities alongside
representatives of the Government of Colombia and FARC -EP at all levels, national,
regional and local. For both sets of activities, given the level of services available in
Colombia, the Mission’s policy will be to rely as much as possible on qualified
service providers, facilitated by either the Government or the Mission, upon the
basis of comparative advantage in terms of time and cost. For example, the
Government is well placed to facilitate the provision of vehicles for the mechanism
and the Mission owing to a pre-existing large-scale vehicle contract, whereas the
Mission is in a position to facilitate the provision of radio equipment owing to a
global service contract already in place with the Department of Field Support. A
letter of assist setting out the scope and description of logistical and administrative
support to be provided by the Government of Colombia and by the Mission to the
mechanism, and by the Government to the Mission is currently being drafted,
following extensive discussions between the United Nations and the Government of
Colombia in technical working groups, as well as consultations with FARC-EP that
started in May 2016.
22. For services that the United Nations is in a position to deliver, every effort is
made to utilize local service providers and existing capacity within the United
Nations country team. Considering the difficulty of access and the lack of basic
services in some of the areas, the Mission will seek solutions of a temporary nature
or those that build upon existing infrastructure. This approach will facilitate timely
activation, minimize costs and, where feasible, also support local communities.
23. The scoping visits of the transitional local zones and points for normalization
outlined below have revealed the formidable challenges that lie ahead in developing
infrastructure to support the deployment of the observer teams and then sustaining
them operationally for the duration of their tasks. Several transitional local zones
and points for normalization are located in difficult-to-reach areas with no access to
electricity, communications or potable water. Some of these locations are
inaccessible by road and can be reached only by river systems or by helicopter. In
some cases, the ability to reach locations even by helicopter is limited by extremely
high terrain and difficult weather conditions. While the result of the scoping visits
was clearly positive and an initial support concept for local headquarters for the
monitoring and verification mechanism is under development, detailed support
planning and validation will be required before the resource i mplications of
operating in such an environment are fully understood.
24. While every effort has been made to ensure that the mission support footprint
remains as light as possible, the challenge of servicing 40 locations in terrain as
wide-ranging as tropical rainforest, mountains and riverine and coastal plains in a
geographically large country will require a flexible and adept mission support
component that has sufficient integral resources to support implementation of the
mandate.

16-14368

7/11

S/2016/729

Security component
25. The Government of Colombia, specifically the National Police of Colombia,
will assume responsibility for the security of the monitoring and verification
mechanism and the Mission at large. Through a unified security structure, the
Department of Safety and Security will provide operational support and advice
relating to the United Nations security management system policies and procedures,
in close cooperation and liaison with the Colombian authorities.
26. The security management system will be covering both the country team and
the Mission with a unified security structure, under the responsibility of a
designated official. The Chief Security Advisor/Chief Security Officer will report to
and be the principal adviser to the designated offici al. In addition, the Chief
Security Advisor/Chief Security Officer will advise the Special Representative on
operational matters that relate to the Mission’s security.
27. Security officers will be posted in each regional office to monitor the situation
continuously and ensure that security management system standards are applied
under the responsibility of the field security coordination officers. The security
officers will provide security support to the observers in the teams for the
transitional local zones and points for normalization. Mission security focal points
are to be appointed in each transitional local zone and point for normalization in
order to enable permanent liaison and coordination with the security officers.
28. The field security coordination officers participated in the six tripartite teams
that conducted simultaneous scoping visits to the transitional local zones and points
for normalization. The projected risk levels for most of the relevant threats
identified (attacks by spoilers, crossfire and social unrest) are deemed acceptable,
providing that the relevant risk management measures are fully implemented.
Regarding the threat of land mines, residual anti-personnel mines may be a risk in
some zones. A comprehensive report is being prepared by the Department of Safety
and Security to update the risk analysis for this particular threat and, if necessary,
include additional proposed security risk management measures.

Geographical deployment
29. Given the role of the Mission as the international component and coordinator
of the monitoring and verification mechanism, the offices of the Mission and the
mechanism will be co-located, even though a number of the Mission’s functions and
tasks are carried out independently of the mechanism. In keeping with the parties’
agreement on the regional deployment of the mechanism in eight cities that provide
the most convenient access to the transitional local zones and points for
normalization, the Mission will have eight regional offices co -located with the
regional headquarters of the mechanism in those cities: San José de Guaviare,
Florencia, Popayán, Villavicencio, Medellín, Quibdó, Bucaramanga and Valledupar.
The leadership of the regional offices will comprise a civilian Head of Office and
the most senior United Nations observer in the region, who will act as the
coordinator of the regional headquarters of the mechanism. In addition, the regional
offices will include about 11 observers and 9 civilian staff in charge of liaison,
public information, security and mission support.

8/11

16-14368

S/2016/729

30. The Mission will seek to ensure that the regional offices are equipped with
liaison and public information staff to respond fully to the keen interest of regional
actors in information and dialogue. This will supplement and reinforce the
monitoring and verification mechanism’s own commitment in this respect.

Participation of women
31. The Mission in Colombia is committed to maximizing the number of women
in all functions and positions. In spite of the laudable e ffort by some of the
observer-contributing countries, the Mission is at present very far from the goal of
20 per cent of observers that was set. The Mission will therefore prioritize the
recruitment of qualified women for the civilian staff and United Nati ons Volunteer
positions to be deployed to the local headquarters of the monitoring and verification
mechanism in order to reach the goal of 20 per cent of United Nations personnel
deployed to supervise the ceasefire and cessation of hostilities and the lay ing down
of arms. I continue to urge observer-contributing countries to increase their
contribution of women observers and thank those that have done so.
32. At the regional level, the Mission is committed to achieving strict gender
parity among civilian personnel in all substantive positions. Similarly, at the
national level, every effort will be made to achieve gender parity among civilian
personnel.

Overall resources
33. On the basis of the provisions of the Agreement, including the Mission ’s
mandate as endorsed by both parties, the personnel required for the Mission to fulfil
its mandate are as follows: about 450 observers and an appropriate civilian
component, as decided by the General Assembly in the context of its consideration
of the Mission budget, to be deployed in 40 locations, including the transitional
local zones and points for normalization.

VI. Observations
34. In my letter of 22 July 2016 (S/2016/643), I expressed satisfaction at the
current level of preparation for the deployment of the Mission, in particular the
swift deployment of United Nations observers within days of the signing of the
Agreement. The number of observers currently stands at 80, which has enabled the
Mission to participate fully in the recent scoping visits to the local areas where the
separation of forces and the laying down of arms will take place. The Mission is
also ready to fulfil its coordination functions within the monitoring and verification
mechanism at the national and regional levels as soon as the mechanism is
established. In addition to the level of Mission preparedness, the successful
tripartite visits to the zones carried out from 8 to 15 August, the working
relationship between Colombian officers and FARC-EP combatants during the
exercise, the positive reaction of the local population, all go to show that
preparations are on track, not only from a technical viewpoint but also from a
political perspective. I acknowledge that the implementation of th e peace
agreements is a major financial undertaking for the Colombian Government.

16-14368

9/11

S/2016/729

Discussions are under way involving the Colombian Government, the Secretariat
and Member States on how best to support the logistics of the transitional local
zones and points for normalization.
35. Against this positive background, several issues have arisen, some concerning
operational aspects of the Mission and some concerning substantive issues an d the
broader political context.
36. While a proper division of responsibilities in terms of the provision of services
has been discussed with the Government, the issue of cost-sharing for those
facilities and services that are used jointly by the members of the monitoring and
verification mechanism remains outstanding. I recommend that the Mission share
with the Government the cost of activating and operating the mechanism, exclusive
of government-provided security costs, in proportion to the number of United
Nations observers and staff relative to the total number of mechanism pe rsonnel.
Current planning indicates that the Mission’s usage of facilities and services at the
national, regional and local levels will be approximately 50 per cent of the total
requirement. Separately, the Mission will be responsible for bearing the cost of
Mission-specific activities, including those relating to the laying down of arms.
37. Regarding the composition of the Mission, the Agreement provides that
observers would come mainly from countries from the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States (CELAC). In view of existing pledges from
observer-contributing countries this is certain to be the case. The Mission has
reiterated its commitment to CELAC to be inclusive of all countries from the region
as it continues to staff its observer and civilian components. For reasons of
sensitivity borne out by long experience of peace operations, the neighbouring
countries of Colombia have not been requested to nominate observers. The United
Nations is, however, open to alternative arrangements agreed by b oth parties. At the
same time, the Mission is making every effort through the United Nations
competitive process to recruit qualified civilians from all CELAC countries,
including neighbours of Colombia, with a solid background in peace processes and
United Nations affairs.
38. Several Colombian civil society and human rights organizations have asked
about the role and relationship of the Mission vis-à-vis human rights. According to
reliable data from Colombian think tanks, the Colombian Defensoría del Pueblo
(Ombudsman’s Office) and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR), the unilateral ceasefire that has been in place for more
than a year on the part of FARC-EP has led not only to a drop in violence among
belligerents but also to a decrease in violence against the population in the conflict
areas. While the termination of the conflict between the Government of Colombia
and FARC-EP will certainly not do away with all acts of violence against civilians,
in which several other armed actors are involved, the definitive cessation of the
conflict, which the Mission is established to facilitate, will, it is to be hoped, mark
an improvement in the protection of human rights in Colombia.
39. In addition, as mentioned above, the rules of the ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities to which the Colombia Government and FARC -EP are committed do not
only prohibit acts of mutual aggression. They also contain a commitment to refrain
from any “act of violence or threat of violence that endanger the life and personal
integrity of the civilian population, in particular gender -based violence”. The
Mission, together with the monitoring and verification mechanism, will bear

10/11

16-14368

S/2016/729

responsibility for verifying that this important commitment is fully comp lied with
throughout the duration of the ceasefire process. Moreover, at all levels the
mechanism is open to receiving complaints, advice and recommendations from the
population, the authorities and civil society organizations.
40. The Mission and the monitoring and verification mechanism will naturally
have to cooperate not just with national institutions mandated to protect and
promote human rights in Colombia, such as the Defensoría del Pueblo, the
Consejería Presidencial para los Derechos Humanos (Office of the Presidential High
Commissioner for Human Rights), Colombian human rights organizations, which
are well established and respected, but with OHCHR. Such organizations will
continue to work throughout the conflict areas, and their extensive expertis e will be
helpful to the mechanism. Provided adequate resources are at their disposal,
national and international human rights organizations will certainly contribute to
ensuring a transition from conflict to a peace free of violence and human rights
violations, well beyond the duration of the ceasefire and the laying down of arms.
41. In their negotiating agenda adopted on 26 August 2012, the Colombian
Government and FARC-EP had agreed to negotiate modalities for the ratification of
the final peace agreement, once concluded. Following protracted and inconclusive
discussions on the subject on 23 June 2016, together with the signing of the
Agreement on the Ceasefire, the parties agreed to heed the decision to be made by
the Constitutional Court of Colombia with regard to the modalities for popular
ratification of the peace agreements. On 18 July 2016, the Government ’s decision to
submit the final peace agreement to a plebiscite was ruled constitutional by the
Constitutional Court.
42. In spite of this factor of uncertainty, the parties have decided to pursue
preparations for the implementation of the ceasefire agreement. For example, joint
training of members of the monitoring and verification mechanism — government
representatives, FARC-EP representatives and United Nations observers — will take
place in the coming weeks. The joint training will bring cohesiveness on the way in
which the ceasefire will be verified once it enters into force, and will build further
confidence in the peace process among combatants on both sides. The debate
surrounding the plebiscite notwithstanding, I believe that such exercises, together
with further dialogue with authorities and civil society on the Agreement are in
themselves useful peacebuilding initiatives. The Mission, whil e remaining prudent
in its deployment and attentive to political developments, will ensure that it can
contribute fully to the success of these initiatives.
43. Concerning the ongoing negotiations in Havana, I note that important issues
remain on the table, including modalities for the implementation of the agreements
and for national and international verification mechanisms. An agreement on the
reintegration of FARC-EP combatants is of particular importance. The ceasefire and
laying down of arms is part of a longer-term process whose sustainability is
conditional upon a reliable programme of reintegration for FARC -EP combatants. I
therefore invite the parties to produce a solid and comprehensive programme in this
respect. In conclusion, I would like to thank my Special Representative, Jean
Arnault, for his continuing leadership, and to commend the Government of
Colombia and FARC-EP for their determination to bring the negotiations to a
successful conclusion. I remain deeply committed to providing all the s upport that is
required of the United Nations to this process. After so many years of conflict, it
may be difficult for many Colombians to imagine a future in peace. Yet the
opportunity is at hand today and I hope they will be able to seize it.

16-14368

11/11
