UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS i 1. ; ..,,__. :j jj

FORTIETH

.,

YEAR
.,..

.

.

.:.

.1
:

2614*”

MEETING:

-.

4 OC&ER

. ..‘.z

._._

i:._

i9s<

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2614)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .,.................

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..d.................

,.........

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17510) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV.2614

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents‘are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nationsdocument.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2614th MEETING
Held

in New York bn Friday,

4 October

1985, at 10.30 a.m.

tatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Botswana, Ethiopia,
Mozambique, Nicaragua, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam and Zambia in
which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

President: Mr. Vernon A. WALTERS

(United States of America).
The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

Present:

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2614)

1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. Complaint

by Angola against South Africa:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif(Afghanistan),
Mr. Taleb lbrahimi (Algeria). Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr.
Wolde (Ethiopia), Mr. DOS Santos (Mozambique), Mr. Chamorro Mora (Nicaragua), Mr. AI-Shaali (United Arab Emirates), Mr. Majengo (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Le
Kim Chung (Viet Nam) and Mr. Lusaka (Zambia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations ahdressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17510)

3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 3 October 1985 from the
representative of Burkina Faso [S/17525] which reads as
follows:

The meeting was called to order at 11.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

“I have the honour to request that during the Security Council’s discussion of the item entitled ‘Complaint by Angola against South Africa’, the Council
extend an invitation under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Peter Mueshihange, Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO).”

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint

by Angola against South Africa:

Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to tbe United Nations addressed
to the President of tbe Security Council (S/17510)

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation to Mr. Mueshihange under
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2612th meeting, I invite the representative of
Angola to take a place at the Council table; I invite the
representatives of Cameroon, Cuba, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Kuwait, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Yugoslavia and Zimbabwe to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

It was so decided.

4. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/17522, which contains the text
of a draft resolution submitted by South Africa.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table: Mr. Engo (Cameroon), Mr. Malmierca Peoli (Cuba), Mr, Rajaie-Khorassani
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr.
Garba (Nigeria), Mr. SarrP (Senegal), Mr. von Schimding
(South Africa), Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Mangwende
(Zimbabwe) took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

5. The first speaker is the representative of Kuwait. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
6. Mr. ABULHASSAN
(Kuwait) (interpretation from
Arabic): The Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait spoke a few days ago and congratulated
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I should like to endorse

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the represen1

his words. I should also like to extend to you and to the
other members of the Council my thanks for allowing me
to participate in this debate as Chairman of the Group of
Arab States for this month.

Council has on many occasions expressed its positive attitude in that connection, but the most recent act of aggression requires that it do more; it must discharge its
responsibility under the Charter and adopt and enforce the
specific measures that have long been demanded of it by
the international community.

7. The judgement of history and of all those who closely
follow the Council’s work will be that this week the Council held continuous meetings to debate two events that
were different in form but similar in substance-two
events marked by the fact that they demonstrate belief in
the supremacy of force over the concepts of law and justice. The aggressor in each case is a racist State which has
constantly violated international law and international
instruments and showed contempt for the will of the international community, of which the Council is the living
conscience.

13. We support the proposals of various delegations, and
in particular that of the President of the Group of African
States, Mr. Garba, that mandatory, comprehensive sanctions be imposed on the racist regime. We hope that the
Council will not fail to shoulder its responsibility and we
shall not once again have to deal with a similar complaint
in the Council. We want the Council to assume its responsibility under the Charter and to deter and call to order the
aggressor.

8. Since the beginning of the week, the Council has been
dealing with blind Israeli aggression against the sovereignty and independence of the fraternal country of Tunisia. Since yesterday, it has been dealing with another act of
blind aggression-South
Africa’s aggression against the
sovereignty, security and independence of a friendly African country, Angola.

14. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe, Mr. Mangwende, whom
I welcome. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
15. Mr. MANGWENDE
(Zimbabwe): I congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of this
important body of our Organisation for the month of
October, and thank you and all the members of the Council for allowing my delegation to participate in this crucial
debate.

9. Those two aggressive States, Israel and South Africa,
continue to demonstrate their firm commitment to the philosophy of force, hegemony and the use of terror in international relations. It is strange that both racist regimes
have celebrated the fortieth anniversary of the United
Nations in that unlawful manner, which reveals that their
attachment to the Charter and to the objectives of the
United Nations is in form only, having nothing to do with
reality or practice. Therefore, in keeping with its legal
responsibilities, the Council has been called upon to deal
with the actions of those two racist regimes in such a way
as to ensure that they comply fully with international law
and respect the Charter.

16. At the same time, I congratulate the Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the
United Kingdom, Sir Geoffrey Howe, on the brilliant
manner in which he chaired the special ministerial meeting
of the Council on 26 September. Equally notable was the
chairmanship of the knowledgeable representative of the
United Kingdom, Sir John Thomson, during the same
month.

10. The Council is meeting for the second time in two
weeks to consider Angola’s complaint about South Africa’s repeated acts of aggression against its territory. These
recent acts of aggression show South Africa’s disregard for
the international will, represented by resolution 57 1(1985),
which the Council adopted recently, and which has not yet
been implemented owing to lack of time. These acts of
aggression reveal South Africa’s intransigence and arrogance. Its arrogance was again illustrated yesterday by
South Africa’s attempt to suggest what the ideal regime for
Angola, an independent country, should be. Is not that
flagrant interference in the internal affairs of an independent country, a sovereign, active Member of the United
Nations?

17. On 20 Sentember.
the Council held an urgent meet.
ing to consider the question of racist South Africa’s
renewed unprovoked aggression against the People’s
Republic of Angola. The sense of outrage and indignation
felt by the members of the Council and by the international community as a whole regarding these barbarous
acts of the Pretoria regime was clearly manifested in the
letter and spirit of the resolution that emanated from that
resolution 571 (1985), which was
meeting-namely,
unanimously adopted. That resolution, as will be recalled,
inter alia demanded that the South African regime immediately withdraw its forces of invasion from Angolan territory and pay reparations for the loss of life and damage to
property suffered by the people of Angola.

11. South Africa has a long record in this area. It is both
adversary and judge at the same time, in regard to not only
the Angolan people but also the people of Namibia and
the black majority within South Africa.

18. Barely two weeks have passed since that decision was
taken, and yet today, once again, the peace-loving people
of Angola are confronted with aggression by racist South
Africa of even greater proportions. In total defiance of the
decisions of the Council and in utter disregard for the
norms and rules that govern the conduct of relations
between sovereign countries-norms
and rules which
demand respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity

12. The Group of Arab States supports the fraternal
country of Angola in its resistance to external aggression
and in defence of its independence and sovereignty. The
2

24. On trial here is the capacity of this respected intemational body to act to maintain world peace and security in
the face of a defiant racist State that has flouted every
decision of the United Nations. At risk is the sovereign
right of the People’s Republic of Angola and of all those
States that are neighbours of South Africa to enjoy the
fruits of their freedom and independence without external
interference and intervention. At issue here is whether the
people of Angola and those States in southern Africa
which by no choice of their own are South Africa’s
neighbours-and
we must emphasize that we did not
choose to be neighbours of the racist regime-shall
be
protected by international law or continue to be at the
mercy of the cyclones of South Africa’s terrorism and
expansionism. Is it not time that the Security Council rise
above cynicism and despair and accept its responsibility to
lead the fight against the crime of apartheid, which the
Council and the General Assembly have long since described as a crime against humanity?

of other States-the racist expansionists have once again
launched an unprovoked ground and air attack deep into
Angolan territory, resulting in an unprecedented loss of
life and property.
19. The Government and people of Zimbabwe spare no
words in condemning in the strongest possible terms these
latest manifestations of Pretoria’s predilection to violence,
destruction and murder of innocent civilians in defence of
its repressive and immoral system of apartheid. We deplore
the continued use of the international
Territory of
Namibia as a springboard for launching acts of aggression
and destabilization
against ‘the People’s Republic of
Angola and other neighbouring States. We join the
members of the international community in demanding
the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the racist
troops from Angolan territory and prompt and full compensation by Pretoria for all the damage inflicted on the
people of Angola during this unprovoked and unwarranted act of savage aggression.

25. Surely the time for prevarication and hesitation has
long since passed. We must now impose comprehensive
mandatory economic sanctions as the only effective nonviolent alternative left to the international community. The
possible suffering of people of South Africa and the people
of southern Africa as a whole should not be used as an
excuse for not imposing sanctions. The majority are
already suffering as it is. The alternative to the pain of
sanctions is the certainty of a massive bloodbath in which
people will not merely suffer pain but will actually be
killed. Economic self-interest should not blind us to our
responsibility to the suffering people of South Africa.

20. To our brothers and sisters in the People’s Republic of Angola, who are once again being subjected to the
outrage and savagery of Pretoria’s brutality, we offer
our deepest sympathies ,and feelings of solidarity, for
their suffering is our suffering and their death is indeed
our death.
21. The Security Council has been seized of the question of South Africa’s aggression against the People’s
Republic of Angola since 1976. During the intervening
period the Council has made a series of solemn declarations and statements demanding that racist South Africa
cease its provocative armed invasions of Angolan territory. In its resolution 428 (1978), in particular, the
Council solemnly warned that, in the event of further
acts of violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola, the Council would meet again “in order
to consider the adoption of more effective measures, in
accordance with the appropriate provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, including
Chapter VII
thereof ‘.

26. We have constantly pointed out that the apartheid
policies pursued by the minority regime in Pretoria have
been and remain the root cause of all the instability in
southern Africa. That regime’s belligerent and expansionist
disposition has led it to seek hegemony in our region. It has
sought to create a cordon sanitaire along its northern
borders, in the hope of warding off pressures to change its
immoral apartheid policies in South Africa itself. Faced
with increasing isolation by the international community
and confronted with a rising tide of dissatisfaction from
within, the racist Pretoria regime has intensified its ruthless
campaign to impose a “pax Afrikaansa” on the front-line
States and other States in the region in order to create a state
of dependency, thus making the region safe for apartheid.

22. Seven years have passed since the adoption of resolution 428 (1978), and yet racist South Africa’s troops are
still occupying southern Angola. The Pretoria regime not
only has intensified its campaign of terror and genocide in
Angola, but has drawn the whole of southern Africa into a
vortex of violence that now has very serious consequences
for the stability of the region and international peace and
security as a whole.

27. The history of the apartheid regime in South Africa is
one of duplicity, insincerity and broken promises. Recent
events in southern Africa have fully demonstrated South
Africa’s bad faith and insincerity in its conduct of relations
with its peace-loving neighbours. In the past, the Pretoria
regime has sworn on its sacred apartheid that it has never,
ever backed, financed and trained the MNR (National Resistance Movement) bandits who are perpetrating acts of
sabotage and destabilization in Mozambique. And yet
only two weeks ago, the duplicity of the racists was
exposed and their Minister for Foreign Affairs was forced
to admit that South Africa was and still is in blatant violation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Mozambique.

23. One is tempted to ask, what more must the Pretoria
regime do before the members of the Council recognize the
threat that it represents in our region? How much longer
are the members of the Council going to be indifferent
about a regime that has violated all norms of international
behaviour, including all that the United Nations stands
for? HOW much longer is the Council going to be satisfied
with mere pronouncements and platitudes, when scores of
innocent lives are lost each day as a result of Pretoria’s
wanton aggression and internal repression?
3

28. In May this year the Pretoria regime ceremoniously
announced that it-was pulling its occupying forces out of
Angolan territory, and yet only two weeks later South
African commandos were caught red-handed in Cabinda
Province in northern Angola. The regime has made promises regarding Namibia, but to date Pretoria remains the
sole stumbling block to the achievement of genuine independence in that Territory. In the face of mounting pressure for change in South Africa itself, duplicity, lies and
prevarication have become the master plan of the regime’s
survival game; on one hand it is seeking to make the world
believe that apartheid is being reformed, but on the other it
is further entrenching that evil system.

gang of bandits. Are we to assume, therefore, that the
United States is on the side of UNITA and its accomplices?
Then, on 17 September this year, we learned that the same
band of desperados which had met earlier in Angola met
again in Dallas, Texas, to co-ordinate their destabilization
activities. From southern Africa, UNITA of Angola and
the MNR bandits of Mozambique
were among the
honoured guests. To this collection of cut-throats and
rapists, President Reagan sent a letter which read in part:
“I commend you all for your part in this noble cause. Our
combined efforts are moving the tide of history toward
world freedom.”
33. Can we really call that ‘constructive engagement”,
either of the active or of the passive variety? Are we wrong
to see it as active constructive instigation? There is much
doubt in our minds about all this.

29. The Government of Zimbabwe is outraged at the fact
that, despite these many acts of deception and arrogance,
the Pretoria regime is allowed to continue to defy world
opinion with impunity. We ask ourselves why in the last
quarter of the twentieth century this Hitlerite regime is still
tolerated, when so many lives were sacrificed during the
last War to remove evil fascism from the face of the earth.
Why are the great nations of this generation so anaemic in
their reaction to this evil crime against humanity? Why is
the reaction of those countries that often pride themselves
on being great champions of liberty, justice and morality
so feeble in the face of daily murders of unarmed children
and women?

34. Not long after that, the United States Congress
repealed the Clark Amendment, which had forbidden the
United States Government to give aid to UNITA. Then a
few weeks later South Africa sent its forces into southern
Angola to defend the UNITA bandits; at the same time,
senior South African officials were dispatched to Washington to confer on the coordination
of assistance to
UNITA. Was it in fact an accident that during that time
the United States abstained in a separate vote on paragraph 5 of resolution 571 (1985), which called for military
help to be given to the front-line States and to the Govemment of Angola, to enable them to resist aggression?

30. We are worried that there may be a connection
between the intransigence and arrogance of the Pretoria
racists and the policies and action-or inaction-of
some
of the great Powers. Our concern is based in part on the
observed fact that there are countries which have dutifully
and dependably abused their veto power to shield South
Africa from any meaningful measures ever contemplated
by the Security Council. But more recently we were
astounded to read in The New York Times of 3 October
about a statement purportedly made by the Secretary of
State of the United States-that great nation. In that statement the Secretary of State is reported to have said, inter
&a, that “we must also remember . . . what is today
happening in . . . Angola, where people are fighting and
dying for independence and freedom.” In Angola, the
statement continued, as in Nicaragua, Cambodia and
Afghanistan, “there should not be any doubt of whose side
we are on”.

35. The United States has many friends in southern
Africa, but they are all disturbed by the apparent discrepancies and inconsistencies in the policies and actions of
the United States towards Angola and southern Africa in
general. We therefore wish the Secretary of State to spell
out more clearly which side the United States supports in
southern Africa, and particularly in Angola. Does it support the side of the perpetrators of this crime against
humanity, the side of immorality, racism and the bands of
reactionary murderers and malcontents, or does it support
those who are standing up against that evil system? At this
eleventh hour, it is important that this ambiguity be
removed, and removed once and for all.

31. We ask the United States whose side it is on in
Angola. Is it on the side of the UNITA (NQtional Union for
the Total Independence of Angola) bandits and their Pretoria allies? It says it does not want us to have any doubt of
whose side it is on. We say that we are now in some doubt
as to where it really stands on this issue. This is terribly
important question to those of us who live in southern
Africa, and, I dare say, to the rest of the peace-loving
world as well.

36. Le me end my statement by advising the Pretoria
racists that no amount of internal repression or destabilization or aggression against Angola, Mozambique and other
States in the region can ever save their evil system from its
inevitable destruction. Apartheid is doomed. Cosmetic
changes cannot save it. It must be dismantled. No amount
of tinkering will help. It must be scrapped and removed
from the face of earth. The time to do this was yesterday.
Today there is little time left. Tomorrow there will be no
time. The judgement of history has already been delivered,
and the executioners are now in place.

32. On 2 June of this year, a Mr. Lewis Lehrman, of
Citizens for America, organized a jamboree of intemational cut-throats and murderers at Jamba, the main
UNITA base in Angola. We were informed that President
Reagan had sent a letter of encouragement to that motley

37. Mr. BIERRING
(Denmark): It is indeed with a feeling of sorrow and utter frustration that we meet again to
consider Angola’s complaint about yet another blatant act
of aggression by South Africa against that country. Our
4

thoughts and sympathy go tirst of all to the Government
and people of Angola.

44. Against this background, South Africa must be
brought to understand that it is not in its own best interest
that steps be taken which will further fuel the explosive
developments in southern Africa. Such an outcome is certainly not in the interest of the world community, and the
Council must strongly warn South Africa that it will not
continue to tolerate action by South Africa which
endangers not only regional stability but also international
peace and security as a whole.

38. So far South Africa has tried to justify its attacks on
Angola as legitimate attempts to counter cross-border
activities by SWAP0 in Namibia. This was the case, for
instance, during the Council’s last debate on an Angolan
complaint against South Africa, on 20 September this
year.
q

45. Mr. LI Luye (China) (interpretufionfiom
Chinese):
Before the ink has dried on resolution 571 (1985), condemning South Africa for its aggression against Angola,
and before the fact-finding commission consisting of
three Council members has embarked on its journey, the
South African authorities have seen fit once again to
commit a blatant armed invasion of Angola, resulting in
serious loss of life and property on the part of the Angolan people.

39. Following the raid by South Africa’s air force a few
days later in the vicinity of Mavinga, even the South African President, however, found it impossible to sustain this
fictitious allegation, and he openly admitted that the sole
purpose of that attack was to support UNITA. This was
also made abundantly clear by South Africa’s Representative yesterday [2612rh meezi?rg]. His statement demonstrated more clearly than ever South Africa’s double
standards and hypocrisy. While maintaining at home one
of the most oppressive and least democratic systems in the
world, South Africa reserves for itself the right in the very
name of democracy to be the policeman of the whole of
southern Africa, to act as the supreme judge as to what is
right and what is wrong in that region, to intervene militarily in neighbouring countries and to advise them on the
conduct of their internal affairs. The culmination of hypocrisy is that South Africa asks the Security Council to act on
a draft resolution which in all its aspects is a total negation
of the norms of behaviour the South African Government
has chosen for itself.

46. This shows once again that the South African authorities do not have the least respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of South Africa’s
neighbours and that it is also bent on throwing down
another challenge to the Security Council and to the entire
international community.
47. In the face of this, the Chinese delegation is deeply
outraged.
48. Just as the aggressor troops of South Africa are moving deep into the territory of Angola, the representative of
South Africa is talking glibly about direct dialogue with
Angola for the peaceful settlement of the dispute. This is
nothing but deception.

40. At least, then, the Council is this time facing a
clear-cut issue. South Africa-in defiance of the decisions
o’f the CourEil, in contravention of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations and without even the
thinnest veil of justification -continues its flagrant violation of the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of a Member State. This is the basis on which the
Council now has to make its decision and determine its
action.

49. It should be recalled that more than a year ago the
South African authorities proposed negotiations with
Angola and undertook to withdraw their troops completely from Angola within one month. However, subsequent developments have fully shown that they never
meant what they said. The South African troops not only
failed to withdraw completely, but, within a span of less
than six months had launched three armed aggressions
against Angola.

41. My country’s position on South Africa’s continued
aggression against Angola is well known and is reflected in
our support for the Council’s previous decisions. We
strongly condemn South Africa’s behaviour and support
Angola’s proper and legitimate demand for full and adequate compensation for the loss of life and damage to
property. We also urge Member States to take prompt,
appropriate and effective action to bring pressure to bear
on the Government of South Africa to comply with the
Council’s decisions.

50. Since 1976 the Security Council has adopted nine
resolutions at different times calling on the South African
authorities to put an end to their intervention and aggression against Angola. However, the South African authorities have to date refused to implement them.

42. The problem before us must be approached in its
regional context, not in an Past-West context.

51. The Chinese delegation strongly condemns the
South African authorities for their wilful aggression
against Angola. In our view, in order to ensure respect for
the resolutions of the United Nations the Security Council should take further concrete action in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter, strengthen its support and assistance to the Government and people of
Angola and adopt effective sanctions against South
Africa.

43. In his recent letter to the Secretary-General the President of Angola has pointed to his country’s right as a
sovereign State to ask for broader assistance in the face of
South Africa’s continued aggression, and also emphasized
its possible disastrous consequences for international
peace ,and security.
5

52. Lastly, I wish to take this opportunity to reafftrm
that the Government of China will, as always, resolutely
support the Government and people of Angola in their
just struggle against the South African aggression and to
safeguard- their sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity.

to exercise in its reaction against the national liberation
struggle of the Namibian people. Grave also because they
disregard the repeated condemnations and the frequent
injunctions of the Security Council with regard to the Pretoria regime, the most recent of which were issued barely
two weeks ago.

53. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker on my list is the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Algeria, Mr. Ahmed Taleb
Ibrahimi. I welcome him and I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

61. Clearly the military escalation against the front-line
countries is very closely connected with the upsurge of the
national resistance of the South African people to the
oppressive apartheid regime. Through these acts of desperation at the regional level, Pretoria is trying in vain to
divert attention from the daily martyrdom of those struggling against apartheid and its illegal presence in Namibia.

54. Mr. TALEB IBRAHIMI
(Algeria) (inrerprerurion
from French): The calm proceedings of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations have been disturbed and the
soundness of its foundations put to the test by the will and
the actions of the two regimes whose aggressive nature is
insatiable.

62. Thus, a policy that was set up with the sole intention
of stifling the legitimate desire to break the chains of domination and oppression is being extended to the People’s
Republic of Angola. Ever since that country espoused the
cause ,of.freedom in that region, its territory, like the territory of other States in southern Africa, has suffered from
South African aggression.

55. We came here to commemorate noble ideals, but we
have been caught up in events that bring to mind everything that the United Nations was designed to oppose. We
came to commend the results of the arduous progress of
the international community towards acceptance of the
primacy of law, but we have been shaken out of that by the
response of unbridled force.

63. Because southern Africa as a whole is paying the
price of its commitment to freedom, it is the duty of the
international community to lend its support in keeping
with the dictates of a moral and political imperative.

56. Tel Aviv and Pretoria, in simultaneous moves corroborating the identity of their goals and the reality of
their alliarice, have tightened the African continent in their
warlike grip and given free reign to outbursts of violence,
examples of which overburden the records of the Security
Council, which has too often been relegated to the position
of a helpless bystander.

64. The non-aligned countries, for their part, are certainly shouldering their responsibilities in this regard. The
reason they held their most recent ministerial meeting in
southern Africa was to show once again their profound
concern at the crisis situation that continues to affect that
region and the dangers that it poses for international peace
and security. By meeting at Luanda, the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries sought to reaffirm its active solidarity with Angola. In deciding to meet next year at the
highest level in Zimbabwe, the non-aligned countries
expressed a commitment to take a more active part in the
struggle to eradicate apartheid, in the complete decolonialization of Namibia and in ensuring that the countries of
the region enjoy stability and security.

57. Over the years;the Council has grown accustomed to
considering, in turn and with a frequency that their proliferating misdeeds have imposed on it, the cases of Tel Aviv
and Pretoria. Today, zionism and apartheid have simultaneously stepped up their defiance as if the better to dissociate themselves together from the meaning and the
promise of the comity of nations in commemorating the
age of reason of the Organization.
58. Thus, at a time when zionism has expanded its sphere
of aggression to North Africa, apartheid% once again the
object of condemnation by the international community
because of its recent attack on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola.

65. The use of violence institutionalized as a norm of
conduct, the suppression of the right of peoples of selfdetermination and the constant aggression against independent States clearly reflect the total denial of the
cardinal principles that led to the establishment of this
organization. Consequently, these acts call for punishment.

59. In this uninterrupted succession of reprehensible acts
that make up the persistent aggression of the Pretoria
regime against the People’s Republic of Angola, the facts
that have justified this new meeting of the Council are for
many reasons particularly grave.

66. Unless it wishes to accent the risk of the systematic
use of force, which would inektably be fatal to its authority, the Security Council, which has the means to fulfil its
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, must not fail to take all the necessary steps to
punish the aggressor and to restore the confidence in it. Its
prestige and, above all, its credibility, are at stake, especially at the time of the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, which, for the peoples victims of
the philosophy that might is right, represents fresh hope

60. Those facts are indeed grave, first, because in the
terms of the Charter of the United Nations, they constitute
acts of aggression against a sovereign State, part of whose
territory is still being occupied by Pretoria. Grave, because
they are based on a so-called right of hot pursuit left over
from colonial times, which the Pretoria regime presumes
6

that their rights will be recognized and their just aspirations heeded.

be given the subversive activities of the counterrevolutionary gangs. The recent statements of the United
States Secretary of State, and in particular his words in
New York on 1 October, cannot fail to be disquieting. It
would seem that certain persons in Washington are preparing to apply in Angola the experience of providing direct
military support to the Angolan Contras that they have
gained in Central America and other parts of the world.

67. If there is a golden opportunity to give meaning to
the United Nations commitment
to work for a better
world, it lies here in the issue that is the subject of the
present deliberations in the Council.
68. “United Nations for a better world”ithose
are lyrical words which might seem to indicate an attempt to
reach an unattainable goal. Yet for the peoples of southern
Africa it is a very real hope, the fulfilment of which would
begin with the end of aparrheid, the accession of Namibia
to independence and the continuance of their economic
and social development in peace and security.

73. A fact, however, is a fact: the results of the policy of
“constructive engagement” with the Pretoria racists, a policy that even its authors are now calling “active constructive
engagement,” are aggressive attacks by South Africa and
State terrorism carried out by Pretoria against Angola,
Mozambique, Botswana and other African countries. The
facts also show that the South African regime has now
entered upon a new cycle of armed aggression against its
neighbours. It has moved from posing a standing threat of
aggression against them to a state of permanent war. And,
of-course, there is good reason for this, because racism and
aggression are indivisible. Attacks on Angola, Botswana,
Lesotho, the colonial war against the people of Namibia,
subversion against Mozambique-these
are all links in the
same chain. They are all manifestations of that regime’s
continuing policy of viewing State boundaries, the sovereignty of its neighbours and the norms of international law
as concepts not applicable to itself.

69. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The representative of Angola has given the Security Council the incontrovertible facts relating to the continuing aggression by the
racist regime of South Africa against his country. It was
because of those facts that the question of that aggression
was again brought to the Council. Blood is -being shed on
Angolan soil and people are perishing. Units of South
Africa’s regular armed forces have invaded Angolan territory and are continuing their hostilities there. The racists’
air force is attacking the positions of that country’s troops.
70. Scarcely two weeks have elapsed since the Council
strongly condemned the racist Pretoria regime for its premeditated, persistent and sustained armed invasions of the
People’s Republic of Angola and described them as a
serious threat to international peace and security, demanding the immediate cessation of such acts of aggression, The
Council adopted similar decisions two months ago, in
June of this year, in connection with the invasion by South
African commandos of the Angolan province of Cabinda
and the raid against Gaborone, the capital of Botswana.
However, the South African regime turned a deaf ear to
the Council’s demands; far from ceasing such acts, it
increased the scale of its aggression against Angola.

74. It is not through happenstance that Pretoria’s military
adventurism has resurfaced at the very moment when the
Republic of South Africa is experiencing a deep-seated
domestic political crisis. Given the growing mass popular
movement against the apartheid system in South Africa
itself, and given the mounting liberation struggle being
waged by the people of Namibia, the Pretoria leaders are
seeking a way out through external aggression. Inventing
false pretexts for their acts of aggression against Angola, the
Pretoria racists first alleged that they were pursuing units of
SWAPO, although no such units had ever been heard of in
that region of Angola in which the South African racists
were engaging in hostilities. Similarly, .Pretoria has made
and continues to make statements about a “direct involvement” of the Soviet Union and Cuba in the actions of the
Angolan armed forces against the UNITA gangs. That ploy
is not new. The aggressors have adopted as a rule of conduct
this recourse to the bugbear of a communist menace as an
ideological screen behind which they can attack other countries. During the Second World War, Hitler also frequently
held up the communist threat and a crusade against communism before invading a particular European country.

71. By its most recent invasion of Angola, South Africa
is trying to forestall the inevitable rout of the armed
UNITA gangs. There can be no doubt that those gangs are
organized, maintained, armed and dispatched by Pretoria.
Indeed, the racists now talk quite openly about this. On 20
September of this year, the South African Minister of
Defence said that his country’s ties with UNITA and its
leader, Savimbi, are no secret and that they are material,
humanitarian and moral. With regard to Savimbi, the
Minister of Defence stated: “He supports the same norms
and values in which we believe.” After such revealing
words of praise, the political figure of Savimbi, who has
betrayed the interests of the African peoples and gone over
to the colonialists, hardly merits any further comment.
The UNITA gangs are being actively used by South Africa
to destabilize the domestic situation in Angola and to subvert that country’s sovereignty and independence.

75. The apartheid regime resumed its military and subversive actions against African countries immediately after the
Western Powers-once they had prevented the Security
Council from adopting comprehensive and mandatory
sanctions against South Africa under Chapter VII of the
Charter-had stated that they were introducing their own
“limited” sanctions. Is this not proof of the total emptiness
of such so-called limited economic sanctions?

72. However, the Pretoria .racists are clearly not the only
supporters of that mercenary organization. After the
repeal of the so-called Clark Amendment, Washington
clearly believes that the way is open for direct support to

76. The African countries and the overwhelming majority
of States in the world are quite rightly wondering how
7

much longer the Security Council will be prevented from
adopting effective enforcement measures against the South
African aggressor. Those who oppose the adoption of
sanctions against the aggressor allege that such sanctions
will not be effective and that they will even be harmful to
the people of South Africa and neighbouring African
countries. But such arguments are resorted to only when
those who make them wish to defend South Africa-or
Israel. In other instances, when sanctions have been unilaterally imposed in violation of the Charter-for
example
against Cuba, Nicaragua and certain other countriesthey seem to believe that sanctions are indeed an effective
means of exerting pressure, and they certainly do not seem
to care whether they are harming the peoples of those
countries. Such a double-standard approach benefits only
aggressive regimes.

cil to take against the aggressor the effective measures provided for in the Charter of the United Nations.” [see
S/I 7491, annex.]
81. Mr. ALZAMORA
(Peru) (interpretation from Spanish): Once again, the People’s Republic of Angola has been
subjected to violence at the hands of South Africa, a
tragedy that has recurred all too often in the history of the
young Angolan nation, despite the provisions of the Charter and repeated resolutions by the Security Council.
82. The statement by the representative of Angola
[2612th meeting] shows that we are not dealing with isolated facts but with the repetition of acts that reveal a blind
determination to impose solutions of force by violating the
sovereignty and integrity of other States and carrying out
colonialist and racist practices. These are all flagrant violations of the values and principles that form the moral and
legal basis of the Organization and that the Security Council thus has an inescapable obligation to protect.

77. Today, when the Security Council is dealing with the
parallel considerations of the Angolan complaint and that
of Tunisia, we hear many bitter words, both here around
the Council table and outside the Chamber, to the effect
that this main United Nations body entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security is helpless
when dealing with such repeated acts of aggression. We
hear about the disappointment of Member States with the
Council and indignation at its failure to act. At the same
time, discussions are being held amongst the members of
the Council about the need to enhance the Council’s effectiveness. Some sitting at this very table take this to mean
the adoption of certain modest procedural measures
which, they allege, could in and of themselves restore confidence in the Council. That is surely no more than an
attempt to divert attention from realities. The Council can
become a truly effective body not through any cosmetic
changes in its work, but only when some of its members
renounce the policy of appeasement of the aggressor and
show a willingness to proceed to the adoption of the effective enforcement measures set forth in the Charter.

83. The resolution to be adopted by the Council condemning this policy will be important, but it will be more so
if the Council finally decides to assume a qualitatively different position and make effective and appropriate use of all
the measures of recourse available to it under the Charter.
84. We believe that the time has come to go beyond the
usual rhetoric and inhibitions. Peru is prepared to meet
this moral and political responsibility.
85. Mr. de KfiMOULARIA
(France) (interpretation
from French): My delegation is shocked that once again a
southern African State should be the victim of an invasion
by South African armed forces. The position of my country on acts of this kind is clear and well known. France
most vigourously condemns these unjustifiable armed
attacks carried out in violation of international law.
86. Having reaftirmed that, I shall now confine myself to
a few brief comments.

78. Thus, whatever the plans of the South African racists
and their supporters, Angola and the other front-line
States and the national liberation movements of southern
Africa will not be vanguished. They have many friends
throughout the world. The strength of their resistance to
aggression and their courage in defending their gains command universal respect.

87. By using armed forces that it maintains in the illegally occupied Territory of Namibia, South Africa has
once again violated the sovereignty and integrity of the
People’s Republic of Angola. My delegation wishes to
express its solidarity with the people and Government of
that country. Angola, like all other African countries,
needs to have its security assured so that it can devote itself
to the development of its economy and the improvement
of the well-being of its people.

79. The People’s Republic of Angola, which is at the
forefront of the struggle against colonialism, imperialism
and racism, is entitled, like other independent African
countries, to count on support from the United Nations
and the Security Council.

88. The latest South African attack gives proof of a disturbing acceleration in the cycle of violence in the region as
a whole. I can thus only repeat that these armed confrontations will do nothing to settle the problems of southern
Africa.

80. The Soviet Union firmly supports the Angolan
people and the other African peoples that are struggling
for their freedom and independence. A statement by the
Soviet Government dated 21 September of this year about
South Africa’s act of aggression against Angola emphasized that “The Soviet Government strongly condemns
South Africa’s criminal aggression and demands the immediate and complete cessation of hostile acts against the
People’s Republic of Angola. In view of the special danger
South Africa’s aggressive policy presents to the cause of
peace, the Soviet Government calls on the Security Coun-

89. My country greatly regrets that escalation. It urges
South Africa to withdraw its troops from Angolan territory without delay, to put an end to its aggressive policy
towards its neighbours and to face squarely the real problems that it must resolve.
Khhemeeting rose at 1.00 p.m.

8

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
‘world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dam les librairies et les agences depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous auprbs de votre libraire ou adressez-vious B : Nations Unies,
Section dcs ventes, New York ou Gentve.
KAK

H3&U%ff’I OPrAHH3ALD35-i
OE%F$lUlHEHHbIX
HAtIm
06aex&ntetntbtxHaluJBMO~HO
KyUHTbB
KlUOKHblXhlal7I3HHBX
H aretiTcrBax 80 BCCX paftoxax Mupa. HaBoxHre crtparnut 06 HM~HHKX B sax.ueM MXOKHOM
hmrasHfle HNI mtuni~e 00 aapecy: Opratfiisauhfa 06aenmreHHbxx Haunit, Cexrurr no
i43JlKHSUl

l-IO-

OpEWiWUiH

npon~ea3n~HHR,HbK).~opxHlIK

XeHeaa.

COMO CONSECUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas h&t en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras en
todas partcs de1 mundo. Consultc a:su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00300

90-61439~March

1995-1.925
