UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/16
9 April 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3649th meeting of the Security Council, held on 9 April 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Liberia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the outbreak of
fighting in Monrovia and the rapidly deteriorating situation throughout
Liberia. This new outbreak of factional fighting, the harassment and abuse
of the civilian population and humanitarian and relief workers, threatens
the peace process and raises serious doubts about the commitment of the
factions to its implementation.
"The Security Council reminds all parties of their responsibility
fully to respect international humanitarian law with regard to the civilian
population and to ensure the safety of United Nations and other
international personnel, and calls upon them to take immediate steps to
this end. The Council calls on all parties to fulfil their obligation to
respect the inviolability of diplomatic personnel and property.
"The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the failure of the
Council of State and the faction leaders to demonstrate the political will
and determination required for implementation of the Abuja Agreement.
Unless Liberia’s political leaders immediately show by concrete positive
actions a reaffirmation of their commitment to the Abuja Agreement and
fully honour their obligation to re-establish and maintain the cease-fire,
they risk losing the support of the international community. The Council
underscores the personal responsibility of Liberia’s leaders in this
regard.
"The Security Council reaffirms its support for the Abuja Agreement as
the only existing framework for resolving Liberia’s political crisis and
the crucial role of the Economic Community of West African States in
bringing the conflict to an end.

96-08714 (E)

090496

/...

S/PRST/1996/16
English
Page 2

"The Security Council calls on the Liberian National Transitional
Government and the Liberian parties to work with the West African States
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) immediately to disengage all forces, re-establish
peace and law and order in Monrovia and an effective and comprehensive
cease-fire throughout the country. The Council calls on the parties, in
particular ULIMO-J, to release all hostages without harm. It further calls
upon the parties to return all captured weapons and equipment to ECOMOG.
"The Security Council reminds all States of their obligation to comply
strictly with the embargo on all deliveries of weapons and military
equipment to Liberia imposed by resolution 788 (1992) and to bring all
instances of violations of the arms embargo before the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 985 (1995).
"The Security Council declares its intention, based on the progress
made by the Liberian parties in implementing the steps set out above, and
after consideration of the report of the Secretary-General on developments
in Liberia, to determine what further measures may be appropriate regarding
the future United Nations presence in Liberia."

-----
