S/PRST/2008/26

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 July 2008
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5932nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 July 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Afghanistan”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the special report of the SecretaryGeneral on the International Conference in Support of Afghanistan, held in
Paris on 12 June 2008 (S/2008/434), and on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as well as the briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Kai Eide, on
9 July 2008.
“The Security Council welcomes the outcome of the Conference,
including the generous financial pledges made in support of the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy (ANDS) and the commitment by the
Government of Afghanistan to promote security, good governance, the rule of
law, human rights and socio-economic development and to pursue political and
economic reform, including by taking concrete steps to combat corruption. The
Council welcomes the strengthened partnership between the Afghan
Government and the international community resulting from such mutual
pledges and commitments. The Security Council endorses the key elements
identified in the Paris Declaration as essential for the security and prosperity
of the Afghan people, including the importance of holding free, fair and secure
elections in 2009 and 2010, the importance of ensuring the respect of human
rights of all Afghans and the provision of humanitarian assistance, and the
need to improve aid effectiveness in order to ensure that the benefits of
development are tangible for every Afghan.
“The Security Council also welcomes the Review of the Afghanistan
Compact presented at the Conference. In this regard, the Council reiterates its
call on the Afghan Government and the international community to implement
the Afghanistan Compact and its annexes in full.
“The Security Council recalls the strengthened role of UNAMA and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in leading and coordinating
international civilian efforts in Afghanistan, through an integrated approach
and guided by the principle of reinforcing Afghan ownership and leadership.
The Council reaffirms in particular the priorities for UNAMA and the Special
Representative identified in paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 1806
(2008) and endorses the views of the Secretary-General and his Special

08-42000 (E) 110708

*0842000*

S/PRST/2008/26

Representative on the areas that require greater attention. The Council calls on
all relevant actors to give their full support to UNAMA’s enhanced
coordinating role.
“The Security Council endorses the recommendation that, in order for
UNAMA to fulfil its mandate, much greater substantive, administrative, and
security resources will need to be expeditiously mobilized in the areas
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General, through the relevant
processes and procedures within the United Nations system. The Council
welcomes in particular the intention to proceed, pursuant to resolution 1806
(2008), with another expansion of UNAMA’s field presence through the
opening of six new provincial offices over the next 12 months. The Council
also welcomes plans to improve the coherence of action of the United Nations
Country Team in support of UNAMA’s priorities.
“The Security Council reaffirms once again its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan. The Council expresses its strong concern about the security
situation in Afghanistan and stresses the need to continue to address the threat
to the security and stability of Afghanistan posed by the Taliban, Al-Qaida,
illegal armed groups, criminals and those involved in the narcotics trade and in
the diversion of chemical precursors, including through the implementation of
measures introduced in its resolution 1267 (1999) and other relevant
resolutions of the Council. The Security Council notes the links between illicit
drugs trafficking, corruption and terrorism, and stresses the need for full
implementation of its resolution 1817 (2008) on international cooperation to
prevent trafficking and diversion of chemical precursors of heroin for illicit
use in Afghanistan.”

2

08-42000
