VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports or the Third Committee

191

R~solwion
No.

Till<

40/138
40/139

Assistance to student refugees in southern Africa (A/40/ 1007) ...... .. ....
Situation cf human rights and fundamental freedoms in El Salvador (A/40/
1007) . .. . . . . . ................. . . . .. .. . . .. . ........ . ........ . . ..
Situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Guatemala (A/40/
1007) ..... . ...... . . . . ... . . .. .. . . ........ . .. . .. . .. . . .. . .. ... . ...
Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran (A/40/ 1007) .....
Status of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide (A/40/1007) . . . . .. . .. . ........... . . ..... . . . .... .. .......
Summary or arbitrary executions (A/40/1007) ....... . . . . .. ... . ..... . . .
Declaration on the human rights of individuals who are not nationals of the
country in which they live (A/40/1007) ......... . ................. . .
Situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Chile (A/40/ l 007) .
Human rights in the administration of justice (A/40/ l 007) . ..............
Question of enforced or involuntary disappearances (A/40/1007) . .........
Measures to be taken against Nazi, Fascist and neo-Fascist activities and all
other forms of totalitarian ideologies and practices based on racial intolerance, hatred and terror (A/40/ l 007) . .. . ... . ..... . . ..... . .. .........
Human rights and mass exoduses (A/40/1007) . . .. . ... ... . ........ . . . . .

40/ 140
40/141
40/ 142
40/143
40/144
40/145
40/ 146
40/ 147
40/ 148

40/ 149

40/ 14. International Youth Year:
Development, Peace

Participation,

The General Assembly, acting as United Nations World
Conference for the International Youth Year, 2
•
Recognizing the profound importance of the direct participation of youth in shaping the future of mankind and
the valuable contribution that youth can make in all sectors of society, as well as its willingness to express its ideas
concerning the building of a better and more just world in
which it can attain the objectives of the International
Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace,
C()nsidering it necessary to disseminate among youth
the ideals of peace, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, human solidarity and dedication to the
objectives of progress and development,
Convinced that youth should be encow-aged to contribute its energies, enthusiasm and creative abilities to the
task of nation-building, the observance of the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, the realization of the
right to self-determination and national independence, the
respect for sovereignty and ·non-interference in the internal
affairs of each State, the economic, social and cultural
advancement of peoples, the implementation of a new
international economic order and the promotion of international co-operation and understanding to achieve the
objectives of the International Youth Year: Participation,
Development, Peace,
Recognizing the important role of United Nations
bodies, the specialized agencies and the regional commissions in promoting international co-operation in the field
of youth and recognizing that they should continue to give
more attention to the role of young people in the world of
today, to their ideas and initiatives and to their demands
for the world of tomorrow,
Convinced that the preparation for and observance in
1985 of the International Youth Year with the motto
..Participation, Development, Peace" have offered a useful
and significant opportunity for drawing attention to the
situation and the specific needs and aspirations of youth,
for increasing co-oper,uion at all levels in dealing with
youth issues, for undertaking concerted action pro2 See sect. l, footnote 10.

Item

Dolt of odop1iuri

Page

12

13 Decembel' 1985

247

12

13 December l 985

248

12
12

13 December 1985
13 December 1985

249
250

12
12

13 December 1985
13 December 1985

251
251

12
12
12

13 December 1985
13 December 1985
13 December 1985
13 December 1985

252
253
254
255

13 December 1985
13 December 1985

256
257

12

12
12

grammes in favour of youth and for improving the participation of young people in the study, decision-making processes and resolution of major national, regional and
international problems,
Bearing in mind that the International Youth Year has
served to mobilize efforts at the local, national, regional
and international levels in order to promote the best educational, professional and living conditions for young
people, to ensure their active participation in the overall
development of society and to encourage their participation in the preparation of new national and local policies
and programmes in accordance with the experience, conditions and priorities of each country,
Conscious that the International Youth Year has contributed to strengthening the rights, the ability and the
willingness of young people to participate in all activities
relevant to them and to promote their own interests,
Commending the organizers of international youth conferences and festivals and other specific activities devoted
to the International Youth Year for the results of those
events inspired by the motto of the International Youth
Year, "Participation, Development, Peace",
Noting with satisfaction the outcome of the World
Congress on Youth, held at Barcelona, Spain, from 8 to 15
July 1985 under the auspices of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,3
Mindful that national committees or other mechanisms
to facilitate the planning, implementation and co-ordination of the activities related to the preparation for and
observance of the International Youth Year have been
established in a majority of States,
Convinced that the timely and significant impetus generated by the activities of the International Youth Year
should be maintained and reinforced with appropriate
follow-up action at all levels,
Expressing its appreciation to the Advisory Committee
for the International Youth Year and to the United
Nations Secretariat for their important contribution to the
whole process of preparation and observance of the International Youth Year,
J See N40/768. annex.

192

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

Having considered the report of the Advisory Committee for the International Youth Year on its fourth session,
held at Vienna from 25 March to 3 April 1985,4
Having considered also the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the guidelines and additional guidelines for the improvement of channels of communication between the United Nations and youth and
youth organizations,'
l. Endorses the guidelines for further planning and
suitable follow-up in the field of youth as contained in the
report of the Advisory Committee for the International
Youth Year on its fourth session;4
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
guidelines for further planning and suitable follow-up in
the field of youth to all States, United Nations bodies, the
specialized agencies and regional commissions, as well as
to other international organizations concerned;
3. Calls upon all States, all United Nations bodies, the
specialized agencies, regional commissions and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned, in particular youth organizations, to exert all possible efforts for the implementation of the guidelines for
further planning and suitable follow-up in the field of
youth, in accordance with their experience, conditions and
priorities;
4. Urges all States to make every effort to consolidate
and build further on the results of the International Youth
Year;
5. Considers that, as the case may be, the continuing of
national committees and other appropriate co-ordination
measures at the national level devoted to the International
Youth Year could be usefuJly considered, and notes with
satisfaction the intention of national committees in many
countries to ensure a proper follow-up, including adequate
funding and the integration of the results of the Year into
future activities and policies in order to continue to pursue
the objectives of the International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace;
6. Requests the appropriate United Nations bodies and
the specialized agencies to consider taking up in their programmes every year one or more specific youth-related
projects to be elaborated in close co-operation with nongovernmental youth organizations on such themes as communication, housing, culture, youth employment and education;
7. Recommends that the Secretary-General keep under
review the youth element in the programmes of appropriate United Nations bodies and the specialized agencies;
8. Requests the Commission for Social Development
to examine, on a regular basis, specific youth issues, in
keeping with the objectives of the International Youth
• Year: Participation, Development, Peace;
9. Stresses again the importance of the active and
direct participation of youth and .youth organizations in
the activities organized at the local, national, regional and
international levels in the field of youth;
10. E mphasizes the importance of improving the
active use of the channels of communication between the
United Nations system and youth organizations, at both
the national and international levels;
11. Invites Governments again to consider the regular
inclusion of youth representatives in their national delegations to the General Assembly and other relevant United
Nations meetings;
4
A/40/256. annex.
5 A/40/631.

12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session an item entitled "Policies and pro.
grammes involving young people: Participation, Development, Peace" and to evaluate, in this framework, the
results of the International Youth Year on the basis of a
report of the Secretary-General.
80th plenary meeting
18 November 1985

.t0/15. Efforts and measures for securing the imple.
mentation and the enjoyment by youth of
human rights, particularly the right to educa•
tion and to work
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/29 of 13 November 1981,
37/49 of3 December 1982, 38/23 of22 November 1983
and 39/23 of 23 November 1984, in which it, inter alia,
recognized the need to adopt appropriate measures for
securing the implementation and the enjoyment by youth
of human rights, particularly the right to education and to
work,
Recalling also its resolution 34/ 151 of I 7 December
1979, by which it decided to designate 1985 as International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace,
Convinced that it is necessary to ensure full enjoyment
by youth of the rights stipulated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,6 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights' and the Intema•
tional Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,' with special regard to the right to education and to work,
Aware of the fact that insufficient education and the
unemployment of young people limit their ability to participate in the development process, and, in this regard,
emphasizing the importance of secondary and higher education for young people, as well as access for them to
appropriate technical and vocational guidance and training
programmes,
Expressing its serious interest in consolidating and
building further on the results of the International Youth
Year in order to contribute, inter alia, to the increasing
participation of young people in the socio-economic life of
their country,
l. Calls upon all States, all governmental and non-governmental organizations and the interested bodies of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies to pay continuous attention, in further planning and suitable follow-up
in the field of youth, to the implementation of General
Assembly resolutions 36/29, 37/49, 38/B and 39/23
relating to efforts and measures aimed at the promotion of
human rights and their enjoyment by youth, particularly
the right to education and vocational training and to work,
with a view to resolving the problem of unemployment
among youth;
2. Requests the Commission for Social Development,
in examining specific youth issues, to pay adequate attention to the enjoyment by youth of human rights, particularly the right to education and to work;
3. Invites national organs of co-ordination or organs
implementing policies and programmes in the field of
youth to give appropriate priority in the activities to be
undertaken after the International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace to the implementation and the
6 Resolution 217 A (III).
7 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
