S/2003/1055

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 October 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 31 October 2003 from the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General
In my capacity as President of the Security Council, I have the honour to
inform you that the Security Council held an open debate on 29 October 2003 on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). Thirty-seven speakers
expressed their views on the issue.
I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and the summary of
the views expressed (see annex I), along with answers to the question posed during
the meeting to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (see annex II), circulated
as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) John D. Negroponte
President of the Security Council

03-59526 (E)

041103

*
0
3
5
9
5
2
6
*

S/2003/1055

Annex I
Summary by Ambassador Negroponte, United States
representative to the United Nations, in his national capacity, of
the open debate on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on 29 October 2003
The Security Council held an open debate on Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), on women, peace and security, on 29 October 2003. The Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Jean-Marie Guéhenno, briefed the Council on
the efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to implement the
resolution. Amy Smythe, Senior Gender Adviser for the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo provided the
Council with an operational perspective of the implementation of the resolution and
spoke about lessons learned and remaining challenges.
At the request of Member States and the group of friends of resolution 1325
(2000), the United States of America has compiled the summary of key points
below. While not comprehensive, this list represents our understanding of the main
messages that came out of the discussion on 29 October.
(a) Council Members and non-members alike acknowledged that progress
has been made towards implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). However, many
speakers commented that much more needs to be done before it can be said that a
gender perspective has been incorporated into all United Nations work and that the
resolution has been fully implemented;
(b) There was an understanding that progress must be made by the Security
Council, Member States, parties to conflict and the Secretariat;
(c) Speakers called for better follow-up and made a number of suggestions
on how to achieve it, including the possibility of naming a Security Council member
to be responsible for tracking implementation;
(d) Speakers acknowledged the important role played by the Office of the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women and by the United
Nations Development Fund for Women;
(e) Speakers acknowledged the valuable role that civil society actors and
non-governmental organizations have played, and will continue to play, in
advancing implementation;
(f)
stressed;

The value of bringing a field perspective to Council discussions was

(g) Security Council members acknowledged that the Council needs to do
more to include references to gender, where appropriate, in its resolutions, mission
mandates and trip reports, as well as to meet with women in the field when
travelling on council missions;
(h) Speakers noted the need for more women to serve as peacekeepers,
military observers and civilian police and understood their national responsibilities
to identify and nominate women for these critical duties;

2

S/2003/1055

(i) It was also emphasized that the Secretariat must do better at assigning
women to senior positions, including as special representatives of the SecretaryGeneral and deputy special representatives. A number of States highlighted that
there is only one woman currently serving as a special representative and noted that
the level of participation by women is not acceptable. Speakers also recognized the
responsibility of Member States to recommend qualified women as candidates for
these senior posts;
(j) Member States positively acknowledged that the Gender Adviser post in
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations had been filled on an interim basis but
stressed the importance of the post being filled on a permanent basis as quickly as
possible;
(k) Speakers also appreciated the importance of the role that full-time gender
advisers in the field play in making real progress on gender mainstreaming. Several
speakers also called for gender advisers to be assigned to all peacekeeping missions;
(l) Speakers emphasized the importance of gender training for United
Nations peacekeeping personnel. It was also noted that States that contribute civilian
police, military observers and peacekeeping forces should provide pre-deployment
briefings on gender awareness;
(m) Several speakers noted the important role that regional organizations can
play in helping to implement resolution 1325 (2000);
(n) Speakers noted the need for more systematic documentation of the role
that women have played in conflict resolution and peace-building efforts;
(o) Member States acknowledged the important contributions that the
Secretary-General’s report and the report of the independent panel of experts have
provided to efforts to advance implementation and indicated that they were looking
forward to the presentation of the Secretary-General’s 2004 report.

3

S/2003/1055

Annex II
Letter dated 31 October 2003 from the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
During the open meeting on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) (women,
peace and security), you requested that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
prepare written answers to questions raised during the afternoon part of the meeting.
To this end, please find attached the questions raised by Member States in the
afternoon of 29 October regarding peacekeeping operations, with accompanying
answers (see enclosure). The first three questions, raised by Australia, were
addressed to the United Nations Secretariat as a whole; you may wish to request
inputs directly from the other departments.
(Signed) Jean-Marie Guéhenno
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations

4

S/2003/1055

Enclosure
Questions raised by Member States during the open meeting on
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on 29 October 2003
Questions raised by Australia and addressed to the United Nations Secretariat
1.

What are the main hurdles in achieving the implementing of resolution 1325
(2000) in current peacekeeping operations?
Some of the main hurdles in achieving the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in current peacekeeping operations relate to the low number of women
personnel in missions, lack of structures to mainstream gender and poor
understanding among staff of how to integrate a gender dimension in their daily
work.
Women currently represent one third of all professional staff in peacekeeping
missions, and the number of women decreases with increasing seniority. This is a
problem that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations is addressing in-house.
However, we recognize that we need to be more effective in the coming year in
identifying suitable women candidates for senior positions and in recruiting
Professional-level women in missions. It is hoped that Member States will continue
their efforts to provide more women civilian police and military personnel to
peacekeeping operations. Member States also need to include women and men with
experience in gender-based crimes to help us address the high rates of violence
against women that are common in post-conflict situations.
Multidimensional missions with gender experts, such as in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste and Kosovo, have made
significant achievements in implementing resolution 1325 (2000). The hurdles that
such missions are facing relate more to their work with outside partners and the
challenge of helping such partners move beyond paper commitments to concrete
implementation of the resolution. To strengthen systems to mainstream gender at the
mission level, the Department will establish in the year to come a network of gender
focal points.
The Department is currently producing a number of guidelines on how to
integrate a gender perspective in the different functional areas of its peacekeeping
operations. This should help staff take account of gender issues in their day-to-day
work. To this end, a gender resource package is in the final stages of being
developed. It will cover a wide range of topics, from general information on gender
concepts and practical checklists highlighting gender issues in peacekeeping to
guidelines on establishing gender units in the field. In addition, in the coming year
we will produce a field manual on gender issues for military commanders, as well as
one on gender issues in mine action.

2.

Has the United Nations Secretariat put into place any institutional mechanisms
to monitor progress made in implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)?
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations is a member of the Inter-Agency
Task Force on Women, Peace and Security, which is coordinating United Nations
agency efforts on women, peace and security. In addition, the Department

5

S/2003/1055

established an action plan to implement resolution 1325 (2000), which will be
updated in the coming months.
3.

What efforts are being made to ensure that the recommendations in resolution
1325 (2000) are mainstreamed into the work programmes of all United Nations
agencies that have a role in conflict and post-conflict situations?
The post of Gender Adviser at Department of Peacekeeping Operations
headquarters has been filled in the interim, while the recruitment process goes
ahead. In addition, new missions, such as those in Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire, have
planned for gender expertise among their staff. The network of gender focal points
to be established this year will assist the Department in monitoring its progress in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
Questions raised by Canada and addressed to Mr. Guéhenno

4.

What are Mr. Guéhenno’s views on the prospect of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations undertaking an initiative similar to that of the
Department for Disarmament Affairs and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to facilitate a stronger integration of gender considerations
in the activities of the Department?
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations established an action plan to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), which will be updated in the coming months.
The review of the action plan will be completed after the Department has taken
stock of current gender mainstreaming activities at Headquarters and in the field.

5.

We would be interested in further information on efforts undertaken to ensure
that gender perspectives are mainstreamed in all training modules and not
confined to gender-specific training modules. We believe this would contribute to
tackling this issue.
At present, the military Training and Evaluation Service of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has produced a lengthy generic gender and peacekeeping
training module that covers a range of topics, including gender awareness and
gender and human rights. These gender modules are currently part of a standardized
generic training package for military personnel and civilian police, to be used in predeployment training in Member States. Discussions are under way with the military
Training and Evaluation Service to ensure that the gender dimension is brought out
in each of the other modules. This point will also be raised during upcoming
planning meetings with the civilian training unit, which is designing a generic,
standardized training package for civilian peacekeeping personnel.

6.

We would be interested in being informed on the follow-up action taken by the
Secretariat to convene the meeting requested by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations to discuss ways and means of meeting challenges in the
areas of conduct and discipline and minimizing misconduct.
Following a thorough review of existing policies and procedures on
disciplinary issues for all categories of personnel, in July, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations provided all missions with an updated set of disciplinary
directives. These cover the issue of sexual abuse and exploitation, as well as other

6

S/2003/1055

types of serious misconduct. In the coming months, the Department will review
existing efforts to prevent and respond to sexual abuse and exploitation at the
mission level, and to identify good practice for replication elsewhere. Following this
stock-taking exercise, the Department will inform Member States on progress made
and its strategy for addressing the problem of sexual abuse and exploitation at the
earliest opportunity.
Question raised by Canada and addressed to Amy Smythe
7.

We would be interested in Amy Smythe’s views on challenges she has faced in
ensuring that information finds its way from the field to the Council.
When the Security Council visited Bunia in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo this year, they heard first-hand accounts from women of how the conflict had
affected their lives. Many of these accounts left a deep impression on the Council
members. However, the final Council report on the visit made only passing
reference to how the conflict had affected their lives.
Request for further information from Indonesia

8.

We would like to have further information on plans to establish a database of
gender specialists and women’s groups and networks in countries and regions in
conflict.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Political
Affairs have established an “eminent persons roster” to facilitate the identification
of senior personnel for peacekeeping missions. In addition, the Inter-Agency Task
Force on Women, Peace and Security, with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women taking lead roles, has been working on designing a
database of gender experts. The roster of P-2 to P-5 gender experts would primarily
be used by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations but would also be made
available to other entities. The aim of the initiative is to improve the Department’s
access to gender expertise for peacekeeping operations. A total of 2,480 applications
have been received so far for the generic posts under social affairs/gender from the
P-2 to P-5 grades: these are currently under review.

7
