A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/155
26 January 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 146
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/52/647)]
52/155. Draft guiding principles for international negotiations
The General Assembly,
Recalling the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations concerning the maintenance
of international peace and security and the promotion of cooperation among States, as well as Article 13,
paragraph 1, of the Charter, whereby the General Assembly is called upon to initiate studies and make
recommendations for the purpose of promoting international cooperation,
Taking into account the objectives of the United Nations Decade of International Law,
Reaffirming the provisions of the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,1
Bearing in mind that in their negotiations States should be guided by the relevant principles of
international law,
Bearing in mind the important role that constructive and effective negotiations can play in attaining the
purposes of the Charter by contributing to the management of international relations, the peaceful settlement
of disputes and the creation of new international norms of conduct of States,
Noting that the identification and harmonization of guiding principles for international negotiations could
contribute to enhancing the predictability of negotiating parties, reducing uncertainty and promoting an
atmosphere of trust at negotiations, and could offer a frame of reference for negotiations,

1

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

98-76225

/...

A/RES/52/155
Page 2

Having considered the sub-item entitled "Draft guiding principles for international negotiations",
1. Underlines the importance of conducting effective negotiations in managing international relations,
in the peaceful settlement of disputes and in the creation of new international norms of conduct of States;
2. Takes note of the draft guiding principles for international negotiations contained in document
A/52/141 and the comments and proposals made during the consideration of the question, including the need
for its further consideration;
3. Decides to continue the consideration of the question in the Working Group on the United Nations
Decade of International Law during the fifty-third session of the General Assembly;
4. Invites all States and relevant international organizations to submit in writing to the SecretaryGeneral, before 1 August 1998, comments and proposals on the content of the draft guiding principles for
international negotiations;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the comments and proposals mentioned in paragraphs
2 and 4 above to the Working Group for its consideration;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session, under the item entitled "United
Nations Decade of International Law", the sub-item entitled "Draft guiding principles for international
negotiations".
72nd plenary meeting
15 December 1997

98-76225

/...
