asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6939

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6939th meeting
Friday, 22 March 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin/Mr. Iliichev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Kayinamura
Mr. Menan
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2013/72)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-26793 (E)

*1326793*

S/PV.6939

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2013/72)
The President (spoke in Russian): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, and I request the Chief of Protocol to escort him
to his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, was escorted to a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Russian): I also welcome
the presence in the Chamber of His Excellency Mr. Ivan
Mrkić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Hashim Thaçi to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2013/72, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: The report before the Council
(S/2013/72) details the key events and the activities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) that occurred between 16 October
2012 and 15 January 2013.
Since I last addressed the Council, on 27 November
(S/PV.6872), we have seen some important positive

2

developments, thanks to the direct Belgrade-Pristina
engagement in the high-level political dialogue
facilitated by the European Union (EU). Since October,
Prime Ministers Ivica Dačić and Hashim Thaçi, who
are present in the Chamber today, have met for a total
of seven rounds of dialogue in Brussels. In addition,
Presidents Tomislav Nikolić and Atifete Jahjaga met
for the first time on 6 February as part of that same
process, signaling the full political engagement of
both sides. Together, these meetings have marked an
essential — indeed, historic — new chapter in the
collective effort to overcome the legacy of the past
conflict. The leaders involved have demonstrated
political courage as well as foresight by their
participation, and they deserve strong recognition for
having embarked on such a difficult yet indispensable
process.
Progress has emerged from these meetings, in
particular the most recent, the last of which took
place only two days ago. Accordingly, I am very
pleased that today the Council has the opportunity to
take stock of the achievements made so far. Detailed
discussions on the further implementation of the
agreement on the integrated management of crossing
points have addressed more complex questions, such
as the management of fees and duties at those points.
The parties’ liaison officers are expected to begin
work soon within the European Commission offices in
Belgrade and Pristina.
More recently, discussions have shifted to
addressing the matter of Serbian institutions operating
within Kosovo, as well as a range of difficult issues
specific to the situation of northern Kosovo. It is my
hope that the parties will remain steadfast in their
determination to reach acceptable compromises on
such highly sensitive issues, and find viable solutions
that can better serve the interests and aspirations of all
communities living in Kosovo.
During this period of encouraging political
progress, there have also been significant challenges to
face on the ground, including adverse security incidents
and frequent instances of inflammatory rhetoric and
posturing from various quarters. The latter have not
only put unhelpful strains on the atmosphere around the
political process, but in some cases have also threatened
efforts to ensure that agreements are translated into
practice. In the face of such developments, we have
joined others in continuing to urge both sides not simply
to remain committed to the dialogue, but also to exert

13-26793

S/PV.6939

more active leadership in order to temper the emotions
and reactions of their constituencies.
In that light, I wish to stress today that if this vital
political engagement is to fulfil its maximum potential,
it needs to be accompanied by strenuous, constant and
coherent work on the ground on the part of both the
mandated international presences and local leaders. For
its part, UNMIK continues to implement a broad-based
strategic review of all its activities and to enhance
functional coordination with its international partners.
Our goal is to help ensure that the political process is
reflected in the realities we face daily in Kosovo as
much as it is reflective of them.
I wish now to briefly highlight some key ongoing
issues, where continued attention and action must
accompany and complement he steps being taken by
those directly engaged in the political dialogue.
There have been episodes of increased tension
in northern Kosovo both during the reporting period
and in the two months since. Some of these have been
motivated, at least in part, by local confusion and
misunderstanding about the substance of the political
talks in Brussels. Unfortunately, that uncertainty was
aggravated at times by very ill-considered statements
from some local leaders. We and our partners continue
to urge Belgrade and Pristina to significantly enhance
their communication with the population living in the
north. At the same time, we are urging local political
leaders to act more responsibly, in a manner that will help
to protect the long-term interests of their constituencies.
With all interlocutors, we have stressed how important
it is that they base their public assessments strictly on
reliable information and renounce the chronic practices
of inflammatory rhetoric and short-term point-scoring.
In northern Mitrovica, there has been a very
troubling and extended series of incidents involving
the use of explosive devices, most of them apparently
targeting properties. Sadly, however, on 4 February
one such incident, in Mitrovica’s mixed Three Towers
neighbourhood, resulted in light shrapnel injuries to
two children at play in their home. Their family has
since moved away from the city permanently.
An ongoing lack of consensus about municipal
authority in northern Mitrovica has also continued
to cause volatility in the mixed areas. Competing
assertions of authority by the administrative office in
northern Mitrovica and the parallel Kosovska Mitrovica
municipality continue to produce persistent tension

13-26793

and occasional confrontation on the ground. I am
concerned that a stand-off over housing construction
and reconstruction works, spearheaded by the southern
Mitrovica municipality in the Kroi i Vitakut/Brđani
neighbourhood of Zvečan/Zveçan municipality, may
continue during the coming spring.
As I have detailed in previous briefings, ending
budget allocations to the UNMIK administrative office
in Mitrovica has undermined the most functional
channel available to address such problems through
consensus. Despite that development, my international
staff continue to carry out the important non-executive
functions of the United Nations administration in
the areas of local facilitation, conflict prevention
and mediation. Coordinated preparations are under
way — involving the EU Special Representative,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation, the
International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR),
ourselves and other mandated actors — to respond
appropriately and collectively so as to prevent any
adverse developments in that area. It is very unfortunate
and unacceptable that the personnel of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX)
continue to be constrained in their access to all areas
necessary to fully discharge their mandate, particularly
given that EULEX is now intensifying its focus on
improved investigative practices.
We were deeply distressed by the wave of
vandalism and destruction that took place across
Kosovo between 13 and 22 January, during which
around 200 gravestones in several Serbian Orthodox
cemeteries were damaged or destroyed, in some cases
by use of explosives or firearms. During this same
period, a monument dedicated to Kosovo Serbs and
Kosovo Albanians killed during the Second World War
was destroyed by earthmover in broad daylight before
an applauding crowd. These reprehensible actions were
unbefitting Kosovo, as were some imprudent efforts to
justify them in the press by making reference to actions
undertaken elsewhere.
In this respect, however, I was gratified by an
unambiguous and timely statement issued by the Kosovo
police. Representatives of the international community
unanimously condemned such wanton acts and, together
with UNMIK staff, were instrumental in encouraging
more proactive public responses from local and central
political authorities. Further appropriate and welcome
actions have been taken by the Kosovo authorities,

3

S/PV.6939

including the allocation of public funds for the repair
and reconstruction of the graves and monuments.
Understandably, the Serb community and the
Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo remain deeply
concerned by the expressions of hatred and intolerance
that accompanied these and other acts targeting
Orthodox sites and symbols. Regrettably, the level of
attendance at Orthodox Christmas services in some
parts of Kosovo fell significantly following public
threats and a few protests organized by some radical
groups in Kosovo.
The international community is particularly
concerned over the continuing rejection by the
municipal leadership in Dečani of a decision taken by
the Special Chamber of the Supreme Court of Kosovo
on 27 December. The decision rejected the claims over
a parcel of land by two socially owned enterprises
against Serbia and the Visoki Dečani Monastery. After
summarily suspending relations with the monastic
community, municipal leaders not only did far too
little to restrain aggressive reactions against the
court’s decision, but also effectively condoned them.
Such reactions included an attempt by a handful of
demonstrators to enter the grounds of Visoki Dečani on
8 February, as well as several attempts to place offensive
placards on its walls. Supported by KFOR, the Kosovo
police have so far been able to prevent harm coming to
the monastery; however, much stronger leadership from
politicians and public officials is needed to demonstrate
that universal values and respect for the rule of law will
be defended in practice.
Too many serious crimes in northern Kosovo,
as well as those affecting communities in the rest of
Kosovo, continue to go unsolved and remain a matter
of very sober concern. Judicial performance in Kosovo
continues to be another significant stumbling block,
aside from the political disputes. These issues were
amply highlighted in the most recent report of the
European Commission to the European Parliament and
Council on progress in fulfilling requirements for a
visa liberalization road map. Unsolved cases inevitably
become subject to political manipulation and lead to the
build-up of public frustration.
The political dialogue is now at a critical stage, and
the parties are poised to make fundamental progress.
Alongside this, stability on the ground remains fragile
and is likely to remain so while these talks delve into
topics that are both the most sensitive and the most

4

essential. I trust that the progress being achieved will
be welcomed by the membership of the Council, and
that they will moreover offer unequivocal support to the
parties to remain steadfast, regardless of the inevitable
challenges and setbacks along the way. Likewise, the
international community should be well prepared
to place its collective weight and support behind all
agreements reached mutually by the parties, and to
fully support their implementation.
As I have outlined today, and as also detailed in the
report, incidents and tensions continue to arise on the
ground, underscoring the need for energy and effort to
be rededicated by all international presences, alongside
the negotiations. Simply put, it is imperative that the
inevitable problems and setbacks on the ground,
however difficult they may be for those affected, not
be permitted to undermine the atmosphere and the
potential for progress in the vital political talks.
I ask that the Council pursue opportunities to make
use of its authority and influence with political leaders
on all sides in order to send clear and unified signals
regarding its high expectations and of its readiness to
support and reward constructive actions. Far too much
is at stake to permit short-term political challenges,
anxieties and setbacks to put at risk the fundamental
and historic opportunity that now stands before the
parties. Effective, efficient and coherent work by
all international presences is needed to promote and
sustain the conditions in which political talks may
achieve their true potential.
I wish to conclude my remarks today by thanking
you, Sir, and all members of the Security Council
for your close attention and support for the work of
UNMIK, including for our efforts to correctly tailor
our contributions to the evolving circumstances on the
ground.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Zarif
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dačić, Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).
I would also like to take this opportunity to express
my gratitude to Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United

13-26793

S/PV.6939

Nations Interim Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his
work to date.
The Republic of Serbia considers UNMIK as the
key factor in establishing peace and stability in Kosovo
and Metohija. We strongly support its activities aimed
at ensuring living conditions for all population groups
there.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia very
much appreciates the efforts of the international
community to establish a constructive atmosphere
in the talks between Belgrade and Pristina under the
auspices of the European Union.
I have studied carefully the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of UNMIK from 16 October 2012 to
15 January 2013 (S/2013/72). It is with regret that I note
that the information set out in the report continues to
reflect the very precarious and sensitive position of the
Serbian community in Kosovo and Metohija, as well as
the existence of considerable security concerns.
The Republic of Serbia is firmly committed to
building peace, security and stability in the region,
in its quest to establish a foundation for a common
European future. On a number of occasions during
the period under consideration, the Government of the
Republic of Serbia confirmed its readiness to make a
substantial and constructive contribution to overcoming
outstanding issues and to offer solutions that meet the
needs of all population groups.
My country’s concerted policy is based on seeking
compromise while actively defending our national
interests, with equal respect for the legitimate rights of
both Serbs and Albanians living in Kosovo and Metohija.
Accordingly, we continue to oppose unilateral steps
from all quarters — for example, the decision of the
Assembly of Kosovo to ask for an international country
code for Kosovo through the Republic of Albania, even
though negotiations regarding telecommunications are
pending.
We shall continue to promote and carry out our
policy based on the search for peaceful solutions through
a constructive dialogue with Pristina, which has already
yielded significant results. For the Government of the
Republic of Serbia, dialogue is the only way to find
sustainable solutions for the problems that the people
of Kosovo and Metohija face on a daily basis. We are
resolved to fully implement the agreements reached
thus far, and we are open to talks on all issues.

13-26793

The Republic of Serbia has embarked upon
dialogue out of a desire to achieve concrete progress
in the talks between Belgrade and Pristina. A number
of very important issues were discussed at the recent
meetings held in Brussels, including the functioning
of the agreement on the integrated management of
crossing points as well as the exchange and the status
of liaison officers.
The meeting in Brussels between Serbian President
Tomislav Nikolić and Ms. Atifete Jahjaga once again
clearly confirmed our political positions spelled out in
the resolution of the National Assembly of the Republic
of Serbia. In line with that resolution, the specificities
of the territory of Kosovo and Metohija are recognized
in accordance with Council resolution 1244 (1999).
However, it also notes the existence of the Serbian and
other communities that should have certain autonomous
status.
The Republic of Serbia believes that the United
Nations should continue to perform its key role of
coordinating all international actors engaged in the
territory of Kosovo and Metohija under its aegis. We
believe that the role of UNMIK in stabilizing the
situation in the region is irreplaceable. Its current
mandate must therefore remain unchanged and, if
possible, strengthened, irrespective of projected
budgetary restrictions. We support an increase in
UNMIK’s activities, as well as a heightened presence
for the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and more efficient cooperation between
two missions. It is of the utmost importance that the
UNMIK Administration in northern Mitrovica continue
to fulfil its mandate and find a status-neutral way for
the missions in Kosovo and Metohija to function, as
provided for in resolution 1244 (1999).
For the Republic of Serbia, the continued financing
of the UNMIK Administration in Mitrovica is of
particular importance. We deem unacceptable any
further limitations on the activities of the Administration
for reasons of financial constraints due to the cessation
of financing by the provisional institutions of selfgovernment in Pristina. After all, UNMIK is the only
legitimate international presence that the people in the
north of Kosovo and Metohija continue to trust.
The Republic of Serbia has great interest in
strengthening the political composition of UNMIK,
in particular with respect to questions of special
importance for the Serbian community. In that regard,

5

S/PV.6939

special mention should be made of the protection of
cultural and religious heritage, in particular of the
Serbian Orthodox Church, improving the level of legal
and security protection and realizing the right to free
return and reconciliation. In fact, those questions
form the fundamental basis for the establishment of
conditions necessary for normal coexistence among all
communities in Kosovo and Metohija.

January of this year, 102 tombstones were damaged or
destroyed in Orthodox graveyards. As a rule, no one
was held accountable or punished for those incidents.
Of particular importance is the increase in the number
of registered ethnically motivated low-intensity crimes,
such as threats, intimidation and theft. Such “lowintensity” crimes contribute to further limiting the
freedom of movement.

A few days ago, we commemorated the ninth
anniversary of the March pogrom during which
19 persons were killed, 4,000 Serbs were expelled
and 6 towns and 10 villages were ethnically cleansed,
while over 150 religious sites of the Serbian Orthodox
Church, of which 34 date back to the Middle Ages, were
damaged or destroyed. Some of them are of particular
cultural significance and under the protection of
UNESCO. According to United Nations estimates,
51,000 individuals took part in the pogrom, and none
of them were held accountable. For that reason, we call
for the resumption of the investigation, which would
lead to the identification of perpetrators, as well as the
instigators of the March pogrom, so that the crime does
not remain yet another crime without punishment.

In the period under review, the continued increase in
the number of detentions and arrests of members of the
Serbian community — without any explanation of the
legal basis on which such warrants were issued — has
been the cause of additional concern and anxiety. The
unlawful detention and beating of 11 Serbian youths in
Gracanica on Christmas Eve further heightened concern
and fear among the Serbian population in Kosovo and
Metohija. Those incidents create additional pressure
on, and distrust within, the Serbian community, while
at the same time being gross violations of the basic
human rights guaranteed to each and every individual
by the Charter of the United Nations. They are equally
unacceptable from the perspective of the values upon
which the European Union is based.

In the period under consideration, the Republic
of Serbia once again demonstrated its willingness
and readiness to participate actively in, and to make
a contribution to, overcoming the existing problems.
The main goal of that constructive approach is to find
a solution that will improve life for all communities
in Kosovo and Metohija while also preserving the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Republic of
Serbia.

Although they honour all previously agreed
procedures, officials and eminent public persons of
the Republic of Serbia are not allowed to enter and
stay in Kosovo and Metohija, in contravention of the
basic human right to freedom of movement. I would in
particular point out that, last January, even the President
of Republic of Serbia was banned from visiting Kosovo
and Metohija and attending the Christmas liturgy.

I regret to note that, in spite of the long-standing
international presence, the situation on the ground has
not improved substantially. The main problems we
continue to face include limits to, and the prevention
of, the freedom of movement, a lack of security, the
impossibility of using the Serbian language, difficult
access to institutions, a lack of the necessary conditions
for the sustainable return of refugees, constant threats
to Serbian cultural and religious heritage, and the illegal
seizure of property owned by the Republic of Serbia.
Those problems are surely the most important
factors negatively affecting the quality of life itself.
According to the available data, 93 ethnically motivated
attacks were recorded between 1 October 2012 and
31 January 2013, in which one person was killed and
20 persons were injured. Within just a few days in

6

It is with regret that I must note that the process
of the return of internally persons from Kosovo and
Metohija is very slow. According to the most recent
data, for 2012, only 302 persons of Serbian nationality
returned to Kosovo and Metohija, while there were 464
such returns in 2011. That data provides telling evidence
of a continued reduction in the number of returnees.
Paradoxically, the international community shows less
and less interest in the problem. In particular, I would
like to point to the October 2012 report of the Mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, which states that the frequent plundering
of uninhabited houses, the intimidation of returnees
and the desecration of places of religious and cultural
importance have very negatively affected potential
returnees’ perception of security.

13-26793

S/PV.6939

The Government of the Republic of Serbia continues
to be concerned about the manner in which privatization
is implemented in Kosovo and Metohija by the so-called
Kosovo Privatization Agency. Of particular concern
is the privatization of public and social enterprises in
Serbian communities. The privatization of the large
Trepca mining complex, currently postponed, is illegal
and contrary to resolution 1244 (1999). The Republic
of Serbia holds majority ownership of the complex,
as well as of other Serbian enterprises. In addition, as
guarantor, the Republic of Serbia continues to make
payments to the International Monetary Fund, the
World Bank and the Paris and London Clubs for loans
to enterprises in Kosovo and Metohija.
I take this opportunity to draw the Council’s
attention to the disturbing facts presented in paragraph
31 of the report on the work of UNMIK, which indicates
that there is an increase in the number of complaints
against police and prosecution officials for inefficiency
in investigating crimes affecting minority communities.
Likewise, the reform of the judiciary and justice systems
in Kosovo and Metohija — embarked upon recently, as
indicated in paragraph 28 of the report — has already
been criticized by the international community.
The inadequate level of development in the area of
the rule of law is referred to in the annex to the SecretaryGeneral’s report — on the work of EULEX — which
draws attention to the “Compact”. Once again, the
question arises as to the status-neutrality of that EULEX
act, especially at this very sensitive moment when
each and every inconsiderate and biased move can
cause unforeseeable consequences. I should therefore
like to recall that, under the Secretary-General’s sixpoint plan, UNMIK is obliged to oversee the process
of the transfer of powers to EULEX. However, it is
also obliged to see to it that the principle of the statusneutrality of EULEX is maintained.

professional and impartial way, while bearing in mind
in particular the information collected by UNMIK with
regard to the destruction of evidence. We continue to
call for more significant role for the United Nations in
the investigation.
We consider it necessary that UNMIK continue to
be present in Kosovo and Metohija at an appropriate
strength so that, among other things, the Security Council
can continue to be effectively informed, considering
that the United Nations plays an irreplaceable role in
providing legitimacy during the process of seeeking a
comprehensive solution.
Without respect for the basic human and other rights
of the non-Albanian population in Kosovo and Metohija,
without protection for their interests and cultural and
religious heritage, and without a full implementation
of European standards in those areas, the desired goal
of creating a secure and safe multinational society will
remain unrealized.
In order to achieve lasting peace in the region, we
must find a comprehensive solution for the question
of Kosovo and Metohija. Reconciliation between
Serbs and Albanians calls for difficult decisions and
compromise by both sides.
The meetings held thus far in Brussels and the
demonstrated readiness to achieve compromise are
proof of the commitment of the Republic of Serbia to
building confidence between the two sides. My country
will continue to cooperate in good faith, at both the
technical and the political levels. With a lasting solution
for sustainable peace based on mutually acceptable
compromises as its ultimate goal, Serbia is committed
to moving towards its European future and to the
process designed to bring about lasting peace between
Serbs and Albanians.

We have recently witnessed even more instances
of desecrations of Serbian tombstones and cultural
monuments in Kosovo and Metohija. Such incidents are
telling evidence of the need for the continued presence
of the Kosovo Force in Kosovo and Metohija.

After years of conflict and tension in the Balkans,
our region has yet to enter a new era of cooperation,
confidence-building and dialogue. The Republic of
Serbia is strongly committed to the continuation of the
process of reconciliation as a key element necessary for
the establishment of regional peace and stability.

I should again like to point to the importance of
carrying out a full and efficient investigation of the
allegations of trafficking in human organs set out in the
report by Mr. Dick Marty. To that end, Serbia is ready
to continue to cooperate with the EULEX investigation
team. The truth must be established in the utmost

However, strong political will is of the utmost
importance for there to be tangible and sustainable
development of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina, as is political courage and readiness on the
part of all participants in the dialogue to achieve
compromise. Serbia is fully committed to the

13-26793

7

S/PV.6939

success of that dialogue; it is not ready, however, for
humiliation and double standards. I do hope, however,
that the dialogue in Brussels, with the support of the
international community, will bring about a just,
lasting and sustainable solution, and that we will all
turn towards the future.
In conclusion, I wish to underline that Serbia’s
readiness to participate in the dialogue does not
mean that it will change its principled position on the
unilaterally declared independence of Kosovo. The
dialogue is status-neutral. Any agreement reached
in Brussels will not lead to the Republic of Serbia’s
recognition of the unilaterally declared independence
of Kosovo. We would like to convey that message to all
the countries that have not recognized the unilaterally
declared independence of Kosovo, as well as to thank
them for their principled and consistent position.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Prime
Minister Dačić for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Thaçi.
Mr. Thaçi (spoke in Albanian; English interpretation
provided by the delegation): It is my pleasure to address
the Security Council today concerning the latest
developments in the Republic of Kosovo. Allow me to
begin by expressing my great gratitude for the ongoing
efforts of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on behalf of
peace and progress in Kosovo and the Balkans.
Before turning to the main points of my
statement — namely, the progress made in Kosovo
since the previous reporting period and in consolidating
Kosovo’s statehood — allow me to recall to the
Council that, just a few weeks ago, Kosovo’s citizens
and institutions solemnly commemorated the fifth
anniversary of our declaration of independence. In that
time, Kosovo has made considerable progress in many
areas. Full credit for this achievement goes to the people
of the Republic of Kosovo, who were able to overcome
the effects of years of systematic repression and ethnic
cleansing and look forward to a prosperous future.
I would like to take this opportunity to express
our highest appreciation to all the States and other
international actors who contributed greatly to our
democracy, freedom and progress. Let us not forget,
in this respect, the leading role of the United States
of America, all the States members of the European
Union and NATO and all the countries worldwide that
have proudly recognized the Republic of Kosovo and

8

thus enabled Kosovo to take its rightful place among
the free nations of the world. Special acknowledgment
goes to the United Nations, whose support was crucial,
first in building independent institutional structures
in Kosovo from 1999 to 2007; then in facilitating
negotiations for a final settlement of Kosovo’s status
from 2005 to 2007 and former President Ahtisaari’s
package as a constitutional and political reflection of
modern Kosovo; and finally, confirming the legality
of the declaration of independence of the Republic of
Kosovo through the affirmative advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice of 22 July 2010.
Thus began a new chapter in the history of the
newest State in Europe — a State with a difficult past
marked by many sacrifices, but with the intention
of being an equal player in the democratic world, a
prosperous, developed, fair, safe State of which future
generations can be proud, regardless of their race,
ethnicity or religion.
On this fifth anniversary of independence, the
State of Kosovo has become stronger, thanks to the end
of international supervision and the assumption by the
institutions and citizens of Kosovo of responsibility for
all matters. That is additional proof of the State-building
maturity of the citizens of Kosovo. Kosovo, as an
independent and sovereign State, is a reality that has
already been accepted and has become a factor of
peace and stability by contributing to regional and
international processes. Despite its difficult birth as a
State, Kosovo is one of the most successful examples
of state-building in the history of the United Nations,
and the result of conscience and international justice.
Kosovo’s independence is as the result, on the one hand,
of the combination of continuous efforts of the sacrifice
of the people of Kosovo for freedom and dignity, and
on the other, of the contribution and support of the
international community to end the chapter of the
violent breakup of the former Yugoslavia.
The consolidation of Kosovo’s statehood is
tangible. Kosovo is now recognized by more than half
of United Nations Member States, and the spread of its
recognition has proven to be irreversible. Many other
countries are in the process of recognizing Kosovo’s
statehood and independence, and I can assure them
that that is the most just decision they can make for
Kosovo and its citizens. I recall that these recognitions
and other recognitions to follow derive from our right
to statehood, confirmed by the International Court of
Justice in The Hague, from the constructive role Kosovo

13-26793

S/PV.6939

plays in strengthening peace and stability in the Balkan
region, and from our commitment to the implementation
of the Ahtisaari plan and the protection of minorities in
accordance with the highest international standards.
In this respect, after joining the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development on 27 February,
the Republic of Kosovo has become a member of the
Regional Cooperation Council, an umbrella organization
for regional cooperation in South-East Europe that
has 46 members. With this membership, the Republic
of Kosovo has embarked upon an irreversible path
towards integration into the European Union, because
the Regional Cooperation Council — as successor to
the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe is the main
instrument of pre-accession into the European Union.
Kosovo will have the same rights of representation,
voting and signing as all other States members of
that Council. In addition, Kosovo will benefit in
terms of the social and institutional strengthening of
its human potential, and will enjoy the support of a
number of social and economic initiatives, including
investment facilities, development initiatives for smalland medium-sized enterprises, trade liberalization,
improvements in public health, social dialogue and
other reforms.
In terms of accession to international organizations,
let me inform the Council that on 22 January the
Council of Europe adopted a resolution paving the way
for the establishment of direct formal relations with
the Republic of Kosovo. The resolution allows direct
cooperation, especially in the key areas of human
rights, freedom of expression and the protection of
cultural heritage. That act is important because it will
directly strengthen the rule of law. Furthermore, the
Assembly of Kosovo will be able to directly monitor
the work of the Assembly of the Council of Europe. As
of today, 34 of the 47 members of the Council of Europe
have recognized the Republic of Kosovo.
Internal developments in Kosovo have been
characterized by political and economic stability. Let me
emphasize that Kosovo continues to maintain financial
stability and sustainable economic growth despite the
ongoing global crisis. Moreover, a free market economy
and market security for foreign investors are important
foundations for increasing the welfare of the citizens of
Kosovo.
As indicated in the annex to the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/72), Kosovo has undertaken

13-26793

significant judicial reforms that came into force on
1 January through legislation such as the Law on Courts,
the new Criminal Code and the new Criminal Procedure
Code. Those reforms are compatible with European
standards and as such are aimed at strengthening the
sustainability of the judicial and prosecutorial sector in
Kosovo, in full cooperation with European expertise.
In the context of the war on corruption, on
11 February a law was enacted by the Assembly to
increase powers to seize assets gained from criminal
acts. A law for the prevention of money-laundering
and terrorist financing has also been adopted by the
Assembly. The Assembly of Kosovo also approved a
new anti-corruption strategy on 11 February. By late
2012, strategies and action plans had been adopted for
the fight against organized crime, terrorism and drug
trafficking, and on integrated border management.
Considerable progress has been made in relation
to the protection of cultural and religious heritage.
On 12 February, the Government of Kosovo, and in
particular the Ministry of Environment, Mining and
Spatial Planning, signed an administrative instruction
for the establishment of an implementation and
monitoring council. The establishment of the council
provides for more focused monitoring of Serbian
religious and cultural heritage institutions, and is
among the priorities derived from the feasibility
study for the start of negotiations on the Stabilization
and Association Agreement. It also contributes to the
normalization of relations between the institutions of
Kosovo and the Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo.
The implementation and monitoring council will
assist and monitor the implementation of the legal
provisions of the Republic of Kosovo regarding the
protection of Serbian religious and cultural heritage in
Kosovo, including in particular the provisions of the
Law on Special Protected Areas, the Historic Centre
of Prizren and Hoçë e Madhe Village. The council,
set up by the legislation of the Republic of Kosovo
and supported by the President Ahtisaari package, is
co-chaired by the Government, the European Union,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the Serbian Orthodox Church. This year,
my Government has allocated an initial €100,000 for
the operation of that mechanism. The European Union
and the United States of America have welcomed the
overall progress.

9

S/PV.6939

Through the Ministry of Communities and Returns,
Kosovo’s Government has continued to provide
financial support for initiatives aimed at the return and
reintegration of minorities in Kosovo. Building houses
is a clear example of the ongoing efforts of the Republic
of Kosovo to accommodate returnees of different
communities — providing decent living conditions that
will, in turn, have a positive effect on other aspects
of life, such as employment, health and education.
Kosovo’s institutions have responded to the demands of
the vulnerable by strengthening its policy and strategy
on internally displaced persons and returnees and by
creating more favourable conditions for sustainable
return and reintegration. In recent months, the Republic
of Kosovo has built or repaired 76 houses for returnees
in all regions. In the same period, the Government
completed 21 infrastructure projects in minority
returnee communities. All those investments contribute
to stabilizing the socioeconomic situation in Kosovo’s
ethnic minority communities. Finally, we have taken
steps to facilitate the return from Montenegro of
persons displaced from Kosovo.

which aim to intimidate officials working at the office
and to prevent the Serbs from the north from taking
advantage of the services offered to them.

In addition, Kosovo has taken serious measures to
integrate Serbs living in northern Kosovo. However,
unfortunately, the destructive practices of parallel
structures have been a constant obstacle and have
undermined our good intentions and commitment to
socioeconomic investment in that part of Kosovo.

In addition, on 19 March a Kosovo police officer
was attacked in the municipality of Leposavić. A
powerful explosion occurred near the gate of the police
station, causing considerable material damage. Such
orchestrated attacks are intended to keep the security
situation tense, not giving a chance to peace and the
rule of law.

To date, the administrative office in northern
Mitrovica opened by the Government of the Republic
of Kosovo has provided services for more than 2,000
members of the Serb community living in the north.
That is further proof that even in the north of the country
there can be space for cooperation and integration. We
believe that the office will be beneficial to the local
population, because it is intended to improve their living
conditions by providing better local services, generating
employment and coordinating donor assistance planned
for investments in the north of Kosovo.
Unfortunately, the office has been targeted several
times by unidentified groups in the north. Recently,
violent attacks against senior officials of Serbian
nationality at the institution have increased, leaving the
operation of the office vulnerable to threats and acts of
violence, which prevent it from carrying out its daily
administrative services. In addition, at least 20 other
incidents have occurred in the north during the past
three months. We have evidence to suspect that Serbian
parallel structures are behind those criminal acts,

10

We call on Serbia to dismantle those illegal security
and justice structures and to stop trying to create
tensions in Kosovo. We are not alone in making that
call, which is supported by a large number of countries
that have invested a great deal for the sake of peace and
stability in Kosovo, as well as by the United Nations.
In addition to dividing Serbs in the south from
those in the north, the use of fear tactics in the situation
in the northern municipalities is preventing the north’s
integration into Kosovo’s institutions. That criminal
tendency reminds me of a terrible case just a couple
of years ago where the current Deputy Chairman of
the Assembly of Kosovo, Petar Miletić, was shot and
injured, and, due to that violent pressure, was forced
to migrate from northern Mitrovica. Therefore, for
the past 13 years, all the communities in that part of
Kosovo have been at constant risk due to the absence of
the rule of law and the resulting anarchy.

I must again draw the Council’s attention to the fact
that, as reflected in the report of the Secretary-General,
the situation in the three northern municipalities
continues to be a serious source of instability in
Kosovo, as well as a serious threat to the entire security
structure of our region. This difficult situation, which
aims to destabilize the functioning of the State of
Kosovo, is in complete violation of international norms
and resolution 1244 (1999). This situation must be
stopped as soon as possible.
Our offer to every citizen, regardless of ethnicity,
is simple and clear: our State is our common future,
and we will build it for our common good and for the
benefit of those of our citizens in the municipalities in
the north of Kosovo whose lives continue to be held
hostage by certain groups. The establishment of the rule
of law and order in the northern part of the territory of
the Republic of Kosovo is essential for its development
within the framework of the Constitution and the laws

13-26793

S/PV.6939

of the country, and for peace, safety and welfare of our
citizens of the Serb community.
I want to believe that my counterpart from Serbia,
Prime Minister Dačić, is deeply concerned for the rule
of law in the north of Kosovo and that the Serbian
community living there develops normally and without
fear.
The freedom of movement remains one of the main
challenges in that part of the territory of Kosovo. Not
only are orchestrated barricades physical barriers but,
above all, they send political messages about ethnic
divisions. Even the international presence — the
Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) — are denied the freedom
of movement, leaving them unable to fulfil their
missions. We witnessed similar scenarios in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia during the war in the 1990s.
I would like to reassure the Council, however, that
Kosovo will not be a place of divisions and barricades.
We will not allow the building of a new Republika
Srpska.
I have full confidence that the physical barricades
that are set up on various roads in the north to
prevent free movement will be removed voluntarily
by the citizens who live there. Self-isolation does not
bring about progress; obstruction of the freedom of
movement should not be a value promoted by Serbia.
Unfortunately, the role of Serbia continues to be
destructive by unlawfully using and operating illegal
structures in Kosovo, thereby further aggravating the
political and security situation.
In that context, on the occasion of the Orthodox
New Year this January, there was an incident between
the Kosovo Police — as the only legitimate and legal
force — and 10 members of illegal structures — the
so-called Civil Defence Corps — who were supposedly
engaged to protect a Serbian Government official,
Alexander Vulin, during his visit to the municipality
of Gracanica.
In that case, the Kosovo Police was hampered in the
performance of its official duty to protect public order
and severely provoked. As a result, they accompanied
the 10 individuals to the police station in Gracanica on
suspicion that they had ignored lawful orders of the
police. Those individuals had been escorted to the police
station in order to enable the police to carry out their
security duties and responsibilities. The action was thus
taken for the security of the Serbian official. Despite

13-26793

the tendency to politicize the case and allow the media
to echo allegations of ethnic abuse, the decision of the
Kosovo police was fair and legitimate. In connection
with the occurrence, I would refer the Council to the
accurate and constructive reporting by the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, contained in one
of the annexes to the report of the Secretary-General,
“No complaints about their treatment by Kosovo police
were made on either occasion” (S/2013/72, annex I,
p. 14).
After the removal of the Albanian martyrs monument
in the Preševo valley on 20 January by numerous Serb
gendarmerie forces, an emotional and violent reaction
broke out, with unidentified individuals demolishing
Serbian Orthodox cemeteries and Second World War
memorials in eight locations in Kosovo. The Kosovo
Government, local civil society and the international
presence condemned those incidents, and the Kosovo
police arrested a number of suspects and is committed
to pursuing an effective investigation of those cases.
My Government has allocated €97,000 for the swift
repair of damaged graves and monuments. I assure the
Council that we are not dealing with coordinated actions
here. I am also pleased by the immediate response of
law enforcement officials and the public condemnation
of the acts by the Kosovo leadership.
As to the allegations of war crimes in Kosovo that
are contained in the report of the Secretary-General,
we are sure that addressing those charges will confirm
the purity and justness of the war waged by our people
in their quest for freedom and independence. While the
Serbian State has so far failed to issue a formal apology
for its regime-sponsored human rights abuses and
ethnic cleansing in Kosovo, we welcome the statement
made by Yugoslav army general Dragoljub Ojdanić to
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
in January, in which he admitted to having committed
war crimes against Kosovo Albanians in the 1990s.
His admission constitutes an important recognition
that violence was acceptable to and orchestrated by
the Serbian authorities at the time, a fact which had
already been recognized and documented by the United
Nations. We encourage other institutions in Serbia to
acknowledge the crimes committed in Kosovo and allow
for the telling and documenting of the truth. That would
obviously be a strong foundation and a breakthrough
moment for reconciliation and coexistence.
In that context, on 18 March my Government
created a working group to address the past and

11

S/PV.6939

reconciliation. The formation of the group had been
postponed until such time as we felt that our society was
capable of dealing with the past in one way or other, in
order to restore relations, seek and face the truth, and
demand reparations for war damages as is generally
provided for by criminal justice systems. Because we
do not have normal relations with Serbia, the process of
dealing with and facing the past has become even more
difficult. Nevertheless, the Government of the Republic
of Kosovo believes that we have to deal with the past,
taking into account the rights and status of each victim
of the war. However, we also believe that the signing
of a peace treaty regulating relations between Kosovo
and Serbia would have to include a Serbian apology,
compensation for war damages, and truth on the issue
of missing persons and other issues related to the war.
That would help create an environment more condusive
to facing the past and dealing with outstanding issues.
The Republic of Kosovo has entered into a political
dialogue with Serbia brokered by the European
Union, which has been brilliantly managed by the
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy, Baroness Catherine Ashton. Of
course, the process has been strongly supported by
all the world’s democracies, which are interested in
contributing to peace and stability. The dialogue is aimed
at normalizing relations between Kosovo and Serbia,
and is considered to be the main tool for integrating the
Serb population in northern Kosovo into the country’s
social and institutional life of Kosovo by offering them
opportunities to improve their lives and providing them
with security, public services, the rule of law, economic
stewardship and democratic governance.
Based on the current rate of normalization of
relations between Kosovo and Serbia, I remain
reservedly optimistic that by resolving practical,
technical and inter-State issues, we are fulfilling key
prerequisites that will lead us to the next stage of mutual
recognition. Of course, this is not at all an easy process;
indeed, it is extremely difficult for Kosovo and Serbia
because the bitterness of the past remains fresh. But let
me assure the Council that the process could succeed
with a minimum of political will coming from Serbia. I
therefore once again invite Serbia to be reasonable and
rational and seize the opportunity before us to reach
an agreement for normalization of relations between
our countries. Success in such a dialogue would benefit
both countries and above all our citizens. If the dialogue
succeeds, there will be no losers — only winners.

12

At the same time, Kosovo intends to make
progress in its relationship with the European Union
by accelerating its process of European integration and
coordinating joint efforts to fulfil the requirements
for membership. We are also engaged in dialogue to
heighten our international profile by obtaining more
recognitions of our Statehood and memberships in
international organizations, including our legitimate
request for membership in the United Nations.
Our commitment to dialogue with Serbia is in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 64/298
and the relevant resolution of the Assembly of Kosovo,
and in full compliance with the Constitution and laws
of Kosovo. In the dialogue with Serbia, there can be
no negotiation on the sovereignty, political status
or territorial integrity of Kosovo. The international
support for those inviolable red lines is very important
to us.
There is no doubt that the Ahtisaari plan sponsored
by the United Nations remains the most generous
offer possible, providing the Serbs in Kosovo with a
broad space for self-governance and the ability to
exercise their political, socioeconomic and cultural
rights. The Ahtisaari plan provides the Serbs in the
north, inter alia, with broad local self-governance, the
right to use their mother tongue in all public affairs,
freedom of media, freedom of education at the primary,
secondary and university levels, the opportunity for
an overhaul of the health-care system, financial and
local fiscal management, and the right to select local
police leadership, establish associations in Kosovo
Serb majority municipalities, and maintain special ties
with other municipalities in Serbia. The Ahtisaari plan
is thus a very liberal and generous plan that offers a
wide range of self-governance capacities to minorities,
as has been proven by effective decentralization since
our independence five years ago, which resulted in
increased political participation of Serbs in Kosovo,
growing inter-ethnic stability and improved social
welfare.
In the dialogue process with Serbia, we have held
seven rounds of meetings since October 2012. Significant
results have been achieved so far, which gives hope for a
successful conclusion of the process. We are now nearly
at the final stage of the process. Unfortunately, over the
past three months the Serbian side has come up with a
platform that demands territorial autonomy for Kosovo
Serbs and the creation of a separate entity in Kosovo.
Similarly, Serbia later proposed an association, or

13-26793

S/PV.6939

community association, in Kosovo Serb municipalities
that would have legislative and executive powers and be
the result of direct elections. That proposal is another
failed effort to create a third level of government in
Kosovo. That is against our constitutional order, which
has been built together with our international partners.
We are very concerned that such proposals are aimed
at creating a new Republika Srpska in Kosovo, which
would make Kosovo non-functional and unstable,
complicate the internal political consensus, cause the
process of our European integration and the integration
of minorities in Kosovo to stagnate, undermine the
process of successful decentralization in Kosovo,
antagonize the majority population and undercut all of
the international political and economic investments
made in the past 14 years. That idea cannot be put into
practice in Kosovo.

It is a fact that in this historic process, Serbia has
gradually accepted the legitimacy and constitutionality
of the Republic of Kosovo.

We are witness to the fact that such arrangements
in the region have become structural obstacles to peace
and ethnic reconciliation, democracy, a multi-ethnic
citizenry and effective governance. It is important
to emphasize the international commitment and
determination with respect to the fact that a change
of borders in the Western Balkans or any tendency
towards territorial rearrangement could destabilize the
region, cause ethnic divisions to flare up and create
other problems.

Unfortunately, Serbia has not shown the same level
of readiness, as evidenced by the many delays in and
obstacles to the implementation of the agreements
reached. Serbia is still trying to prevent Kosovo from
participating in regional events.

The agreements reached so far in the context of
the technical and political dialogue are very important,
because they address issues that have preoccupied
us for a long time and made the lives of our citizens
difficult. The regional cooperation agreement allows for
Kosovo’s independent representation in organizations
and at regional events, and does away with ambiguities
and indirect representation. The agreement on the
opening of a liaison office and the exchange of liaison
officers opens an initial chapter in the establishment of
diplomatic relations between the Republic of Kosovo
and Serbia as two independent countries and good
neighbours.
The agreement on customs stamps supercedes
informal arrangements, establishes proper governance
in the area of of customs and increases the economic
benefits to Kosovo and Serbia. The agreement on the
return of civil registry and cadastral books will enable
the resolution of property disputes.
Finally, the agreement on the recognition of
university diplomas allows for more youth employment.

13-26793

The Supreme Court of Kosovo cadastral agreement
has been accepted as the final authority. Concerning
vehicle registration plates, the Ministry of Internal
Affairs of Kosovo has been accepted as the final
authority, just as Kosovo customs is the final authority
in the area of customs.
In the current dialogue, Kosovo has proved to be
more consistent, more responsible and more decisive
in the implementation of the agreements reached. We
have taken all of the necessary political and technical
measures for the implementation of the agreements
reached so far. We have also expressed a willingness to
increase economic investments in this part of Kosovo.

The agreement on free movement is hampered
by the barriers placed in the north of Kosovo, which,
unfortunately, are directed from Belgrade. The return
of cadastral and civil registry documents is being
unjustifiably delayed.
The agreement on the opening of liaison offices
and the exchange of liaison officers, which has not yet
been implemented, represents a significant step towards
the establishment of diplomatic relations between two
independent countries.
Other issues that remain unresolved in the context
of this dialogue are the fate of those persons who went
missing during the war in Kosovo, with 1,700 still
missing; the issue of energy and telecommunications;
and the dismantling of Serbia’s illegal parallel structures
in the field of security, which operate in the north of
Kosovo in violation of international law.
We rightfully expect dedication and determination
from Serbia as concerns the full implementation of the
agreements, as well as the immediate dismantling of
its structures in Kosovo. We assure the Council that
the Republic of Kosovo will play a constructive role in
this dialogue, as it has done in the past, in accordance
with the Constitution and our laws and with goodwill,
so as to improve the lives of citizens and reach an
agreement to normalize our relations with Serbia that

13

S/PV.6939

further strengthens and consolidates our statehood and
international recognition.

mutual political and economic cooperation between
Kosovo and the European Union.

The Republic of Kosovo has proved and continues
to prove that it embraces European values. The
European agenda of my country has already become
a working plan for society as a whole, considering
that EU integration is an incentive to achieve the most
important goals of our society: political stability, respect
for human rights and the development of a sustainable
economy. The European agenda is a reform agenda, not
just integration. That process did not start yesterday;
since the Thessaloniki summit of 2003, Kosovo has had
its own independent path in relation to EU integration.

In that context, we welcome the European Parliament
draft resolution on Kosovo dated 11 February 2013. In
particular, we consider it very important that the draft
resolution encourages the five remaining EU countries
that did not recognize Kosovo’s independence to do so;
rejects Kosovo’s territorial division; affirms the spirit
of the Ahtisaari package and emphasizes that that plan
is an adequate platform to resolve disputes in the North;
welcomes the end of the supervised independence of
Kosovo in September of last year; welcomes the greater
participation of Kosovo’s representation in international
organizations and initiatives; welcomes the PristinaBelgrade dialogue agreements reached to date; and
condemns the acts of violence in northern Kosovo and
the deviant behavior of the local groups.

Kosovo has already entered an important period
as a country, with significant advancements in many
fields, bringing Kosovo into the focus of the EU
enlargement policy. That has been done as a result of
the reforms carried out and the comprehensive support
and determination shown across the political spectrum
and by the citizens of the Republic of Kosovo. I am
honoured to represent a society where integration into
the EU and NATO has more than 90 per cent of public
support; it is maintaining that support at a much higher
level in relation to other countries.
The European Commission has confirmed that
our country has made significant progress on the road
to EU membership, emphasizing the fact that Kosovo
is ready to open negotiations on the Stabilization and
Association Agreement, with the short-term fulfilment
of specific criteria in the areas of the rule of law,
public administration, the protection of minorities and
trade. That joint success was reaffirmed recently by
the visit of the EU Commissioner for Enlargement and
Neighbourhood Policy, Mr. Štefan Fule, in Pristina.
Above all, the Republic of Kosovo is making
great strides towards the establishment of contractual
relations with the European Union. With the signing
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement, we
are taking the first, very important step on the road to
membership in and full integration into the Union.
The Stabilization and Association Agreement will
also enable Kosovo to have a long-term perspective
for sustainable economic development, improving
Kosovo’s trade position and providing stability for
foreign investors. That will have a significant impact
on the advancement of democratic processes, the
promotion of internal reforms and the deepening of

14

In addition, Kosovo is advancing in the process of
visa liberalization for its citizens. My Government is
very much committed to this process being completed
quickly, so that the people of Kosovo can come out of
the isolation that they have been in for more than two
decades and move freely, like the other peoples of the
Balkans. Kosovo’s Government has proved that it is able
to make progress on the criteria set by the European
Commission, including in the areas of readmission;
reintegration; document security; integrated border
management;
migration
management;
asylum;
the prevention and combating of organized crime,
corruption and terrorism; international cooperation
on law enforcement; judicial cooperation in criminal
matters; data protection; and the fundamental right to
freedom of movement.
I should like to make it clear, however, that any
asymmetry that puts an additional burden on Kosovo
to implement new criteria that is not required of other
Western Balkan countries would hurt its image and the
credibility of the process. Kosovo has not even a day
to waste, because decades have already been lost as a
result of apartheid and conflict. Above all, we call upon
the European Union to foster internal unity in Kosovo,
without further hindrance to our deserved integration.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate that the
Western Balkans has no room for conflict or belligerent
policies aimed at violating territorial integrity at any
cost since the violent break-up of the former Yugoslavia.
Efforts to create frozen conflicts by destabilizing the
region are doomed to failure. The Republic of Kosovo

13-26793

S/PV.6939

has encoded its Constitution to reflect that it has no
territorial claim against anyone.
Finally, I recall that Kosovo is one of the
most successful instances of State-building and
peacebuilding in United Nations history and in
international governance more generally. Resolution
1244 (1999) has been implemented for a long time.
We have implemented the Ahtisaari plan, resulting in
the successful conclusion of international supervision
last September. To date, Kosovo has been recognized
by more than half of the United Nations Member
States and is a member of the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund and the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development, as well as many
other regional and international initiatives. Kosovo is
in the process of integration into the European Union
as a full member among all others. Kosovo has installed
a democratic Government, built a multi-ethnic society
and is maintaining sustainable economic growth.
The Republic of Kosovo has been internationally
recognized, which should be welcomed by all Security
Council members. Moreover, we rightfully anticipate
that in the near future, given developments in Kosovo
and the region, and in particular our conviction that
Kosovo and Serbia will normalize inter-State relations
as a result of the dialogue process, the Security
Council will draft and adopt a new resolution making
Kosovo an equal, peace-loving Member of the United
Nations capable of maintaining order and assuming its
international responsibilities.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): Allow me to
express my appreciation to Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo, for
his leadership and commitment to the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and his efforts to implement its mandate in Kosovo.
I also thank Mr. Ivica Dačić and Mr. Hashim
Thaçi for their statements. Their presence today in the
Council demonstrates their political will and courage
to embark on the difficult yet indispensable process of
working together in order to normalize the relationship
between the two capitals.
When we look at the history of the issue at hand, the
trail we see is one of a bitter past and bitter memories.
However, in Rwanda we believe that it is in the common

13-26793

interest of both parties to turn the page on that part of
their history and continue with serious negotiations to
bring peace and lasting security in the region. In the
same spirit, it is our hope that both leaders will make
further progress on the outstanding issues, mainly those
concerning northern Kosovo, and reach an agreement
in view of the upcoming meeting on 2 April.
Both leaders have made important strides. In that
respect, we hope that the international community,
in particular the Council, will be well prepared to
mobilize resources and political backing to encourage
both leaders to reach a sustainable agreement leading
to lasting peace.
With reference to the report that is before the
Council (S/2013/72), it notes the positive developments
in Kosovo, and we acknowledge that the situation
has been relatively calm. However, the ongoing
tensions in northern Kosovo are worrisome and could
spark intercommunal violence, which would cause
lasting harm to peace and security and even the
agreements that have been reached. I acknowledge
that improvement has been seen in the Kosovo police,
which has taken ownership in the provision of law and
order and addressed the concerns of its citizens through
increased participation of the municipal community
safety councils.
In addition, we welcome the collaboration between
UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo in helping the Ministry of Justice
to implement reform of the justice sector. We also
welcome the cooperation between UNMIK and other
international organizations, as manifested in the work
achieved. We encourage the international community
to maintain its commitment and increase its support to
enable those organizations to achieve their mandates. I
also remain convinced that the task of building a stable
and prosperous region will need both leaders to come
together and negotiate a lasting solution.
To conclude, my delegation believes that achieving
peace in the region lies within the hands of the two
countries; it is therefore crucial that both parties
demonstrate political will and a sincere desire to
continue through dialogue to bring about a lasting
peace.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank Mr. Zarif for introducing the quarterly report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/72) on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

15

S/PV.6939

(UNMIK). I also thank the Prime Minister of Serbia
and Mr. Hashim Thaçi for their statements.
I will principally address the issues related to the
still precarious security situation in northern Kosovo,
and those related to normalizing relations between
Kosovo and Serbia. For nearly two years, under the
auspices of the European Union (EU), the Serbian and
Kosovar authorities have undertaken a process aimed at
normalizing their relations. My country welcomes the
progress made since then. It is noteworthy that, at the
technical level, the dialogue has led to an agreement
aimed at improving the daily lives of the people in
both territories, whose existence has been roiled by the
political and legal stalemate.
Both sides have therefore agreed on arrangements,
in particular the exchange of liaison officers, in order to
improve communications and the joint management of
crossing points. They have agreed on a customs regime
involving the recognition of documents including
vehicle registration plates, identification documents
and university diplomas from Kosovo. My country
is convinced that such initiatives will promote the
rapprochement of the people of Kosovo and Serbia
by promoting increased exchanges between both
territories and by addressing the daily tensions arising
from coexistence.
The dialogue undertaken has gradually evolved
from technical to policy issues in recent months, which
we welcome. We commend the positive momentum
made possible by the mediation efforts of the European
Union and highlighted by the recent high-level meetings
in Brussels on 6 February between the President of
Serbia and the leader of Kosovo, and between their
Prime Ministers on 19 and 20 February. Togo welcomes
the resolve reaffirmed by the senior officials at those
meetings to normalize relations between Serbia and
Kosovo.
The powerful symbol of the normalization process
represented by those meetings is encouraging, given
that only a few months earlier their positions were so
rigid that such meetings between senior Serbian and
Kosovar officials could scarcely have been imagined.
Still, beyond the symbolic aspect, Togo hopes that the
momentum will continue in order to bring about a rapid
settlement to the sensitive and complex issue of the
maintenance of parallel Serbian structures in northern
Kosovo, and ultimately of the final status of Kosovo.
To that end, we urge both sides to be much more open

16

and flexible with a view to a win-win solution in the
interests of the Serbian and Kosovar populations and to
promote peace and stability in the region.
Togo also remains concerned about the inter-ethnic
tensions still evident in northern Kosovo, in particular in
North Mitrovica, which risk jeopardizing reconciliation
efforts. In December 2012 and in January, there was an
increase in the number of demonstrations condemning,
in particular, certain aspects of the agreement on the
integrated management of crossing points, the building
of housing for repatriated Albanians in North Mitrovica
and restrictions on the freedom of movement of Serbian
senior officials to Kosovo. That led to the Serbian
President cancelling his visit to Gračanica monastery
in January.
Such developments attest to the ongoing
inter-ethnic strife and the limited positive response
locally to reconciliation initiatives. Togo believes that
there must be a particular focus on the local impact of
the reconciliation process. In that regard, we call on the
religious authorities and the civil society of Serbia and
Kosovo to become more involved in bringing together
the various communities. In that regard, we commend
the example of the dialogue between the Orthodox
Church in Kosovo and the municipal authorities in Pejë
on a range of practical issues.
The lack of security undermines efforts to bring
the Serbian and Kosovar communities together. It has
a negative impact on the decision of displaced persons
and refugees from northern Kosovo whether or not to
return and reintegrate. Togo therefore urges the Kosovo
authorities to continue the investigations under way
into the cases of attacks against the Serbian residents of
Kosovo and their property in order to bring to justice the
perpetrators of such acts and to provide the necessary
compensation to victims.
On the issue of disappeared persons, my country
welcomes the visit to Cyprus on 7 and 8 November 2012
of members of the Kosovo Serb family associations
of missing persons, who were able to learn from the
experience of Cyprus in that area. We look forward
to the rapid implementation of the recommendations
arising from that visit, which underscore the importance
of ownership of such activities by the populations
themselves and of the involvement of family associations
in all discussions and decisions on the issue.
Togo is also concerned about the phenomenon of
corruption and organized crime that are developing

13-26793

S/PV.6939

widely, in particular in northern Kosovo. We call
on the Kosovo authorities to do their utmost to fight
effectively against that scourge. We note the decision
taken by the Kosovo authorities in that regard, as stated
by Mr. Thaçi. We believe that the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) should have
the appropriate staffing in order to further focus on
preventing and suppressing that scourge.
Moreover, with regard to the allegations of
trafficking in human organs, we again call on Kosovo
and its neighbours to allow the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force to work in peace and to fully
cooperate with it. We hope that the investigations
undertaken by Prosecutor Williamson can be rapidly
concluded in as impartial a way as possible in order
to once and for all shed light on that case, which is
dividing peoples and views.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my country’s
congratulations to the European Union, UNMIK, the
Kosovo Force, EULEX, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and all partner organizations
that continue to work alongside the Kosovo authorities
in order to prevent tension and to promote the adoption
of consensus solutions by playing an important role in
mediation and in facilitating dialogue.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(S/2013/72). We also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting
the report and Mr. Ivica Dačić and Mr. Hashim Thaçi
for their statements.
The Secretary-General’s report once again affirms
that the United Nations continues to play an essential
role in guaranteeing stability and neutrality in Kosovo
and the region. We reaffirm the primacy of resolution
1244 (1999) as the legal framework applicable in
Kosovo, as well as the importance of full respect for
international law.
During the reporting period, we note the progress
in the dialogue between the parties. We congratulate
them not only on the level of the dialogue but also on
its quality, which has moved from a primarily technical
level to a political one, providing new prospects
for resolving several long-standing problems. The
Secretary-General’s report also points out that, despite
the developments in the high-level dialogue, incidents
and tensions on the ground continue to occur. It is

13-26793

therefore important that the results of the dialogue
have a positive impact on the reality on the ground, in
particular in the north.
In that regard, we regret that the parties were unable
to reach an agreement with regard to the situation in
northern Kosovo at the recent round of talks on 20 March
in Brussels. We encourage the parties to continue those
efforts, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999), at
the next round, to be held on 2 April.
Northern Kosovo remains a source of concern to
my delegation. With regard to the security situation,
we note that to date this year there have been more
than 20 incidents using explosive devices. The report
documents serious incidents that also affected the staff
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). It also reports on the arrests and
mistreatment of Kosovo Serbs during the Christmas
celebrations on 7 January. It is important that the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), the Kosovo Force and the local authorities
investigate each of those incidents. We are pleased
that those entities have increased their visibility and
prevention activities in response to such incidents.
In addition, we are concerned about the situation
of the administrative office in Mitrovica. We regret
the freeze on the payment of salaries from the
Kosovo budget to the employees of that office. Given
the important work that UNMIK is doing to ensure
coordination and cooperation among the international
presences in the north, it is necessary to find solutions
to enable its administration to continue to carry out its
prevention, mediation and facilitation functions.
On that same point, we would like to comment in
general terms on the importance of UNMIK having the
necessary resources to achieve its operational capacity
and to implement its mandate. UNMIK operates in a
vulnerable situation with limited resources. A strong
United Nations presence with the appropriate resources
remains necessary given the prevailing situation on the
ground, in particular in northern Kosovo.
We were surprised by the information the Security
Council has received about refusals to allow Serbian
authorities to enter Kosovo, including the recent hostile
treatment of the Director of the Serbian Office for
Kosovo and Metohija. Such behaviour has an adverse
impact on the situation of minority communities in
Kosovo. It is worth recalling that UNMIK’s goal is to
promote security, stability and respect for human rights

17

S/PV.6939

in Kosovo, with the participation of all its communities.
Kosovo’s multi-ethnic character will be undermined
by the lack of mechanisms capable of assuring and
protecting the rights of those populations. Moreover,
it has a negative effect on the rate of those returning
voluntarily to Kosovo.
Turning to the work of the Special Investigative
Task Force in addressing the allegations of inhumane
treatment of persons and trafficking in human organs,
we note with interest the information included in the
annexed EULEX report and have followed progress
on the matter closely. We support the objectives
of operational cooperation and therefore continue
to believe that it would be desirable to reach an
arrangement that could involve the United Nations in
the process of investigating the allegations. We agree
on the importance of tackling impunity and ensuring
accountability.
We conclude by affirming that beyond the highlevel political process, it is equally important that
sustained and well-funded efforts be made to promote
reconciliation and build trust among the communities.
In that regard, we support the Special Representative’s
efforts to promote consensus solutions and expand
cooperation among the principal stakeholders.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
I would first like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo,
for his briefing on recent developments in Kosovo. I
welcome the presence here and participation of the
Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and thank
Mr. Hashim Thaçi.
Progress has been made on the situation in Kosovo
in various areas, which, while they may be technical,
are politically highly symbolic. In fact, the joint
agreement on the integrated management of crossing
points, the highway construction project and the
appointment of liaison officers for the European Union
delegation offices are measures that will have a direct
effect on Kosovo’s communities and their daily life.
This progress has been achieved under the auspices
of the High Representative for Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union, whose commitment and
perseverance enabled high-level talks to be held between
the parties. In that context, we encourage the parties to
continue to negotiate in a spirit of compromise so as
to reach a satisfactory result as quickly as possible. It
is predictable and understandable that implementation

18

of these measures may meet with resistance and create
friction, but it is crucial that the leaders on both sides
stay the course and move forward by soothing fears
and, if necessary, adjusting the arrangements agreed
on. The momentum of reconciliation of the various
interests and building trust must be maintained and
strengthened.
That the progress that has been achieved in this
way unquestionably marks an important stage in the
negotiation process between the parties should in
no way mask the persisting tensions on the ground,
particularly in northern Kosovo, where incidents
affecting minorities continue to occur. Where these
include, in particular, incidents of disrespect for
cultural and religious sites, which are still a frequent
source of tension, it is essential that a spirit of religious
tolerance be maintained and peaceful existence between
communities promoted. In that regard, we commend
the role of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo in restoring and protecting minority
religious sites.
Regarding the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, that body continues to investigate
issues connected with organized crime, war crimes and
corruption. In that context, the allegations of trafficking
in human organs are still extremely worrying.
This region has endured many conflicts that have
claimed many victims, who continue to suffer the
consequences of war and fratricidal conflict. Today it
is up to the parties to continue to strive to resolve their
differences and to work towards what we hope will
be a prosperous future for the generations to come. In
that regard, we commend the commitment and efforts
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force, which continue to
play a very important role between the parties with
the goal of moving forward on the issues that divide
them and, above all, to work towards a political solution
that is comprehensive, inclusive and in accord with the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing. I welcome the
presence of the Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Dačić;
I have also listened carefully to Mr. Thaçi’s statement.
China has always maintained that Serbia’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity should be fully
respected. Resolution 1244 (1999) is an important legal

13-26793

S/PV.6939

foundation for addressing the question of Kosovo.
That task should be carried out within the framework
of the relevant resolutions and through dialogue and
negotiation between the parties concerned so as to
reach a mutually acceptable solution. China welcomes
the many rounds of high-level political dialogue
that have been held recently between Belgrade and
Pristina and that have made good progress. We hope
that both parties will remain committed to promoting
constructive dialogue, try to reach agreement on issues
in the relevant areas, and seek a lasting solution to the
question of Kosovo that will help maintain peace and
stability in the Balkans and in Europe generally.
At present, the security situation in Kosovo is
generally stable, but in the north tensions remain, and
we are very worried about the situation. The parties
concerned should adopt a prudent attitude, stick to
dialogue to settle their differences and refrain from
any action that might worsen the situation. China
appreciates the work done by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) under the
Special Representative, and supports its continuing
efforts to implement the Council’s mandate. We hope
that UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo Force, the Kosovo and the other international
presences will strengthen their coordination in order to
ensure that they play a positive and constructive role in
settling the relevant issues.
China is very concerned about illegal trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo. Any activities contravening
international law or international humanitarian
standards should be met with zero tolerance. The
United Nations should play its part in a comprehensive
and independent investigation of such cases.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing and the Prime Ministers of Serbia and Kosovo
for their statements.
Naturally, my country remains committed to
the reality of a sovereign, peaceful, democratic
and multi-ethnic Kosovo, living in peace with its
neighbours. Our hope therefore is that Serbia and
Kosovo can find an agreement that would allow them
to definitively close the chapter on their conflict,
work towards their European future and contribute to
stabilizing the Balkans.
That is why the European Union is promoting
dialogue between the two countries; the meeting held on

13-26793

Wednesday, 20 March, in Brussels has confirmed that
we were close to an agreement. That is major progress,
and we encourage both sides to finalize discussions by
each making the necessary compromises. We thank
Mr. Dačić and Mr. Thaçi for the information they have
just provided us with respect to the meeting, and we
commend their determination to find an agreement.
Thus, considerable progress has been made in the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. That dialogue
is being held at the level of Heads of Government, and
is addressing the most sensitive issues. We offer all our
support to the efforts of the High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy for the European Union, Ms. Catherine Ashton,
to promote that dialogue.
We need to move towards a long-term solution
on the issue of northern Kosovo. The outlines are
known. Serbia must dismantle the parallel structures
that it maintains there, and Kosovo, for its part,
must provide security assurances and substantial
autonomy that would win the acceptance of the Serbian
populations concerned, which would entail a degree of
decentralization, the scope of which would be agreed
upon by both sides.
Parallel to that, it is important that the technical
agreements that have been reached be implemented
and that an agreement be reached on other issues
that have been identified, particularly on energy and
telecommunications. If the conditions defined in the
conclusions of the European Council of December 2012
are met, we could enter a new phase of the European
rapprochement for the two countries, which means the
launch of European Union accession talks for Serbia and
a stabilization and association agreement for Kosovo.
We call on the authorities of Serbia and of Kosovo to
remain committed to this historic process and to prepare
the public for concessions in each stage. We know that
this is never easy, and we specifically commend the
recent courageous statements of the Prime Minister of
Serbia and the resolute commitment of Mr. Thaçi to the
dialogue, which does not enjoy unanimous support in
Kosovo.
On the ground, the security situation in Kosovo
remains calm overall, although incidents continue
to take place, particularly in the northern part of the
country. As is recalled in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/72), it is critical to consolidate the rights of the
different communities within Kosovo, to protect their

19

S/PV.6939

cultural and religious heritage, and to guarantee the
return of the 18,000 refugees and internally displaced
persons in appropriate conditions of security and
reintegration.
We firmly condemn the recent desecration of
Serbian cemeteries, and any attack against orthodox
religious and cultural sites. Such acts must not go
unpunished.
With the end of supervized independence and
the establishment of the administrative office in
northern Mitrovica, it is normal and desirable that the
international presence should adapt to the new realities
on the ground. We call on all parties to cooperate
with international organizations. It is essential that
the authorities of Kosovo cooperate actively with the
Special Representative of the European Union and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) on the rule of law, especially with respect
to the investigation into alleged trafficking of human
organs. In that regard, I welcome the fact that EULEX
continues to provide to the Security Council information
on progress made in this investigation, as provided in
the report of the Secretary-General.
We would also like to reiterate that the soldiers
and personnel deployed within the Kosovo Force and
EULEX are instructed to ensure the respect for the
freedom of movement within Kosovo. Any impediment
to their own freedom of movement or physical
security is unacceptable. At a time when the European
Union, NATO and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe are adapting their presence to
conditions on the ground, we call on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to do the same in a spirit of subsidiarity in order to
contribute to a peaceful evolution of behaviour, in
accord with the Kosovo authorities, without letting
themselves be used by the defenders of the status quo.
I would like to conclude by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
personnel of the UNMIK in Kosovo for their work.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zarif, for his briefing. I would like to welcome
both Prime Minister Dačić and Prime Minister Thaçi
back to the Council and to thank them for sharing their
perspectives with us.

20

I would also like to express again our appreciation
to the European Union (EU), NATO, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other
organizations that, alongside the United Nations, are
supporting the international community’s work in
Kosovo. I would like to congratulate Kosovo on the
fifth anniversary of its independence on 17 February.
The United States commends Kosovo and Serbia
for their efforts in the ongoing EU-facilitated dialogue
towards a normalization of their relations. Prime
Ministers Thaçi and Dačić have shown courage in
working to resolve long-standing issues through a
pragmatic approach that will improve the lives of their
citizens, bring greater stability to the region and allow
both countries to move forward on their respective
paths to European integration.
The United States very much welcomes the
progress made in the seven rounds of the dialogue,
and we understand that the Prime Ministers are close
to concluding an agreement on northern Kosovo. We
encourage them to do so at the next dialogue session
on 2 April. Both parties, with the assistance of the
international community, should quickly and fully
implement any agreement ultimately reached. Those
efforts will continue to require much cooperation and
hard work.
Further, we applaud the continued implementation
of the arrangements under the integrated management
of crossing points agreement, and look forward to the
exchange of liaison officers to serve in the respective
capitals. Such agreements are proof that the dialogue is
producing results. We call on both Kosovo and Serbia
to sustain the momentum towards normalization that
their leaders have built in recent months.
We also commend the significant progress Kosovo
has made in modernizing the justice sector. The new
court structure, criminal code and criminal procedure
code are major steps forward. We encourage the
Government of Kosovo, in coordination with its partner
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), to continue to prioritize reforms in that sector
and to increase efforts to address corruption, strengthen
judicial independence and remedy inefficiencies, which
would contribute to increased public confidence in the
legal system and improved justice.
Kosovo’s recent adoption of laws to increase
the transparency and accountability of financial
transactions will, once fully implemented, help Kosovo

13-26793

S/PV.6939

to combat corruption and organized crime, promote the
country’s growth and help to ensure the independence
of its institutions more broadly. Further, we continue to
support the Special Investigative Task Force in its work
to investigate allegations of organ trafficking and other
wrongdoing. We reaffirm our belief in the Task Force’s
capacity and commitment to operating consistently with
established investigative and prosecutorial practices
and in the interest of justice.
While the progress at the political level has been
significant, the United States remains concerned
about continuing security incidents, especially in the
north. As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2013/72), the overall number of recorded incidents
affecting minority communities declined in 2012. Still,
we are disturbed by the uptick of violent acts in recent
months, much of which appears intended to harass
and threaten those who are cooperating with Kosovo
authorities to normalize relations. Those acts represent
a serious threat to peace and security. They must not
be tolerated. Of great concern is a string of grenade
attacks in northern Kosovo that has targeted EULEX
staff, officials at the borders and Kosovo Serbs.
In addition, an ongoing pattern of violence in
northern Mitrovica against personnel employed by
Kosovo institutions and their families, particularly
against Kosovo Serb employees of the northern
Mitrovica administrative office undermines safety,
security and the rule of law, and hurts the ordinary
citizens of the north, whom that administrative office
is trying to help. The United States continues to support
the office’s work to improve the delivery of services
to the citizens of northern Mitrovica, and hopes that
UNMIK will support those efforts.
We also insist on zero tolerance for vandalism, the
desecration of religious sites, intimidation and targeted
violence, and condemn the desecration of grave sites in
Kosovo that occurred in reaction to the removal by the
Serbian Government of a monument in southern Serbia.
The United States welcomed the prompt condemnation
and assurances by Kosovo authorities that those criminal
acts would be investigated fully and the perpetrators
prosecuted, as well as the Government’s commitment
to restore the grave sites at Government expense.
As the Prime Ministers continue talks under the
auspices of High Representative Ashton in less than two
weeks, it will be important to seize the opportunities
presented by the dialogue to move beyond the past

13-26793

and look toward their common European futures. The
United States will continue to support them and the EU
facilitation efforts towards that end.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): As I
begin my remarks, allow me to welcome to the Council
His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of
Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Prime
Minister of Kosovo. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the quarterly report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/72) on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).
In his report, the Secretary-General underscores
the constructive approach taken and the pragmatism
shown by the authorities in Pristina and Belgrade in
the high-level political dialogue held under the aegis
of the European Union. The most recent session of that
dialogue was held the day before yesterday in Brussels,
with the participation of the two Prime Ministers. We
welcome the progress made at that meeting, and we
hope that it will be made concrete at the next meeting,
scheduled for 2 April.
Luxembourg firmly supports the efforts by the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Baroness Catherine Ashton,
as facilitator of that dialogue. I would like to join the
Secretary-General in commending Serbian and Kosovar
leaders for having committed themselves to the path of
dialogue, which has allowed for concrete results to be
achieved on the ground since the most recent debate of
the Council on this issue (see S/PV.6872). I would like
to note in particular the effective implementation of the
agreement on the integrated management of crossing
points as it relates to gates 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 31 of the
agreement. Those efforts should be continued and the
achievements to date consolidated on the ground.
The meeting between the Presidents of Kosovo
and Serbia that took place on 6 February in Brussels
in the presence of Baroness Ashton, the first since
the declaration of independence by Kosovo, was an
important step towards the normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina.
Much progress towards peace and stability has
been made since UNMIK’s establishment, in 1999, by
virtue of resolution 1244 (1999). The context in which
the Mission and the other international missions are
operating, including the European Union Rule of Law

21

S/PV.6939

Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), has radically changed.
The security conditions in Kosovo are evolving in
a positive direction. In that regard, the report of the
Secretary-General underscores that, on the whole, the
security situation is calm, with the exception of the
north of Kosovo. In particular, in northern Mitrovica,
several serious incidents have been reported, in
particular acts of violence against Kosovo Serbs and
incidents targeting the personnel, assets and projects of
the administrative office put in place by the Kosovar
authorities in northern Mitrovica.
We are concerned by the recent acts of vandalism
targeting Orthodox religious sites, and we firmly
condemn all acts of intolerance. While the total number
of incidents affecting minority groups has diminished,
there must be a redoubling of efforts to ensure peaceful
coexistence between the different population groups in
Kosovo. No effort should be spared to minimize tension,
particularly in northern Kosovo. In that connection, I
commend the work of UNMIK and EULEX in support
of the Kosovar authorities, including the participation
of EULEX in the recruitment of the new multi-ethnic
police unit that will be charged with protecting religious
sites.
The European Union is determined to continue
its support for Kosovo. The extension of the EULEX
mandate through June 2014 will allow the European
Union Mission to continue with its capacity-building
efforts in the area of the rule of law and help the
Kosovar authorities to undertake prosecutions against
the authors of war crimes, as well as to step up the fight
against corruption and organized crime. We welcome
the significant work undertaken by the Special
Investigative Task Force of EULEX to consolidate the
high-level support it has in all of the countries of the
region and to prepare for the operational phase of the
investigation into allegations of organ trafficking set out
in the report of Council of Europe Special Rapporteur
Dick Marty and into the information provided on that
subject to the Security Council.
For its part, Luxembourg remains committed
to the stability of Kosovo through its participation
in the Kosovo Force, to the development of the rule
of law through its contribution to EULEX and to the
socioeconomic development of the country through a
major cooperation programme focused on professional
training in the areas of water management and health.

22

In conclusion, allow me to reaffirm our deeply held
conviction that the future of Kosovo, as that of Serbia,
must take place in a resolutely European context. My
country is prepared to continue to support the efforts of
those two countries and their leaders in order to achieve
those common objectives.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today. I am delighted to
also welcome to the Council His Excellency Mr. Hashim
Thaçi, Prime Minister of Kosovo, and His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of Serbia.
Kosovo continues to make progress, both internally
and on the international stage. We encourage those
countries that have not yet recognized Kosovo to do so.
The United Kingdom welcomes Kosovo’s progress
towards meeting the short-term conditionality, set out
at the December 2012 European Union (EU) General
Affairs Council session, for opening negotiations on
the Stabilization and Association Agreement with
the European Union. The implementation of the
conditionality is crucial for sustainable reform and for
Kosovo’s continued progress towards a more secure
and prosperous future. Active engagement in the EUfacilitated dialogue is vital to Kosovo’s EU accession
path. In that respect, the United Kingdom welcomes
Baroness Ashton’s personal engagement and the
tangible progress made in the dialogue, particularly
with regard to integrated border management. The
continued assistance of EULEX in the implementation
of dialogue agreements is indispensable. We continue
to urge full cooperation with EULEX by the authorities,
in both Pristina and Belgrade.
I would like to echo the words of Baroness Ashton
by paying tribute to both Prime Ministers for the
courage, vision and determination they have shown over
the past five months in that dialogue. I also welcome
the commitment they have each expressed today to
the success of that process. They are on the brink of
a historic agreement that will open a new chapter in
Serbia/Kosovo relations and ensure that both countries
make progress towards the European Union in a more
cooperative and stable manner. There is more work to do.
It is crucial that an agreement be reached on 2 April and
that its implementation begin immediately. Serbia must
do all it can to ensure agreements are communicated
to, and accepted by, the local communities in northern
Kosovo. Kosovo must make greater efforts to show that

13-26793

S/PV.6939

it is working in support of the rights and culture of all
its minority communities.

address the challenge posed by this tragic legacy of past
conflict in a number of countries, including Kosovo.

The Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2013/72) indicates a reduction in 2012, compared
to the previous year, in the overall number of recorded
incidents affecting minority communities. We hope
that trend will continue and, indeed, intensify. There
is of course no room for complacency in that area. The
United Kingdom was deeply concerned by the violence
in Kosovo that followed the removal of the monument
in Presevo in January. Those attacks were completely
unacceptable, and it was right for the international
community and the Government of Kosovo to
universally condemn them. All the perpetrators of
those acts should be arrested and brought to justice. In
that respect, we welcome the suspension of five police
officers in Viti/Vitina who allegedly did not adequately
respond to the removal of a monument from the Second
World War, and the arrest of five individuals on the
suspicion of having desecrated a Serbian Orthodox
cemetery. Kosovo must continue to combat illegal
activities and violence committed against all of its
communities, and must investigate fully when incidents
do occur.

Let me take this opportunity to thanks Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif for his
continuing efforts to drive down the UNMIK budget.
At a time when countries across the world are having
to face tough decisions regarding cuts to their own
national budgets, it is only right that the United Nations
and its institutions respond accordingly. I encourage
Special Representative Zarif to make further efforts to
identify cost savings in the future.

While socioeconomic factors remain the overriding
consideration for individuals returning to Kosovo,
the Government must continue on its commitment
to creating the conditions necessary for sustainable
returns. The United Kingdom remains committed to
the returns process through political engagement and
bilateral projects.
The United Kingdom welcomes the comprehensive
update in the EULEX annex to the work being carried out
by the Special Investigative Task Force. We continue to
support the important work carried out into the serious
allegations made in the Marty report. We are confident
in the Task Force capacity and its determination to take
forward this important investigation.
I welcome the update in the Secretary-General’s
report concerning the high-level round table on the
status of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence,
involving the Kosovo Government, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and other international representatives. I welcome
the work of UN-Women in organizing this round
table. Initiative preventing and responding to sexual
violence are a priority for the Government of the United
Kingdom. We will give strong support to efforts that

13-26793

Important though budgetary rigour is, I would not
want to end my remarks on that note. Let me re-emphasize
the United Kingdom’s commitment to the irreversible
progress of both Kosovo and Serbia to EU membership.
We hope that both deliver on the conditions set out
at the December General Affairs Council in order to
move forward on their respective EU accession paths.
We welcome the continued constructive engagement
by both Belgrade and Pristina in the dialogue and look
forward to further tangible results.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
latest report (S/2013/72) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I also
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his detailed presentation
of that report. We welcome the participation today of
the Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and of
Mr. Hashim Thaçi.
We welcome the fact that the report of the SecretaryGeneral underlines the positive role that the United
Nations continues to play in Kosovo though UNMIK,
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights, and collaborating with other international
actors. Argentina voted in favour of resolution 1244
(1999) when we were member of the Security Council,
and believes that it should continue to serve as the
international legal basis for achieving a general solution
in Kosovo through a fertile political process and fair
and specific negotiations.
We cannot fail to welcome the high-level dialogue
process between the parties, under the auspices of the
European Union, which held its seventh meeting in
Brussels just two days ago. We trust that the willingness
to engage in constructive dialogue shown by Belgrade
and Pristina will contribute to the stabilization of the

23

S/PV.6939

situation and the political resolution of the contentious
issues.
We welcome the commitment and decision of both
parties to promote dialogue as an import factor for
building confidence. The efforts of Serbia to promote
dialogue and the normalization of relations deserve
special recognition. We urge both parties to continue in
that spirit, in keeping with resolution 1244 (1999), and
hope for a successful outcome of the meeting to be held
on 2 April. In that respect, we endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s assertion in his report that the resumption
of talks is in itself a clear signal that both parties are
resolved to maintain peaceful dialogue and overcome
the scars of the conflict of the past.
In this context, we believe it crucial that UNMIK
continue carrying out its mandate and the important
role it plays in complement to dialogue so as to
guarantee the effective exchange of information and the
presentation of reports to the Council. We support the
role of UNMIK and its contribution to stabilizing the
region, as well as the cooperation between UNMIK, the
Kosovo Force and European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, maintaining a status-neutral position under
the auspices of the United Nations.
Argentina has been following closely the financial
situation of the United Nations administrative office
in Mitrovica. It is unacceptable that a lack of funds
is having an adverse impact on its mandate. As the
Secretary-General is right to point out, the situation in
northern Mitrovica calls for coordinated attention and
action in order to ensure that the difficult problems are
resolved in good faith so as to avoid future tensions.
This is why, given the important work of UNMIK
to ensure coordination and cooperation between
international actors with regard to northern Mitrovica
within their respective mandates, there is a need to
find practical solutions, prevent tension and ensure
that its administration continues carrying out conflict
prevention, mediation and facilitation functions. We
therefore call on UNMIK to continue to be granted the
necessary resources to avoid a negative impact on the
valuable work it carries out, which deserves our full
recognition.
We are concerned that, despite progress in the highlevel dialogue, serious incidents and tension continue
to occur on the ground, especially in the north. It is
therefore crucial for the high-level dialogue to have a
positive impact on the ground. We cannot but agree with

24

the Secretary-General that, in addition to the political
process, it is equally important for sustained efforts to
be made to promote reconciliation and increase trust
between the communities of Kosovo.
For Argentina, strengthening the respect for
the human rights of all communities in Kosovo is of
fundamental importance, as is bringing an end to acts
of intolerance and guaranteeing the swift return of
internally displaced persons. In our view, it is of the
utmost importance to ensure full respect for the human
rights of displaced persons returning to their places
of origin, so that they may access and exercise their
substantive rights and not fall victim to various forms
of violence or discrimination, in particular in cases
of undocumented returnees, who remain stateless.
We therefore assign great importance to the technical
assistance that UNMIK can provide in this context.
It is equally essential to strengthen policies aimed
at ending the discrimination suffered by various
communities, such as the Roma, Ashkali and small
Egyptian communities. The protection of cultural and
religious heritage must continue to be a priority for
UNMIK. While progress has been made in this area,
we remain concerned by the occurrence of vandalism
and religious intolerance, which should be firmly and
effectively condemned.
We also support and follow closely the work of the
EULEX Special Investigative Task Force created in
2011 to investigate reports of the inhumane treatment
of people and human organ trafficking in Kosovo.
We reaffirm the importance of tackling impunity and
ensuring accountability in a framework of cooperation
with the United Nations. It is important to underscore
the role of EULEX and UNMIK in investigating the
crimes committed during the armed conflict, with a
view to ending the impunity that persists to this day.
I should like to conclude by once again highlighting
the crucial importance of UNMIK’s work in promoting
security, stability and respect for human rights in
Kosovo, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).
We commend Special Representative Farid Zarif for
his efforts. We trust that the political dialogue that
is now under way will contribute to stability and
reconciliation, facilitate consensual solutions and
strengthen confidence among Kosovo’s community,
thereby making possible peaceful progress and lasting
prosperity.

13-26793

S/PV.6939

Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I should like
to thank Special Representative Farid Zarif for his
briefing this morning. I should also like to welcome to
the Council Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of Serbia,
and Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Prime Minister of Kosovo.
The Republic of Korea welcomes the ongoing
negotiations process between Belgrade and Pristina
on the normalization of relations. It is encouraging
that both sides have demonstrated seriousness and
firm political will to engage in the dialogue. We also
applaud the positive contributions of the European
Union in facilitating the high-level meetings. We are
especially grateful for the personal commitment to this
issue on the part of High Representative Ashton. While
the recent meeting in Brussels ended inconclusively,
we believe that such dialogue itself marks an important
step. Such high-level engagement has already led
to early results on the ground. Specifically, we are
pleased at the implementation of the integrated border
management agreement, with the opening of the four
crossing points on the border of northern Kosovo. We
encourage both sides to continue the dialogue to resolve
remaining differences. We sincerely hope that further
tangible progress will be made at the next meeting, on
2 April.
Turning to the security situation in Kosovo,
the overall security situation has remained calm
and stable. However, the recent unrest and fragile
security situation in northern Kosovo remains a
serious concern. There have been a number of violent
protests against the border agreement. In addition, we
are also concerned about multiple incidents targeting
minorities. With that shared concern, we encourage
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) to further strengthen its cooperation
with other international agencies and local authorities
in monitoring the situation and reducing tensions on the
ground.
Another serious concern is the growing number of
incidents of religious intolerance. In spite of the efforts
to the Kosovo Police and the Kosovo Force, incidents
involving the desecration of graves and Orthodox
cemeteries and the vandalism of religious of religious
and cultural heritage sites continued to be reported.
Such acts are unacceptable and need to be addressed
resolutely.
Those incidents and the increased tensions between
ethnic groups pose obstacles to the reconciliation process

13-26793

and the progress achieved so far. As such, we urge the
authorities in Kosovo to investigate such incidents
thoroughly, work towards bringing all perpetrators to
justice and take all the necessary preventive measures.
Confidence-building among communities is
indispensable in the entire process towards normalization
and long-term reconciliation. In spite of the significant
progress and the political dialogue, we have seen major
challenges stemming from misunderstanding a lack of
trust. Therefore, the political dialogue should take place
parallel to confidence-building measures, including
through educational initiatives and awareness-raising
campaigns. To that end, it is crucial that the authorities
of Kosovo integrate and embrace their citizens in the
north, as well as the ethnic minority groups.
In addition, public trust in the fairness and
credibility of law-enforcement agencies will be decisive
in building a harmonious, multi-ethnic society. Respect
for norms and standards and a strengthened role for
legal institutions will prevent minor incidents from
escalating into inter-communal clashes. In that context,
we encourage the Kosovo authorities to continue
to strengthen the national rule of law and to build
institutional capabilities in close coordination with the
European Rule of Law Mission.
In conclusion, I would like to commend Special
Representative Zarif and UNMIK for their commitment
and efforts to maintain peace and stability in Kosovo
and the region.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I would like to thank
Mr. Farid Zarif for his briefing. We have taken note
of the report (S/2013/72) of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).
We welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime
Minister of Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Hashim
Thaçi, Prime Minister of Kosovo, to the Security
Council and thank them for their statements.
There has been intense engagement between the two
Prime Ministers during the current reporting period.
We are encouraged by the commitment demonstrated
by both sides to resolve their differences through
peaceful means. We would like to commend the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Baroness Catherine
Ashton, for her tireless efforts to bring the two sides
closer to an agreement. Dialogue offers the best means

25

S/PV.6939

to address the outstanding issues between Kosovo and
Serbia and reach mutually acceptable solutions. We
therefore urge both sides to maintain the momentum of
the dialogue process and seize the present window of
opportunity by making the necessary compromises. We
sincerely hope that the next round of talks on 2 April
will lead to an agreement.
The report of the Secretary-General notes that
the high-level engagement between the two sides
has resulted in the start of the implementation of the
agreement on integrated border management at four of
the six crossing points. The full implementation of the
agreement will help to address a key source of discord
that has caused much of the violence witnessed over
the last year and a half. Implementation of the other
agreements concluded with the facilitation of the
European Union would also serve to enhance mutual
confidence and help the dialogue process.
The security situation in Kosovo has remained calm.
However, the north continued to see some violence. The
overall number of recorded incidents affecting minority
communities has decreased. All such incidents should
be thoroughly investigated and the perpetrators
brought to justice. Incidents involving the vandalism of
religious sites, damage and theft at Orthodox churches,
and the desecration of Orthodox graves continue to be
reported. Such incidents are harmful to intercommunal
relations and must be addressed.
The Kosovo police should ensure that it equally
provides for security for all communities inhabiting the
country. The adoption of the community policing and
action plan is a step in the right direction. The creation
of conditions for the peaceful integration of minority
communities and sustainable returns is essential for
building the foundation for long-term reconciliation. It
would help in convincing the Kosovo Serbs that they
share a common future with the Albanians.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s assessment
of the need for well-grounded efforts aimed at promoting
reconciliation among the communities in Kosovo
alongside the political process. That will require sincere
efforts on the part of the leadership on both sides. We
therefore encourage political leaders in both countries
to reach out to their respective constituencies in order
to prepare them for the difficult decisions and painful
compromises ahead.
Finally, UNMIK continues to play a vital role
in ensuring stability in Kosovo. We would like to

26

commend the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and his team for their dedication and hard work
in the service of peace in Kosovo.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the report (S/2013/72)
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
welcome the participation in today’s meeting of the
Serbian Prime Minister, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and thank him
and Mr. Hashim Thaçi for their statements.
Azerbaijan’s position with regard to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia and the
non-recognition of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration
of independence remain unchanged. Resolution 1244
(1999) continues to be the binding international legal
basis for a comprehensive settlement through a political
process and negotiations.
In that connection, we commend the leadership
in Belgrade and Pristina for their commitment and
determination to achieve substantial progress in the
dialogue facilitated by the High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Catherine Ashton.
Unfortunately, it was not possible to agree on some
of the most difficult issues during the meeting held in
Brussels on 20 March. We encourage the sides to remain
committed to reaching agreements through a mutually
acceptable solution and to make further progress
during the next meeting, scheduled for 2 April. The
successful outcome of the dialogue is indispensable so
as to move forward in overcoming the burden of the
past, normalizing relations and bringing about lasting
stability for the region.
We emphasize the utmost importance of UNMIK’s
presence and activities in Kosovo. As the SecretaryGeneral notes in his report, during the reporting
period the Mission continued to work closely with the
communities on the ground and to collaborate with
all other mandated international presences to enhance
the prospects of success in the political dialogue.
It is important that UNMIK maintain and further
develop its key role in ensuring the coordination of all
international efforts under its status-neutral framework,
as is envisaged in resolution 1244 (1999).
According to the report, the overall security
situation remained generally calm during the reporting

13-26793

S/PV.6939

period, with the exception of northern Kosovo, where
some serious incidents were reported. Indeed, ethnically
motivated attacks and violence, acts of vandalism of
religious sites and other forms of religious intolerance
have continued, affecting first and foremost the rights
and freedoms of minority communities in Kosovo.
Needless to say, the atmosphere of impunity for such
violations will hardly contribute to enhancing public
confidence or to building the foundation for long-term
reconciliation.
The voluntary return of internally displaced persons
to Kosovo again showed few signs of improvement
during the reporting period. At the same time, we
commend the efforts of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to
promote dialogue between potential returnees and the
receiving communities. According to the report, some
progress was also made in the provision of municipal
support for housing construction and refurbishment, as
well as in the implementation of the UNHCR return
and reintegration project. These are encouraging
developments that should be further supported and
promoted.
We agree with the Secretary-General that of
equal importance to the high-level political process
are sustained and well-grounded efforts to promote
reconciliation and to increase trust among the
communities in Kosovo. In that regard, the preservation
of the region’s rich cultural diversity and the further
promotion of its cultural and spiritual heritage on
the basis of ethnic and religious tolerance should
undoubtedly remain one of the key objectives.
The establishment of tools and the strengthening
of the principle of justice and the rule of law are also
imperative to building confidence and achieving a
lasting political settlement. In that regard, we take
note of the information regarding the ongoing criminal
investigation by the Special Investigative Task Force
into the report related to a wide range of alleged
criminal offences, including organized crime, the
inhuman treatment of people and organ trafficking. We
are encouraged by the high-level political commitments
throughout the region to support the investigation
conducted by the Task Force.
We note also that during the reporting period
UNMIK continued to support and encourage progress
on the issue of missing persons, which remains one of
the essential aspects of reconciliation. We encourage

13-26793

the sides and international partners to intensify their
efforts and enhance coordination to that end.
In conclusion, I should like to commend UNMIK,
under the leadership of Special Representative Zarif, for
its efforts and for its important role in the maintenance
of peace and stability in Kosovo and the entire region.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Special Representative Zarif for his presentation this
morning and for the participation in today’s debate by
Prime Ministers Dačić and Thaçi and for their remarks.
We warmly welcome them both.
Given that this is the first time that Australia has
spoken in a debate on Kosovo in the Council, I would
like to state Australia’s support for an independent and
sovereign Kosovo. While we recognize that there is
not a unanimity of views within the Council on this
question, Australia wishes to note that it was one of the
first few countries to recognize Kosovo’s independence,
in February 2008.
We commend the leadership displayed by both Prime
Ministers in elevating the European Union-mediated
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina to the highest
political level. That has been essential. Of course, it
is not an easy process, but we are very encouraged by
their personal and constructive contribution to seven
rounds of trilateral negotiations, including in Brussels
this week.
The discussions between the Prime Ministers
builds on other recent positive developments, including
the meeting between Presidents Nikolić and Jahjaga in
early February, which was a powerful symbol of the
commitment of both parties to continuing their dialogue
so as to find a long-term solution. Trust-building
and reconciliation among communities in Kosovo is,
obviously, a vital complement to the political process.
The role of the European Union (EU) and High
Representative Ashton has been decisive in advancing
the dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo. We commend
those ongoing endeavours, which have achieved
genuine results, including the commencement of the
integrated agreement on the management of crossing
points and customs, and the exchange of liaison officers
based in the EU delegations in Belgrade and Pristina.
Both countries have a European future.
We welcome the strong endorsement of the process
provided by both the National Assembly of Serbia and
the authorities of the Republic of Kosovo, which has

27

S/PV.6939

sent powerful messages to their own communities on
the fundamental importance to the futures of both
countries of a successful outcome to the negotiations.
The security situation in northern Kosovo,
particularly around northern Mitrovica, remains
fragile. Both sides need to do more and to work harder
to improve the situation in the north. We condemn acts
of vandalism against significant cultural and religious
heritage sites. The prompt reaction by local authorities,
the condemnation of violence by all political parties
and the swift action of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) have
helped to prevent further incidents, and we commend
those actions. We encourage all sides to take steps to
protect Kosovo’s rich and diverse heritage, including
that of the Serbian Orthodox and Muslim communities,
on the basis of ethnic and religious tolerance. We also
encourage the unimpeded resettlement of minority
returnees and internally displaced persons in Kosovo.
That is vital.
Australia would also like to express its appreciation
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Farid Zarif and the United Nations Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for their efforts to ensure
a consistent approach by the international presence
in Kosovo. We have to be frank about this. UNMIK’s
job, as mandated by the Council, is a difficult one, but
its work has complemented strongly the efforts by the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX), KFOR
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and helped to provide the stability to support
direct political dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade.
We support the ongoing investigation by EULEX into
the allegations of organ trafficking, and we support the
calls for any persons implicated in war crimes to be
held accountable.
To conclude, a broad and substantial political
settlement to the question of Kosovo is now within reach,
and Australia joins the Secretary-General and other
Council members in encouraging both Prime Ministers
to continue their dialogue with a determination to bring
about lasting stability, not only in Kosovo and between
Serbia and Kosovo, but in the broader Balkan region.
We look forward to progress on remaining sensitive
issues, such as the governing institutions in northern
Kosovo, at the next round of EU-mediated dialogue
in April. Following that, it will be important that
both parties leverage the confidence and trust that
they have so painstakingly created to achieve actual

28

implementation of the agreements reached at a political
level. For our part, we believe that the Security Council
and the international community generally stand ready
to assist the parties on their path to reconciliation,
security and stability.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We thank Mr. Zarif for introducing the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2013/72) on the activities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). We welcome the participation
in this meeting of Prime Minister Dačić of Serbia.
We share his assessments. We listened very closely to
Mr. Thaçi, as well.
Russia’s position with respect to the non-recognition
of the unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo
is unchanged. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in
force as the mandatory international legal basis for a
comprehensive settlement of the Kosovo issue. We
anticipate that the dialogue to be held at the highest
political level between Belgrade and Pristina, under
European Union mediation, will contribute to a longterm settlement of the issue of Kosovo. At the same
time, the Security Council still has the final word.
The United Nations Mission is the core international
civilian presence in Kosovo and must carry out its
functions in full, in accordance with its mandate under
the Security Council. To that end, it must be endowed
with all the necessary capacities and resources.
We believe that Kosovo made a serious mistake in
its decision to establish a new administrative office in
northern Mitrovica, which is financed, inter alia, with
resources assigned earlier to UNMIK administrative
tasks in the northern part of the city. That decision has
raised additional tensions in northern Mitrovica.
There has been a series of inter-ethnic and
sectarian incidents in Kosovo. Unfortunately, the most
flagrant of those do not receive due consideration or
analysis in the Secretary-General’s report. The wave
of anti-Serbian acts that swept through Kosovo in
January recalls the tragic events of March 2004. We
are particularly concerned about the events that took
place at the time of the Serbian Orthodox Christmas in
Kosovo. The detention and beating of Serbian believers
who arrived at Gračanica — in addition, reports
have said that took place in the courthouse building

13-26793

S/PV.6939

in Pristina — have again demonstrated the inability
of international entities, above all the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX), to appropriately withstand acts of
provocation by the Kosovar Albanian authorities. Two
months have already passed. What are the results of
the investigation? Was it neutral and impartial? We are
concerned about the widespread attacks against Serbian
cemeteries, which have resulted in the desecration
of more than 150 grave sites in more than a dozen
municipalities.
There was also an arson attack against a church in
the town of Obilić, as well as an attempt to burn down a
Serbian city hall building in Mitrovica. In that context,
the incident that stands out is the memorial to victims
of the Second World War, which was blown up in the
town of Vitina. We view that as an act of desecration
against the memory of the victims of fascism and those
who fought against it.
Over and over again, we have drawn attention to
the fact that progress on the issue of the resettlement
of Serbian refugees and internally displaced persons
is essentially nonexistent. An analysis of that situation
demonstrates that the Kosovar Albanian authorities
systematically impede their return to the province, the
restoration of their property rights and compliance with
internationally recognized fundamental human rights
and freedoms.
There is a conscious effort to create conditions
aimed at pushing the remaining Serbian population
out of Serbia, under the threat of reprisals, which is a
kind of ethnic cleansing by peaceful means, with all the
ensuing consequences.
We hope that in future reports on UNMIK and
on the situation in the province there will be an
objective picture drawn of the situation of the Serbian
population in Kosovo. We call on Mr. Zarif to provide a
fundamental assessment of the situation and to take an
active stance in accordance with his mandate.
The Russian Federation emphasizes that the
decisions taken with respect to northern Kosovo
must take into account the view of the local Serbian
population. If that is not done, compromises will remain
only on paper.
Without genuine steps carried out in the areas
of inter-ethnic dialogue and confidence-building,

13-26793

the prospects for a multiethnic society in Kosovo are
unrealistic.
We draw attention to the fact that, in the report,
attention is focused on the pace of the investigation of
the incidents reported by Council of Europe Special
Rapporteur Dick Marty on the illegal trafficking of
human organs in Kosovo. However, that is not enough.
We are looking forward to results. All perpetrators of
such acts must be brought to justice. If EULEX does
not have sufficient capacity to ensure an effective,
objective and impartial investigation, we will not
remove that issue from the United Nations agenda.
Under the mandate of the Security Council, KFOR
bears core responsibility for the maintenance of security
in the province. Any change in its function or format
must be approved by the Council.
We hope that NATO will recognize the possible
consequences of the transfer of KFOR’s responsibility
for the safety and security of Orthodox monasteries
in the southern part of the province to Pristina’s law
enforcement entities, and therefore carry out effective
measures aimed at avoiding sectarian or inter-ethnic
clashes.
We have repeatedly discussed the distressing
situation in the provinces home to Serbian Orthodox
churches, which have been the subject of vandalism and
attacks on their clergy. That problem calls for focused
attention. The situation is totally intolerable with respect
to the Visoki Dečani Monastery, which UNESCO has
designated as a World Heritage Site. Local authorities
are inciting the populace to protest with a demand to
confiscate the land of the Monastery. The decisions of
the Kosovo courts have been ignored, as have the calls
of the international community.
We are concerned about statements regarding this
year’s conversion of the Kosovo security force into a
full-fledged armed force. The Kosovo security force
consists essentially of Albanians, the majority of
whom were earlier militia members. We view that as a
potential threat to regional stability.
One must also highlight the heightened Albanian
rhetoric. Statements have not gone unnoticed in terms
of the intention of Pristina to give patronage to ethnic
Albanians regardless of their country of residence. That
constitutes a direct step towards the destabilization not
only of Kosovo, but of Serbia’s neighbours, including the

29

S/PV.6939

former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Greece.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The stabilization of the situation in Kosovo
remains far off. Problems in the province can be
solved only through political means. We anticipate that
all international presences will fully adhere to that
common position within the framework of efforts to
implement the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).

There are no more names inscribed on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

30

The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

13-26793
