United Nations

S/PV.6560

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6560th meeting
Tuesday, 21 June 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Messone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Berger
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the modalities for the establishment of
specialized Somali anti-piracy courts (S/2011/360)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-38134 (E)

*1138134*

S/PV.6560

which reflects the Security Council’s close attention to
this pressing issue.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the
modalities for the establishment of specialized
Somali anti-piracy courts (S/2011/360)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Patricia
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs
and United Nations Legal Counsel, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/360, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the modalities for the
establishment of specialized Somali anti-piracy courts.
I now give the floor to Ms. O’Brien.
Ms. O’Brien: I am pleased to have this
opportunity to present the report before the Council on
behalf of the Secretary-General (S/2011/360).
The Secretary-General has consistently advocated
for the international community to take action to
counter piracy and to respond in the most proactive
way possible. He has pressed the United Nations and
other international organizations to do more to
contribute to a solution to this complex problem that
poses so many challenges. The Council will recall that
the Secretary-General dispatched me on a mission to
Kenya as far back as March 2009 to discuss the issue
with Kenyan authorities and to engage with the United
Nations offices active on the ground. Most recently, in
April, he dispatched me again to represent him at the
conference organized and hosted by the Government of
the United Arab Emirates. The theme of the conference
was “Global challenge, regional responses: forging a
common approach to maritime piracy”. For my Office,
the piracy dossier remains an active and important one,

2

The human cost of piracy off the coast of Somalia
is incalculable, with killings and widespread hostagetaking of sailors. The increasing number of incidents of
piracy, the escalation of violence and the expanding
geographical scope of the attacks are all extremely
worrying. The commercial cost of this scourge is also
very high. As I said when presenting the previous
report (S/2010/394) on behalf of the Secretary-General
in August last year (see S/PV.6374), the problem of
piracy
clearly
demonstrates
the
increasing
interdependence of States and people in a globalized
world. The number and diversity of States and
organizations with a stake in finding a solution
provides strong evidence of this fact, with human
welfare and commercial and security interests
remaining under serious threat.
Against this background, the Secretary-General’s
report on the modalities for the establishment of
specialized Somali courts to try suspected pirates both
in Somalia and in the region, including an
extraterritorial Somali specialized anti-piracy court, is
a timely contribution that I believe will assist the
Security Council’s deliberations. It has had input from
my Office, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the Department of
Political Affairs, the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia (UNPOS), the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Safety and Security
(DSS), the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and INTERPOL. In responding to the
Security Council’s request in resolution 1976 (2011),
we have taken into account the work of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. I and other
senior members of the Office of Legal Affairs have
also consulted a number of concerned regional States.
The report (S/2011/30, annex) of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Adviser on Legal Issues Related to
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, Mr. Jack Lang, has
been highly praised for comprehensively addressing
the operational, security, jurisdictional and economic
aspects of piracy off the coast of Somalia, and for
setting out an emergency plan focused on Somalia. His
report brings together, for the first time, all of the
facets of the problem, and makes concrete suggestions
for action.

11-38134

S/PV.6560

By making specific recommendations for the
establishment of three Somali specialized anti-piracy
courts, he has sharpened the debate and laid the ground
for the detailed assessment of the modalities for such
courts, as requested by the Security Council. Two
aspects of Mr. Lang’s report, in particular, have
provided the impetus for productive inquiries by my
Office, namely, the availability of legal experts among
the Somali diaspora to add impetus to the development
of Somali specialized courts and the need to disrupt the
activities of the financiers and planners of piracy. The
results of our consultations on the basis of these
aspects highlighted by Mr. Lang are set out in annexes
III and IV, respectively, to the Secretary-General’s
report.
Mr. Lang noted in his report that the
strengthening of the rule of law in Somalia remained
the guiding principle underlying the proposal for the
establishment of Somali specialized anti-piracy courts.
The legal and practical considerations for the
establishment of such courts include such matters as
the constitutional and legal basis in Somalia; the need
for adequate criminal and procedural legislation for the
prosecution of pirates; a sufficient number of trained
judges and other legal professionals; security
considerations; sufficient prison accommodations that
comply with international standards; financing; and the
timeline for the establishment of such courts. These are
the modalities that are the subject of the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
The report contains a factual assessment of these
modalities, based on the information that is set out in
the five annexes to the report and the consultations
with concerned regional States that my Office and I
have conducted. I would like to emphasize from the
outset that, if the Council should wish to mandate the
Secretary-General to look in greater depth at any of the
particular modalities considered in the report, my
Office and I stand ready to do so. Furthermore, if the
Council wishes to request the Secretary-General
actively to address any of the modalities with a view to
moving towards the establishment of Somali
specialized courts, we will do so as a matter of priority.
We were greatly assisted in the preparation of the
Secretary-General’s report by the fact that UNDP,
UNODC and UNPOS are active on the ground in
Somalia in assisting Somali authorities to address some
of these matters. UNDP and UNODC are working to
develop the capacity of the courts in Somaliland and

11-38134

Puntland to conduct piracy prosecutions in conformity
with international standards. The report draws on that
experience in assessing, in section II, the modalities for
the establishment of specialized anti-piracy courts in
Somalia and, in section III, the modalities for the
establishment of an extraterritorial Somali anti-piracy
court located in another State in the region.
Before outlining the content of those two sections
of the report, I would like to mention an initial point as
to the scope of the report. Paragraph 26 of Security
Council resolution 1976 (2011) asks the SecretaryGeneral to report on the modalities for the
establishment of specialized Somali courts to try
suspected pirates. The resolution does not specify
whether
the
recommendation
concerns
the
establishment of new Somali courts, the establishment
of new specialized chambers within existing Somali
courts or the development of the capacity of the
existing assize sections within Somali courts, which
have jurisdiction to hear piracy cases.
As that was not specified in the Security Council
resolution, nor in Mr. Lang’s report that led to it, the
Secretary-General’s report deals with all three of these
possibilities. The Secretary-General’s report also
makes it clear that it would be for the Somali
authorities to determine whether the establishment of
new courts, or new specialized chambers within
existing courts, would be compatible with the relevant
provisions of the 1960 Constitution of the Somali
Republic and the 2004 Transitional Federal Charter for
the Somali Republic.
To address Mr. Lang’s recommendation regarding
specialized courts in Somaliland and Puntland, UNDP
and UNODC are engaged in programmes of assistance
in the courts in those regions to build the capacity of
the assize sections to try piracy cases. This important
work is ongoing, and it is estimated that it will take
around three years to bring piracy trials up to
international standards. This will be a key
development, because the courts in Somaliland and
Puntland are conducting large numbers of prosecutions.
Two hundred and ninety cases have been concluded or
are ongoing in Puntland, with 94 cases in Somaliland.
The programmes of assistance are aimed at
increasing the numbers of prosecutions in each region
by about 20 cases per year, with each case involving
about 10 accused. Achieving international standards
will be a critical step, because it will open the way for

3

S/PV.6560

naval States to be able to enter into arrangements with
Somali authorities for the transfer of piracy suspects
apprehended at sea to Somaliland and Puntland for
prosecution.
The timeline of three years could possibly be
shortened through the use of international experts to
assist and mentor local professionals. Initial research
by my Office confirms that there are legal
professionals among the Somali diaspora who could be
contacted to determine whether they would be willing
and able to play that role.
A further key step in opening the way for naval
States to transfer suspects apprehended at sea to
Somalia would be the building of new prisons in
Somaliland and Puntland to provide a total of
1,000 prison spaces that complied with international
standards. That will take about two years to achieve.
The total cost of these UNDP and UNODC
programmes of assistance over the next three years,
both in relation to he courts and the prisons, is
calculated at approximately $24 million. Salary and
security costs would be likely to increase if
international experts were deployed to assist the
development of trial capacity. The challenges facing
these programmes of assistance in Somaliland and
Puntland include critically out of date criminal and
procedural codes and a shortage of trained judges and
other legal professionals.
As I emphasized in my introduction, an
extraterritorial Somali court could be a new court
established for the purpose located extraterritorially, a
new specialized chamber established within an existing
court located extraterritorially or an existing section of
a Somali court located extraterritorially. In any of these
events, the determination as to whether such court or
chamber would be compatible with the relevant Somali
constitutional provisions, or whether an amendment of
the Transitional Federal Charter would be required for
that purpose, would be for Somali authorities to make.
They would also need to consider the need for a
specific legislative basis for the court or chamber.
The views of the Transitional Federal
Government and Somali regional authorities are
important in the consideration of the proposal for the
establishment of an extraterritorial Somali court or
special chamber, as are the views of the States in the
region that could potentially host such a court or
special chamber. I and other senior members of my

4

Office therefore conducted three sets of consultations,
including in the region. We also sought views in
writing. Those consulted were the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia and the regional authorities in
Somaliland, Puntland and Galmadug, and Tanzania,
Kenya, the Seychelles, Mauritius and Djibouti.
The Transitional Federal Government of Somalia
and Somali regional authorities were not favourable to
the location of a Somali court outside of Somalia. In
the most recent consultations, officials of the
Transitional Federal Government and of Puntland and
Galmadug expressed their preference for the location
of any such court within Somalia, and confirmed their
willingness to work towards agreement on a location
for it.
Among the States of the region consulted as
potential host States for an extraterritorial Somali
court, the Government of Tanzania expressed its
readiness to host the court within the current premises
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) in Arusha. In such an event, the Government
considered it imperative that prison construction in
Somalia be completed on time to avoid those convicted
being held in Tanzania for lengthy periods. The ICTR
has confirmed that, as its work approaches completion,
one courtroom, office space and cells for 30 piracy
suspects could be made available. The office space and
numbers of cells available will increase during 2012
and 2013. However, the ICTR also highlighted that its
premises are within the Arusha International
Conference Complex, which it shares with other
international bodies. It also raised serious security
concerns about hosting an extraterritorial Somali
anti-piracy court within those premises.
The United Nations Department of Safety and
Security shares that concern and advises that a full
security risk assessment would be needed. They
consider that hosting the anti-piracy court would
significantly increase the security risks to the ICTR,
and potentially to the United Nations more widely. The
fact that the premises are shared limits the ability to
upgrade security. DSS therefore recommends that
stand-alone premises would need to be found.
The Government of the Seychelles considered
that the proposal for an extraterritorial Somali
anti-piracy court needed considerable further
discussion and consultation before any substantive
reply could be prepared for the Security Council.

11-38134

S/PV.6560

The Government of Mauritius supported the idea
of on extraterritorial Somali anti-piracy court, but was
faced with a number of practical difficulties and
capacity constraints that prevented it from hosting a
court at this stage.
If the proposal for an extraterritorial Somali court
were to proceed, a key modality would be the
negotiation of an agreement between the Transitional
Federal Government and the host State to regulate their
respective rights and obligations. Drawing on the
Lockerbie precedent, in which the United Kingdom and
the Netherlands agreed in 1998 that a Scottish court
could conduct a trial in the territory of the Netherlands,
such agreement would be likely to require provisions
to regulate the exercise of Somali jurisdiction within a
specified location in the territory of the host State; the
receipt and transfer of suspects through the territory of
the host State; the security of premises and persons;
privileges and immunities; cooperation between the
two States; and the responsibility for costs.
It is difficult at this stage to estimate a timeline
for the establishment of an extraterritorial court.
Factors affecting the timeline would include, for
example, the views of the concerned States and the
need for the negotiation of an agreement between the
Somali authorities and the host State for the
establishment of the court. Some of the relevant factors
are currently being addressed, such as the training of
judges and other legal professionals, as well as the
improvement of prison conditions in Somalia. We have
also confirmed that legal experts from among the
Somali diaspora would be contactable and may be
available to mentor and assist Somali legal
professionals.
Similarly, it is difficult to estimate the costs of
the establishment and functioning of an extraterritorial
court at this stage. The closest comparisons that we
have may be the costs of the Special Panels in TimorLeste, which were approximately $4 to $5 million
dollars per year, and the Bosnia War Crimes Chamber,
which costs about €13 million per year.
If, at the other end of the spectrum, there were to
be participation in an extraterritorial court by United
Nations-selected judges, prosecutors and staff, the
closest comparison would be the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia, which is a
national Cambodian court with a United Nations

11-38134

component embedded within it. Its budget for the
current biennium is $92.3 million.
I would like to underline the position that I set
out at the beginning of my statement. If the Council
wishes to mandate the Secretary-General to look in
greater depth at any of the particular modalities
considered in the report, or to request the SecretaryGeneral actively to address any of the modalities with a
view to moving towards the establishment of Somali
specialized courts, including an extraterritorial Somali
court, we will do so urgently.
This brings to an end my introductory remarks. I
am looking forward to the debate and am happy to
answer any questions.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to members of the Council who wish to make
statements.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Ms. O’Brien for her
briefing and for the thorough analysis contained in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/360) on the
legal and practical aspects of the establishment of
specialized anti-piracy courts in Somaliland and
Puntland and an extraterritorial Somali court with
international participation. The report provides
sufficient basis for further movement forward towards
the creation of an effective system for the judicial
prosecution of pirates. It is important to carefully
analyse the constitutional and legal framework for the
establishment of new anti-piracy courts and their
possible material and procedural bases, as well as
questions relating to staffing and security.
We welcome in particular the readiness of
Tanzania, as noted in the report, to host the
extraterritorial court on its territory. The Security
Council would thus have, in the leadership of that
country, a responsible and reliable regional partner in
the criminal prosecution of pirates.
However, we share the view of Tanzania that
strengthening the extraterritorial court by adding an
international component is a necessary condition for its
effective functioning in accordance with international
standards.
There are numerous problems noted in the report
concerning the creation of a system of anti-piracy
courts. We had expected that there would be many, but
there are no more than there were when the Security

5

S/PV.6560

Council helped to create other judicial organs, and they
can all be resolved with sufficient political will.

(S/2011/360)
presentation.

In that connection, we are concerned at the
information contained in the report on the lack of
consent from the Transitional Federal Government and
regional Somali authorities with respect to the idea of
two anti-piracy courts, in Somaliland and Puntland,
and an extraterritorial court. We do not believe that
such a position is rational. It is clear that neither
Somalia nor other States that are in a more favourable
position can deal alone with the problem of the judicial
prosecution of pirates. Even international efforts to
strengthen the capacity of the judicial systems of
Somalia and other States in the region have proved
insufficient, as is evident from the statistics contained
in the report. Thousands of Somalis are involved in the
piracy business, and, in spite of all the efforts made to
strengthen the capacity of national judicial systems,
only a few of them reach the court system.

The report, in its analytical approach, reflects the
difficulty of the subject that we are addressing today.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia is indeed a complex
issue, as the Council has acknowledged, in particular in
its resolution 1976 (2011), adopted in April. A solution
to this problem requires responding to a variety of
social, economic and security challenges. The report of
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal
Issues Related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
Mr. Jack Lang (S/2011/30, annex), was particularly
eloquent in that regard.

If we look beyond narrow interests, it is clear that
there is no choice other than to create two specialized
courts, in Somaliland and Puntland, and an
extraterritorial court with international participation.
That is the absolute minimum.
The current situation involving piracy in general
and the judicial prosecution of pirates in particular is
far from being acceptable. It is necessary to continue to
make clear to the Somali authorities the advantages of
the option for the criminal prosecution of piracy, which
is exclusively pro-Somali in essence. Together with the
other members of the Security Council and the
Secretariat, we will endeavour, in the near future, to
work on eliminating existing obstacles to the creation
of courts in Somaliland and Puntland and an
anti-piracy court with international participation. We
do not rule out the possibility of other options that do
not stipulate the need to obtain consent from the
Somali authorities. We will also look for ways to
resolve other problems noted in the report.
We are convinced that any measures provided for
in resolution 1976 (2011) to fight against piracy in the
economic and security areas can be successful only if
they are paired with steps aimed at the effective
creation of a mechanism involving international
participation for the judicial prosecution of pirates.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I wish to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report

6

and

the

Legal

Counsel

for

her

One of the most important proposals to fight the
piracy threat in the region was the establishment of an
extraterritorial Somali court functioning in Arusha. The
solution, long defended by my country, represents the
most practical way of swiftly addressing the situation
of impunity for piracy in the region through a Somali
solution — a solution that is flexible enough to help
attract international capacity support, capable of
responding to needs on the ground as they evolve, and
also able to be rapidly set up, since it could rely on
existing facilities.
It was with this in mind that the Security Council
requested the Secretary-General, in its resolution 1976
(2011), to report on the modalities for the
establishment of specialized Somali courts to try
suspected pirates, both in Somalia and in the region,
including an extraterritorial Somali specialized
anti-piracy court consistent with applicable human
rights law and with the participation of international
personnel and other international support.
The thorough report presented by the Office of
Legal Affairs deals with the many components of the
solution and identifies exhaustively the difficulties and
challenges ahead. We note in particular the complex
political context, the security situation in Somalia and
the need for stabilization in the country and, in
particular, for political will for such a solution to be
viable.
We encourage the Office of Legal Affairs to
pursue its efforts in that regard, in particular in its
contacts with the Transitional Federal Government in
the months to come so as to determine, in cooperation
with the Somali authorities, a feasible road map of
activities conducive to the establishment of a Somali

11-38134

S/PV.6560

judicial solution to piracy, including through the
definition of the necessary legal framework.

facilitate the execution of the necessary procedural acts
in Somalia, including arrest warrants.

We welcome also the positive response by the
Government of Tanzania to the proposal to establish an
extraterritorial Somali specialized anti-piracy court in
Arusha. Such a solution, which builds on existing
premises and capacity in the existing International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) premises, seems
to be a practical way forward. We note also the
convergence of this aim with the downsizing and
completion strategy of the ICTR, and the possibility of
using available space in courtrooms and facilities in the
near future, not losing sight, naturally, of the security
needs to be safeguarded.

Finding a solution to counter impunity for piracy
has never been easy. Moreover, in the particular
situation of the Somali conflict and the security
environment in the country, the challenge is even more
complex. But we remain convinced that any solution to
piracy off the coast of Somalia can be found only
inland. The capacities to be established now are to
benefit this country, because only by supporting
Somalia to overcome this challenge can the
international community put an end to the scourge of
piracy in the region.

We thank the ICTR for its cooperation and
positive approach and welcome further efforts in
evaluating concrete needs to accommodate this
solution. We commend also the active support of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in training
in the area of judiciary activities and in prompting the
necessary debate over the future needs for such a
solution.
To fight the scourge of piracy, we should
concentrate our efforts on targeting those suspected of
financing and planning acts of piracy. They are the
most responsible for and the real masterminds of the
majority of piracy incidents off the coast of Somalia
and should therefore be the principal aim of our action.
As the report underlines, consultations with a
number of Member States, INTERPOL, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Department of
Political Affairs and the Monitoring Group of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 751 (1992) suggest that the identities of key
leaders of pirate networks and their location and
political connections are widely known. Many of them
are reportedly within Somalia. Therefore, any solution
that is aimed at prosecuting such persons cannot be
detached from the legal environment of where they
actually live.
That is why a solution must be based on Somali
law, even if initially through an extraterritorial court
justified by the current security situation in Somalia
and the need to ensure safe and swift investigation and
prosecution. Such a solution would, indeed, allow for
investigations to be conducted securely from the
outside but under a legal framework that would

11-38134

We strongly support the Office of Legal Affairs
and encourage it to pursue all necessary efforts with
that goal in mind.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by thanking the Under-Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, Patricia O’Brien, for briefing the Council on
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/360)
submitted pursuant to resolution 1976 (2011) on the
modalities for the establishment of specialized Somali
courts to try suspected pirates in Somalia and outside,
including an extraterritorial Somali specialized
anti-piracy court and the possible participation of
international personnel and other international support
and assistance.
The international community is facing an
unprecedented and growing threat from piracy. The
report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/360) presents a
very alarming picture. Despite an increased naval
presence in the Internationally Recommended Transit
Corridor (IRTC), piracy attacks off the coast of
Somalia have continued to increase, as have the
geographical range of the attacks and the level of
violence employed by pirates.
As of 14 June, 23 ships are being held by pirates,
with a total of 477 hostages. The geographical area of
the attacks now stretches to 2.8 million square miles,
which is not easy for naval forces to patrol. The use of
overwhelming force by pirates to overcome security
personnel on board merchant ships and the use of
hijacked crews as human shields are also matters of
serious concern.
Piracy is not only a threat to the freedom of
maritime navigation; it has destabilizing effects on
global and regional trade and on security and is

7

S/PV.6560

jeopardizing the lives of seafarers, who are the
lifeblood of the international economy.
To combat this menace, this Council has adopted
a multilateral and multidimensional approach that as a
first step led to the establishment of the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, in January 2009, of
which India is a founding member. Though naval ships
deployed in the Gulf of Aden have successfully
thwarted several piracy attempts and have provided
security escorts to the merchant marine in those waters,
the growing scope and expanding area covered by the
problem indicate that naval operations alone may not
be sufficient and that there is an urgent need to adopt a
comprehensive counter-piracy strategy.
In that connection, I would like to mention the
issue of seafarers, who are the lifeline of merchant
shipping. India contributes around seven per cent of the
world’s merchant marine and thus has an abiding
interest in their safety and security. So far, the main
focus of our concerted efforts has been to protect the
ships from pirate attacks and on issues related to
prosecution and punishment of pirates. Keeping in
view the increasing incidences of seafarers being taken
as hostages and the intensity of the violence used
against them, there is a need to pay special attention to
the safety, security and well being of seafarers taken
hostage and to their quick release by whatever means
appropriate.
In addition to a naval solution, this Council is
also focusing its attention on ways and means to
effectively apprehend, prosecute and punish those who
engage in piracy. Capacity-building, not only of
Somalia but of other States in the region, is an essential
component of such mechanisms. India has welcomed
efforts to counter piracy by enhancing regional
cooperation and capacity-building of States in the
region. The international community needs to
recognize that any effort to prosecute and imprison
pirates cannot succeed without the effective
involvement of the States in the region.
The issue of imprisonment of convicted persons
can be best addressed by building prison infrastructures
in the region, ideally in Somalia. It is also important to
ensure that sustained and predictable financing is
available to the host States to handle the financial
burden of prosecuting and imprisoning convicts over
periods of long duration.

8

Ensuring sound and prompt prosecution of piracy
suspects and their imprisonment subsequent to trial is
critical to prevent impunity and deter further attacks.
We fully support strengthening the ongoing United
Nations assistance programmes and extending them to
regional States to build capacities for prosecution and
imprisonment of pirates. United Nations assistance
could focus on the three main components of legal
reform: capacity-building for prosecution and trial of
piracy cases, effective law enforcement, and
improvement of prison infrastructure in Somalia and
regional States.
We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), which has
contributed significantly to strengthening the law
enforcement, prosecutorial and judicial capacities in
Puntland and Somaliland. We are very encouraged by
the number of piracy cases successfully prosecuted in
Somalia, and we urge UNODC to continue its good
efforts.
We also appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations Development Programme in increasing prison
capacity and improving safety and security in Somalia
so that those held responsible for committing acts of
piracy can undergo imprisonment in their own country.
This would also help in the smooth rehabilitation of
convicts once they are released after completing their
sentences. Establishment of more such prisons would
also enable the transfer of convicted persons from
other countries to undergo the remainder of their
sentence in Somalia.
We welcome the volunteering by States in the
region to cooperate in the prosecution and punishment
of suspected pirates. We support the establishment of
any extraterritorial court outside Somalia in which
Somalis have an ownership, the courts that are manned
by Somali judges and prosecutors in accordance with
Somali law. We are happy to note from the SecretaryGeneral’s report that the requisite expertise may be
available in the Somali diaspora and that they are
willing to contribute to the Somali cause.
Participation of an international component as
judges and prosecutors in anti-piracy courts may not be
a pragmatic and long-term solution to the problem.
Anti-piracy courts cannot be equated with specialized
international tribunals set up for dealing for cases of
war crimes or crimes against humanity. Pirates belong
to an ordinary class of criminal, and they should be

11-38134

S/PV.6560

treated like any other criminal who commits similar
offences on land.
Besides being cost-effective, the approach with
Somali ownership will be relatively easier to
implement, as it would utilize an existing jurisdiction
with established crimes and procedures. The regional
proximity would be useful for the purpose of the
transfer of suspects by patrolling naval States and of
those convicted to third States for imprisonment.
We fully support the finding in annex IV of the
report that steps to disrupt land-based pirate activities
and the associated financial flow are necessary in a
multidimensional counter-piracy approach. Therefore,
it is essential to investigate and prosecute individuals
who provide the leadership and financial flows that
sustain piracy. That would require broader criminal
legislation to include crimes of extortion, kidnapping,
conspiracy, money-laundering and financing of pirate
activities.
Given the limited capacity of the Transitional
Federal Government and other countries in the region,
there is a strong need for capacity-building in this area
too, with the active collaboration of UNODC.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that
with the increased presence of international naval
forces off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden,
pirates have moved to other areas. There has been an
increase in piracy activities in the larger Indian Ocean
area outside the IRTC. India has a strong and abiding
interest in ensuring the security of maritime traffic off
the Somali coast and in the Gulf of Aden. We stand
ready to contribute to any international effort to
increase effective cooperation among States to tackle
the threat of piracy and armed robbery at sea and the
safety and release of hostages taken by pirates.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/360)
and Patricia O’Brien for her comprehensive briefing
this morning. I also commend Mr. Jack Lang, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General, for his work on this
issue, which led to the adoption of resolution 1976
(2011).
The United Kingdom remains strongly committed
to the fight against piracy across the spectrum of
necessary activity to address piracy directly and to
tackle the roots of piracy on land. We continue to
provide military assets in support of the European

11-38134

Union, NATO and the Combined Maritime Forces
counter-piracy naval operations, and we provide
capacity development support to regional partners,
including direct support to the Coast Guard of the
Seychelles.
The United Kingdom is supporting work to target
pirate leaders and disrupt the financial flows linked to
piracy. The United Kingdom is also taking forward
work to identify how development work can most
effectively be targeted to undermine piracy.
As a key part of this commitment to a
comprehensive approach to counter-piracy, the United
Kingdom strongly supports efforts to deliver viable
legal solutions. In the past year the United Kingdom
has provided $8 million of support for the work of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in building
the capacity of local courts and prisons in the region, in
line with the Special Adviser’s recommendations.
In our view, there must be particular emphasis on
efforts to build prison capacity, which remains the
critical capacity issue, much more so than court
capacity. It is of note that there is a greater willingness
among regional partners to prosecute suspected pirates
than there is to hold those convicted, and that the
Somali administrations are willing to accept post-trial
transfers from courts in the Seychelles, and in principle
from others too, once similar agreements are reached.
The United Kingdom welcomes the stated intention of
the authorities in Somalia to work with the United
Nations on specialized anti-piracy courts within
Somalia and on prisons within Somalia to provide
more capacity in both areas as soon as possible.
As Patricia O’Brien has highlighted this morning,
the report sets out the clear view of the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia and the regional
administrations of Somalia that they do not support the
establishment of a specialized Somali anti-piracy court
outside of Somalia. We believe that it would be wrong
to disregard their views.
In addition, the report sets out the challenges and
difficulties that would be faced in setting up such an
extraterritorial court. It seems clear that it would not be
workable in the near future for legal and other reasons,
nor would it be cost-effective when compared to the
costs of prosecution in national courts in the region or
elsewhere. The United Kingdom believes that such a
proposal should therefore now be put aside and efforts

9

S/PV.6560

and money focused instead on supporting national
courts and prison capacity.
Regarding the specific proposal to base an
extraterritorial court in Arusha, the United Kingdom
believes that a single extraterritorial court in Arusha
would be unable to handle the problem. Both the
judicial and detention requirements would be more
than Arusha can provide, particularly while the
Rwanda Tribunal continues its work.
The United Kingdom is willing to consider
prosecuting pirates in its national courts on a case-bycase basis, especially where our nationals have been
affected, and we encourage all flag States and
international partners to show similar willingness. We
pay tribute to partners who have taken forward such
prosecutions already and express particular gratitude to
the Governments of Kenya, the Seychelles and Somalia
for their leadership role in the region, as well as to the
Governments of India and the United States for their
repeated willingness to take determined steps to ensure
prosecution of the pirates captured by their military
forces.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I also want to thank
Under-Secretary-General O’Brien for her insightful
and comprehensive briefing on the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2011/360).
The Secretary-General’s report does not just paint
a vivid picture of the challenges in the fight against
piracy off the coast of Somalia. It also profiles a range
of options to address the threat with a renewed sense of
urgency. Nigeria shares this sense of urgency, including
with regard to the need for swift action, considering the
devastating impact of piracy on Somalia, the Horn of
Africa and especially international trade. We share the
Special Adviser’s basic premise that convergent
comprehensive measures are required to co-opt the
menace, in particular the establishment of a legal
regime to prosecute piracy cases. We believe that such
a regime should be anchored in internationally
supported, Somali-led objectives and national
ownership.
Nigeria supports the measures the SecretaryGeneral has outlined in the report to engender global
cooperation in the fight against piracy. We believe that
overcoming the jurisdictional, legislative and
constitutional challenges to multinational prosecution
of piracy cases requires international cooperation.
Mindful of the significant investment required, we

10

welcome the Special Adviser’s estimated timeline of
two to three years for developing the requisite national
and regional legal regime and infrastructure to combat
piracy. The depth of talent and ability within the
Somali diaspora should be explored to augment local
capacity and build a robust extraterritorial legal
system.
Nigeria views broad-based regional criminalization
of piracy and the establishment of specialized piracy
courts within Somalia and the region as imperative in
the fight against piracy. To foster regional cooperation,
we support enhanced coordination and informationsharing among the private sector, law enforcement
agencies and relevant international and regional
organizations. Indeed, we support the strengthening of
anti-money-laundering capabilities in the region.
As significant as these counter-piracy measures
are, they will require a determined, cohesive
government to steer their implementation. With the
Al-Shabaab-driven insurgency and the incessant
wrangling plaguing the leadership of the Transitional
Federal Institutions, piracy has not yet received the
desired robust response from the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG). Stabilizing Somalia’s political
environment is therefore a prerequisite to a
comprehensive and enduring counter-piracy action.
As expressed in resolution 1976 (2011), Somali
authorities should assume the responsibility of creating
clear political and economic alternatives to piracy.
Reviving Somalia’s domestic industry is in consonance
with the Special Adviser’s suggested cluster of
measures for preventing piracy. The TFG institutions
should now begin the process of building consensus on
national goals around the Kampala accord, following
the resignation of Prime Minister Mohamed. We
encourage parliament to revise Somalia’s law to
provide a sound criminal and procedural basis for
prosecutions. States in the region should also take
similar actions under their domestic laws, in
accordance with resolution 1918 (2010).
Considering the negative effects of illegal fishing
and maritime pollution, Nigeria remains unwavering in
its support of the Special Adviser’s recommendation on
the establishment of an independent committee to
investigate allegations of illegal fishing and dumping
of toxic waste in Somali waters. We also renew our call
for generous contributions to the trust fund for this
purpose.

11-38134

S/PV.6560

With regard to the appropriate reach of an
extraterritorial court, our view is that it is primarily a
jurisdictional issue. Nigeria has always viewed piracy
as a crime of international jurisdiction. Therefore,
pirates may be prosecuted by any regional court of
sufficient competence within Somalia and the region.
However, given the necessary challenges to managing
a regional court, we believe that such a forum should
be reserved for high-profile cases of regional
significance.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): We thank UnderSecretary-General Patricia O’Brien for her very
informative briefing.
Piracy is a serious scourge affecting the situation
in Somalia. It has further aggravated the grave crisis in
the country. The consequences of piracy extend far
beyond Somalia’s borders and threaten the stability of
the entire region. Its material burden has reached
alarming levels and has been surpassed only by the
tragic human costs to those who face the horrors of
kidnapping and death.
The comprehensive report of Special Adviser
Jack Lang (S/2011/30, annex) was a welcome
contribution to the considerations of the international
community on the issues. We welcome the fact that
resolution 1976 (2011) incorporated many of the
recommendations of that report. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/360) being discussed today
addresses an important component of that effort as it
elaborates on the modalities for the creation of
specialized Somali anti-piracy courts.
Brazil gives particular attention to the issue of
capacity-building for training and to the provision of
adequate facilities for the tasks involved in the
prosecutorial process. We also encourage Somali
authorities to give due attention to the need for revision
in its legislation on piracy, and to establish the
necessary laws for efficient criminal and procedural
foundations for prosecutions. Regarding the issue of
extraterritorial Somali courts, the opinion of Somali
authorities must be the guide to any action by the
international community.
As we continue to deliberate on better ways to
combat piracy, it will be necessary to maintain efforts
towards the improvement of prosecution mechanisms,
while at the same time focusing on the deeper issue of
the underlying causes of piracy. We fully concur with
the assertion of Mr. Lang’s report that it is necessary to

11-38134

create socio-economic opportunities that can curtail the
recruitment of pirates and to encourage alternatives
that contribute constructively to the situation in
Somalia. As Brazil has previously stated, a
comprehensive strategy is required so as to combine
repressive and punitive measures with preventive ones
through initiatives on land that can help mitigate the
problems at sea.
Mr. Dunn (United States of America): We join
our colleagues in thanking Under-Secretary-General
O’Brien for her thorough briefing this morning. The
United States fully agrees with Under-SecretaryGeneral O’Brien and Special Adviser Jack Lang that to
address piracy effectively solutions must be found both
on land and at sea, and that there must be judicial
consequences for those involved. In that regard, I
would like to thank the United Nations Office of Legal
Affairs (OLA) for rapidly compiling this informative
report (S/2011/360), which discusses the feasibility of
specialized Somali counter-piracy courts both in and
outside Somalia, as well as valuable information on
ongoing enhanced prosecutorial efforts in other States
of the region.
The Secretary-General’s report emphasizes the
ongoing work of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) and of the United Nations
Development Programme towards establishing courts
in Puntland and Somaliland within the existing
authorities. We commend and support that important
work. With United Nations assistance, trials in
Somaliland and Puntland are expected to reach
international standards, thus permitting the transfer of
suspects to Somalia for prosecution within three years.
Prison capacity, significantly enhanced also to
international standards, is expected in two years.
We believe that building on the ongoing efforts in
Somalia along those lines may be the most effective
and efficient way to help meet the goal of the Lang
report (S/2011/30, annex) for the Somalialization of the
anti-piracy effort. Based on the report’s findings, it is
clear to us that an extraterritorial Somali piracy court is
not a viable option due to opposition to the idea from
Somalia itself and the host of constitutional,
procedural, security, financial and logistical issues
identified in the report. The Somali authorities have
been clear that they do not support that idea, as
confirmed in the OLA report. In addition, the report
makes clear that major amendments to the Somali
Constitution, even to the Transitional Federal Charter,

11

S/PV.6560

would be required to provide a basic legal foundation
for an extraterritorial court. We believe that such
changes are not realistic, especially given the lack of
support from Somalia for such an objective among the
many competing priorities.
While long-term efforts to improve the judicial
and prison capacities in Somalia are under way, we
must address the urgent need to establish a reliable
venue in the region for the prosecution of suspected
pirates captured by international naval forces. The
United States supports the establishment of a dedicated
piracy chamber or court in one or more States of the
region, applying the national law of the State in which
it sits. If the law of the host State allows, that dedicated
court or chamber can be supplemented with
international personnel, including foreign prosecutors
and judges. With adequate international support, it
could be established almost immediately in one of
several States in the region that already has robust
piracy law in place.
In terms of the next steps, the Seychelles has
offered to host a regional prosecution centre, given
sufficient prison capacity to imprison convicted pirates.
We also welcome the confirmation in the OLA report
that Tanzania is willing to host a dedicated piracy court
on its territory. The international community should
consult with any other State of the region discussed in
the report, or that otherwise might come forward, to
develop a plan to establish in the very near term a
dedicated piracy court or chamber in the region.
As recognized in the Lang report, we must not
forget that incarceration is perhaps the most significant
constraint on piracy prosecutions. In that regard, the
United States urges Puntland and Somaliland to pass
any necessary prisoner transfer legislation. We agree
that if the international community will invest in the
construction and rehabilitation of prisons in those
regions, convicted Somali pirates could be housed
humanely and securely in such facilities.
Finally, the United States is committed to
pursuing the means to disrupt the pirate enterprise
ashore, including by tracking illicit financial flows, in
an effort to identify and prosecute the organizers and
financiers of piracy. To that end, we energetically
support the leadership of Italy, South Korea,
INTERPOL, UNODC and other partners in that regard.
In conclusion, in cooperation with the
international community, the United States plans to

12

continue to address actively the issue of piracy as we
seek to assist Somalis in bringing stability to their
country. The roots of the piracy problem remain on
land. In that regard, the United States will continue to
support the Djibouti peace process, the Transitional
Federal Government and the African Union Mission in
Somalia to work towards greater stability, governance
and economic viability throughout Somalia.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Nearly
five months ago, the Security Council met to listen to
the report of the Special Adviser of the SecretaryGeneral on Piracy, Mr. Jack Lang (see S/PV.6473). The
overall feeling then was one of urgency. More recently
still, in a message of 18 April, the Secretary-General
underscored that piracy was rapidly growing and that
the scale of the phenomenon seemed to be overtaking
the efforts being implemented by the international
community to overcome it.
I will make two comments today. First of all, the
diagnosis has not changed. By adopting resolution
1918 (2010), the Council noted that the absence of
legal solutions encouraged the pirates’ impunity and
only increased the scourge of piracy. Since then, that
situation has only deteriorated.
The report before us (S/2011/360) notes that
attacks off the Somali coast, their geographical range
and the level of violence used have continued to
increase. Since 1 January, there have been 177 attacks,
of which 18 were successful. In May, pirates detained
26 boats and 601 hostages. Crews that are taken
hostage are used as human shields. Recently, a Filipino
sailor was executed. Four American citizens have been
killed. According to estimates, there are about 50 pirate
leaders, 300 group leaders and 2,500 carrying out the
attacks. That being the case, 9 of 10 pirates are
released owing to the lack of capacity of judicial and
prison systems.
France once again thanks the States of the region
for their efforts — Kenya, where the prosecution of
69 people is still ongoing; the Seychelles, which has
23 on trial; and Tanzania, which is prosecuting six.
Their contributions must be acknowledged. However, it
would be unfair to think that those countries could
cope with the scale of the phenomenon. A new solution
is necessary. We must show pragmatism.
My second comment is that we know the
solution, and it is a Somali solution. In entrusting the
drafting of the report to Jack Lang, the Secretary-

11-38134

S/PV.6560

General was proposing to the Security Council a
formula that could provide a rapid and effective
solution. Two months ago, the Council decided to
urgently study the possibility of creating specialized
Somali jurisdictions, including an extra-territorial
Somali specialized court. The Council also requested a
strengthening of the incarceration capacity in Somalia
and a report by the Secretary-General on modalities for
these initiatives, with a view to taking new decisions.
What does the report tell us? First of all, that the
legislative, penal and procedural framework in Somalia
for fighting piracy is incoherent and out of date. Duly
noted, but we must be proactive and try to adapt that
framework.
With respect to the issue of jurisdiction in
Somalia, the assistance of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) will
enable Puntland and Somaliland to try only “around
20 additional cases each per year” (S/2011/360,
paragraph 10), but not for three more years. That is
why we must set up specialized jurisdictions and not
simply use what we have. Here also, the work has just
begun.
Finally, with respect to incarceration, UNODC
has the funds to build two new prisons, one in
Somaliland and one in Puntland, with the capacity to
hold 1,000 inmates, which, it is proposed, would be
reserved for pirates convicted outside of Somalia. How
can we deprive Somalia of the right to prosecute its
own nationals? In addition, the two-year delay is too
long. We therefore need to look, together with
UNODC, at ways of shortening that time period.
It is not a time to be discouraged, but a time to
take action. In reading the report of the SecretaryGeneral, I sometimes feel that the Secretariat is
overwhelmed by the magnitude of the undertaking.
This we understand, and we sympathize, but
opportunities do exist. The report notes that there is a
pool of international experts in the Somali diaspora
who would be ready to participate in specialized
jurisdictions, whether inside or outside Somalia.
Creating an off-site Somali court, an idea that
was supported by most of the speakers preceding me,
would, of course, be feasible. We know, for example,
where the court could be set up temporarily. Tanzania,
whose commitment to this matter I welcome, expressed
its readiness to host such a chamber in Arusha, on the

11-38134

site of the current International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). The use of infrastructure from the
Residual Mechanism of the ICTR to deal with piracy at
the judicial level would be negligible in terms of cost.
Also, more generally, establishing an off-site
Somali court would be an easy solution. The court’s
functioning would require an estimated $7.5 million
over three years, or hardly more than $2.5 million per
year. Above all, this cost is negligible in comparison
with the overall global cost of piracy. If we add up the
economic costs of this scourge and the cost of related
military operations, piracy every year costs us between
$7 billion and $12 billion.
The report notes the division among the Somali
authorities. It is up to the members of the international
community to make clear their expectations to the
Somali authorities. We expect the Transitional Federal
Government to shoulder its responsibilities in dealing
with this threat, which the Council has called a threat
to international peace and security. The proposed
solution offers an opportunity to develop Somali
judicial capacities with the assistance of the
international community.
Among the important questions raised by the
report concerning extraterritorial Somali jurisdiction, I
would highlight that of the scope of jurisdiction.
Should such a court investigate and prosecute those
who finance and plan acts of piracy, or prosecute only
those who carry them out? That is a good question. It is
clear that preparing comprehensive files on those
primarily responsible for such crimes would require
international expertise — more so than in other cases.
Could we consider a precursor group in Tanzania to
deal with such questions? Such prospects must be
investigated quickly and in a lasting manner in order to
effectively strengthen Somali capacities.
We must be creative and imaginative. It is clear
that obstacles remain, and my delegation is the first to
recognize them. But if we talk only about obstacles, we
will not accomplish anything.
Over a year after the adoption of resolution 1918
(2010), it is time to act. We owe it to the sailors and
users of the sea, who are on the front lines of the battle.
The Secretary-General stated recently — and France
shares his view — that their security and well-being
should be our primary concern. We are ready to work
with the members of the Council and with the

13

S/PV.6560

Secretariat to move forward in a concrete and speedy
manner.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, allow me to
thank the Under-Secretary-General, Ms. O’Brien, for
her valuable briefing.
My delegation would like to emphasize the
importance of resolution 1976 (2011), which
demonstrates the resolve of the Council to assume a
more forward-looking policy aimed at establishing
mechanisms to prosecute piracy and armed robbery off
the coast of Somalia, on the basis of the
recommendations set out in the report of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal Issues
Related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, Mr. Jack
Lang (S/2011/30, annex). The resolution further
reflects the need to adopt a holistic approach towards
combating piracy, which constitutes a threat to, inter
alia, human life, development, international navigation
and trade.
The failure to prosecute suspects and incarcerate
those responsible for piracy and armed robbery
severely
undermines
anti-piracy
efforts.
The
deteriorating situation, as described in the Special
Adviser’s report, particularly given the increasing
number of piracy attempts off the coast of Somalia and
the enduring catch-and-release practice, requires a
strong response from the Council. This is necessary in
order to enable interested parties to set up prosecution
mechanisms before reaching what Mr. Lang has
referred to as a point of no return in the fight against
this serious offence.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2011/360) and would like to highlight the following
points.
First, we stress once again the importance of the
incorporation of international law applicable to
combating piracy and armed robbery into the domestic
law of the States of the region. We take note of the
progress described in the report in this respect and look
forward to enhanced assistance to the relevant
authorities with a view to enabling them to adopt
anti-piracy laws.
Secondly,
my
delegation
welcomes
the
participation of regional States in the prosecution and
trial of suspected pirates and the enforcement of
sentences and would like to commend those who have
expressed readiness to host potential extraterritorial

14

Somali courts within their respective jurisdictions. This
does not do away, however, with the need to continue
to give priority to supporting, strengthening and
modernizing Somali courts on Somali lands.
We are also fully cognizant of the concerns of
regional States with regard to security, logistics,
international cooperation and funding. Assistance from
the United Nations and donor countries in this respect
would be crucial for the efficient and sound
implementation of any decision to establish an
extraterritorial Somali court in any neighbouring State
that has expressed its willingness to host such a body.
Thirdly, more avenues should be explored in
order to secure the jurisdictional basis under Somali
law and the laws of any host State, namely the legal
reforms necessary to authorize the required executive
and judicial jurisdiction over suspected pirates. We
encourage the United Nations to assist Somalia and
potential host States in clarifying the pending
jurisdictional matters described in the report. The
United Nations has an additional advantage in this
regard, as it can draw lessons from its rich experience
in the various models of international education it has
set up or assisted States in so doing.
Fourthly, we look forward to further dialogue
between the Transitional Federal Government, as well
as the transitional federal institutions, and the United
Nations, so that an agreement can be reached as to the
most appropriate arrangements and their modalities in
order to bring offenders to justice.
The aim of this meeting is to specifically address
the mechanisms for the prosecution of piracy.
However, we must think of judicial mechanisms as one
tool that should complement others that ensure
economic and social development.
We would also like to recall here that resolution
1976 (2011) importantly highlights the need to
investigate the threats to the health and livelihoods of
Somalis related to illegal fishing and the dumping of
toxic substances off the country’s coast.
The international community needs to remain one
stop ahead of the pirates. For that reason, we look
forward to the Council’s full engagement with the
affected countries and the relevant United Nations
agencies in order to keep up the momentum in our
collective counter-piracy efforts.

11-38134

S/PV.6560

Mr. Berger (Germany): I thank the Legal
Counsel for her detailed briefing on the modalities for
the establishment of specialized Somali anti-piracy
courts. We also commend the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/360) for its detailed analysis of the
legal, administrative and financial implications.
Despite some progress in recent months,
Germany is very concerned about the persistent threat
of piracy and armed robbery off Somalia and in the
region. The Security Council clearly needs to continue
to address this threat to peace and security. The
Council has taken up this task by unanimously
adopting resolution 1976 (2011). The Security Council
and the international community have shown unity and
resolve, but we have to step up our efforts.
The report of the Secretary-General identifies a
number of challenges with regard to the establishment
of specialized Somali anti-piracy courts and the setting
up of an extraterritorial Somali court in a third country
in the region. We hold the view that it must ultimately
be in Somalia that pirates are prosecuted and
imprisoned. The urgent establishment of adequate
structures in Somalia is crucial to reaching that goal.
We therefore share the aim of assisting the
Somali justice system to prosecute piracy suspects in
accordance with international standards, in particular
fair trial and due process guarantees, and to imprison
those convicted in accordance with international
human rights standards, thereby enabling States to
transfer piracy suspects to Somalia.
To that end, we would like to encourage all
countries to continue their efforts and commitments in
that regard. We appreciate the efforts of neighbouring
States of Somalia and States in the region, such as
Kenya and the Seychelles, to contribute to the efforts
to prosecute piracy suspects. We believe these efforts
need to be further enhanced until the Somali justice
system is able to prosecute piracy suspects.
The activities of the Contact Group on Piracy off
Somalia and its Trust Fund are important and very
useful components of these combined efforts. We
support these efforts and invite others, including the
shipping industry, to further participate and commit
funds in order to build support for courts and prisons in
Somalia that are up to acceptable international
standards.

11-38134

Let me also mention the recent signing of a
memorandum
of
understanding
between
the
Seychelles, the Transitional Federal Government,
Somaliland and Puntland concerning the transfer of
convicted persons from the Seychelles to prisons in
Somalia. This is the first arrangement entered into by
Somali authorities in that regard.
The
Secretary-General’s
report
describes
challenges with regard to the establishment of an
extraterritorial Somali specialized anti-piracy court in a
third State in the region. We take note of these
challenges. The numerous uncertainties show that this
option needs further and thorough exploration.
However, we should continue to follow up on the
Secretary-General’s report in this respect and try to
find solutions to the challenges he presented.
With regard to the financial implications of the
eventual establishment of such an extraterritorial court,
we take note of the report’s finding that it would not be
possible at this stage to comment authoritatively on
costs figures. We would nevertheless like to underline
that any such solution would have to be found within
reasonable financial limits.
Let me conclude by underlining that we look
forward to constructively continuing cooperation with
partners in the Security Council and the Contact
Group.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to start by thanking Ms. Patricia O’Brien, UnderSecretary-General for Legal Affairs and United Nations
Legal Counsel, for her briefing. We have noted that
there has indeed been some positive progress on
bringing Somali pirates to justice, as evidenced by the
increased number of prosecutions and of countries
pursuing prosecutions, which we welcome. At the same
time, we also note that the peace process in Somalia
still faces many challenges and that piracy is still
rampant, which is a cause for concern. I wish to make
the following points with regard to the fight against
piracy off the coast of Somalia.
First, detaining and prosecuting Somali pirates
and ending impunity are crucial steps in our fight
against piracy off the Somali coast. We support the
continued focus on this issue by the international
community and we believe that the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/360) lays a good foundation
for future work in this area.

15

S/PV.6560

Secondly, we appreciate the willingness of
Tanzania to host an extraterritorial specialized court.
We have also noted that there are multiple challenges
in establishing anti-piracy courts, both within and
beyond Somalia. We call on the international
community to step up its efforts and address problems
gradually, on the basis of respect for the will of the
Somali people, to reach a viable and effective solution
to this problem.
Thirdly, strengthening the judicial capacity of
Somalia and other countries in the region goes hand in
hand with establishing anti-piracy courts both within
and beyond Somalia. The United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime have both done a great deal of work in that
regard, for which we express our appreciation. We call
on the international community to continue to provide
assistance to Somalia and other countries in the region.
Fourthly, the root causes of piracy off the coast of
Somalia lie on land. As such, our response should
tackle both the symptoms and the root causes, with the
overall objective of achieving peace and stability and
promoting economic and social development in that
country. To that end, the Transitional Federal
Government and the international community should
pursue a comprehensive strategy in promoting
balanced interventions on all fronts.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Patricia O’Brien for
her comprehensive briefing on the modalities for the
establishment of specialized Somali anti-piracy courts.
South Africa remains concerned about the
continuing incidence of piracy off the coast of Somalia.
To that end, we encourage States to take action
individually and collectively to punish acts of piracy in
conformity with the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea.
South Africa wishes to reiterate its view that the
threat of piracy off the coast of Somalia is but a
symptom of the internal political problems of
instability and conflict in that sister African country.
The threat of piracy can therefore only be resolved
through a comprehensive approach that seeks to bring
peace, stability and economic development to Somalia,
including through the provision of adequate resources
through the African Union Mission in Somalia. South
Africa is firm in its view that piracy has to be defeated
on land by comprehensively addressing all the social-

16

economic, political and security challenges the people
of Somalia face.
The reports of continuing illegal and unreported
fishing in the waters off Somalia remain a major
concern for us.
In addition, South Africa fully supports efforts to
promote the rule of law and to fight the incidence of
piracy off the coast of Somalia through the use of
specialized anti-piracy courts, including extraterritorial
courts. In our view, the establishment of a judicial
mechanism such as this should satisfy two important
requirements. First, it must be fully compatible with
the constitutional and legislative framework of
Somalia. Secondly, it must take into consideration the
views of the Somali authorities in the regions where
the courts are established.
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2011/360) on the
modalities for the establishment of specialized Somali
anti-piracy courts. We welcome the clarity that the
report provides for assessing the recommendations
contained in the report of the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Legal Issues Related to Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia (see S/2011/30, annex),
Mr. Jack Lang, on the establishment of the specialized
Somali courts to try suspected pirates in Somalia and
the region alike.
It is evident from the report that the establishment
of such courts inside Somalia or in the region will
require considerable financial resources and the
building the necessary judicial capacity, establishing
additional imprisonment infrastructure, addressing
security concerns and creating the necessary
constitutional and legal framework for facilitating the
work of such specialized courts. What needs to be
borne in mind is that the special courts are to be
national courts. Therefore, there should be no
disparities between piracy courts, jails in other courts
or jails for other crimes in terms of the facilities to be
established.
From the report, we observe the following major
challenges outlined in establishing specialized Somali
courts in Somalia. The first is the lack of adequate
criminal and procedural legislation to provide a sound
basis for piracy prosecutions in Somalia. Secondly,
neither the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) nor
the regions favour the participation of foreign nationals
in proceedings in judicial or prosecutorial posts.

11-38134

S/PV.6560

Thirdly, the views expressed by the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia indicate that the current
political climate in the country may make it difficult to
pass the requisite legislation and amendments to the
Transitional Federal Charter.
Under those circumstances, my delegation
believes that is it important to take into consideration
the views of the TFG and the regions in establishing
such specialized courts. My delegation therefore
welcomes the assistance and capacity-building
provided by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to the TFG and regional
authorities in Somalia in strengthening their national
institutions in their anti-piracy efforts and in meeting
international standards.
We further welcome the ongoing training of
judicial
officers
and
the
construction
and
re-establishment of court and prison facilities in
Somaliland and Puntland. That is particularly
important given the express view of the Somalis that
they do not wish foreign nationals to participate in
judicial proceedings or prosecutorial posts. According
to the report, the Somali authorities have expressed
their support for the ongoing work of UNDP and
UNODC in strengthening existing court structures in
Somaliland and Puntland. The Security Council must
consider those views in its deliberations on any future
action.
Concerning
the
establishment
of
an
extraterritorial Somali specialized anti-piracy court in
another State in the region, we note the opposition of
the TFG and regional authorities to the establishment
of such courts. We should consider the development of
a sustainable mechanism for resourcing national
jurisdictions that have demonstrated willingness to
arrest and prosecute pirates so as to enable them to
pursue their efforts to put an end to impunity for
piracy. This practice of catch-and-release has ensured
the exponential growth of piracy, and it must stop.
We continue to encourage States to criminalize
piracy in their national jurisdictions. In that regard, we
urge flag States to prosecute piracy.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank Ms. Patricia O’Brien, UnderSecretary-General for Legal Affairs and United Nations
Legal Counsel, for her serious and detailed
presentation on the report of the Secretary-General on

11-38134

the modalities for the establishment of specialized
Somali anti-piracy courts (S/2011/360) to try suspected
pirates both in Somalia and in the region.
The situation has remained unchanged since our
most recent meeting on Somalia (see S/PV.6532).
Piracy attacks have continued to increase, as have the
geographical range of the attacks and the level of
violence and force used. Many hostages remain in
captivity.
My delegation was a sponsor of resolution 1976
(2011) because it set forth the essential measures for
moving forward with the fight against the crime of
piracy over the medium term, with the prospect of
contributing to national capacity-building in Somalia
so as to enable its authorities to meet their obligations
and needs over the long term.
Today, we remain convinced of the need to
support and bolster State institutions, while
recognizing its primary role in re-establishing security,
political stability and the rule of law and relaunching
its economic development as the bases for lasting
peace and stability. In his report, the Secretary-General
indicates that some of the assistance provided by the
Organization, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), has led
to progress towards the achievement of the goals
established in resolutions 1950 (2010) and 1976
(2011).
It is encouraging that steps have been taken to
build capacity in the assize sections of regional and
appeal courts in Somaliland and Puntland so as to
enable them to prosecute cases of piracy and other
serious crimes in accordance with international
standards. Also promising is the progress made in
building new prison facilities and renovating existing
ones. Nevertheless, the Secretary-General warns of
rising crime and the high level of impunity and
highlights the need to secure resources for the adequate
functioning of regional and federal courts.
Clearly, the specialized offices of the
Organization must continue providing assistance to
update and adapt the legislative basis at the regional
and federal level in order to categorize piracy as a
serious crime and draft a code of criminal procedure
that meets international standards of due process.

17

S/PV.6560

With regard to the assigning of jurisdictions, we
believe that the goal should be to establish courts with
extensive jurisdiction that can be exercised in ordinary
cases of piracy and in prosecuting financiers and
facilitators of piracy. Although the latter cases are more
complex and require more specialized courts and more
time in which to become fully operational, they can
have a greater impact on efforts to prevent and
eliminate the crime of piracy. Priority must be given to
the training of judges, lawyers and other related
professionals. They must be provided the necessary
time to develop capacity to effectively conduct
investigations and trials in accordance with national
and international needs.
With regard to the proposal to establish an
extraterritorial Somali specialized anti-piracy court, it
has been underscored that the Transitional Federal
Government and regional authorities consulted are
opposed to the establishment of such a court, owing to
their concern about the potential diversion of funds and
resources needed for capacity-building resources. My
delegation believes that any decision on the
establishment of a specialized court should have the
support of the Transitional Federal Government. In
addition, efforts should be made to ensure that
professionals trained in Somalia are not encouraged to
migrate. In any case, consideration should be given to
the cost-benefit ratio of a specialized anti-piracy court
and its implications for the security of the host State
and community.
The Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States
Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia needs to
have a guaranteed resource flow, including for the
building and renovation of prisons that meet
international standards in Somaliland and Puntland and
for the resumed operations of regional courts.
Bearing in mind the timelines and the difficulties,
as detailed by the Secretary-General, in effectively
implementing resolution 1976 (2011), it is essential to
stress the importance of using, in an effective and
timely manner, the regime established in resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) to impose sanctions on the
relatively smaller number of individuals identified and
located by the Monitoring Committee of Committee
established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) as leaders
of private militias and piracy networks. That could be a
strategic and effective way of supplementing the
prosecution efforts under way.

18

Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to express our gratitude to Ms. Patricia O’Brien for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General on the
modalities for the establishment of specialized Somali
anti-piracy courts (S/2011/360), which we consider a
good basis for creating instruments to counter piracy
activities off the coast of Somalia.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains deeply
concerned over piracy off the coast of Somalia. It
poses a threat to international peace and security as
well as to international navigation and the safety of
commercial maritime routes. The capacity-building
measures for Somali State institutions, in addition to
reinforcing sovereignty, should have a significant
positive impact on the fight against piracy.
The international community and Somalia should
continue to work in a coordinated manner in order to
strengthen the Somali security sector. We welcome the
ongoing activities of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia in that regard. We also
encourage the international donor community to
provide the necessary assistance for counter-piracy
efforts.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s comprehensive report on the modalities for
establishing specialized Somali anti-piracy courts,
either in Somalia or on the territory of another State in
the region. The basic parameters for introducing such
specialized courts, or new sections within existing
courts, should be strengthening the rule of law in
Somalia and creating a long-term solution for counterpiracy activities.
We note with interest the imprisonment of
convicted pirates and the trials that have been
conducted by Somali courts, particularly in Puntland
and Somaliland, as well as by other States in the
region. Prosecuting financiers, facilitators, leaders and
planners of piracy is crucial to addressing this issue.
Establishing specialized anti-piracy courts, either
in Somalia or on the territory of another State in the
region, would require that the Transitional Federal
Institutions adopt the necessary constitutional and
legislative
bases,
including
considering
the
compatibility of both options with the relevant
provisions of the 1960 Constitution of the Somali

11-38134

S/PV.6560

Republic and the 2004 Transitional Federal Charter for
the Somali Republic.
We are concerned about the fact that the criminal
and procedural codes across Somalia are critically out
of date, containing numerous inconsistencies and
deficiencies. We therefore encourage UNDP and
UNODC to continue their assistance in the preparation
of necessary legislation for processing pirates, but we
have to bear in mind that such a process is possible
only with national ownership. To that end, we
encourage the Transitional Federal Institutions to speed
up the process of drafting and adopting a constitution.
Whichever option for establishing specialized
anti-piracy courts is found most suitable, we have to
consider the shortage of adequate courtrooms,
correction facilities and other necessary infrastructure,
both in Somalia and on the territory of other States in
the region. In both cases, the specialized anti-piracy
courts or new sections within existing courts would be
part of the Somali judicial system. Due to the limited
number of qualified legal professionals in Somalia, the
training of judges, prosecutors, defence lawyers and
other professionals should be maintained and, if
possible, accelerated. We welcome the activities of
UNDP and UNODC in that regard.
Modalities of international expertise and
participation in the work of the anti-piracy courts, or
new sections within existing courts, should be arranged
in close consultation with the Somali authorities. We
welcome the recommendation of the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Legal Issues Related to
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia that international
expertise be drawn from the Somali diaspora. We take
note of the statement of the Somali authorities, as well
as those of other regional States, particularly Tanzania,
regarding possible establishment of an extra-territorial
Somali court.
We also commend the efforts of Operation
Atalanta of the European Union Naval Force Somalia,
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Coalition
Maritime Forces and States acting in their national
capacities in cooperation with the Transitional Federal
Government, other States in the region and one another
to suppress piracy and protect vessels transiting
through the waters off the coast of Somalia. We also
commend the African Union and the troops of the
African Union Mission in Somalia for their important
role and hard work in stabilizing the situation in

11-38134

Somalia. Finally, we welcome the efforts and hard
work of the Contact Group for Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia, with its four supporting working groups, as
an effective international cooperation mechanism in
combating piracy.
The President (spoke in French): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Gabon.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Patricia O’Brien for her briefing and to express our
appreciation of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2011/360) on the modalities for the implementation
of resolution 1976 (2011). We again acknowledge the
efforts of Mr. Jack Lang, the Secretary-General’s
Special Adviser on piracy.
Piracy is a critical aspect of the overall problem
of Somalia, in view of the large number of acts of
piracy and their increasing violence.
We would like to speak to two points. We stress
the importance of strengthening the judiciary and
prison capacity in Somalia, especially in Puntland and
Somaliland. In this regard, we are pleased with the
progress made in training justice auxiliaries and police
officers and officials, as well as the rehabilitation and
construction under way of courts and prisons. We
welcome the efforts of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, as well as the support provided by
the United Nations Development Programme and the
efforts of the African Union Mission in Somalia in the
fight against piracy on the ground.
Despite this progress, and while waiting for
agreement on the ideal formula, the Somali authorities
should continue to work on reviewing domestic law in
order to enable their courts to prosecute and sentence
those responsible for acts of piracy. It is important that
current Somali legislation be brought closer to
international standards for the fight against piracy. We
call on the authorities to take part in that process. Close
legal cooperation and information-sharing between the
States in the region should be strengthened.
As the Secretary-General’s report emphasizes, the
Somali diaspora can contribute to the establishment of
the processes and mechanisms to be set up. The
international community must continue to support
judicial and prison capacity-building in Somalia.
Regarding setting up a specialized extraterritorial
court, we note the difficulties involved in creating such

19

S/PV.6560

a jurisdiction, as stated in the Secretary-General’s
report.
We share the view of Russia that the rejection
expressed by the authorities of Puntland and
Somaliland, as well as of the Transitional Federal
Government, of such an institution is not a constructive
position in the face of a problem whose proportions
exceed the country’s current response capacity. Gabon
welcomes the availability and willingness of Tanzania
to host the Somali extraterritorial court. We call on all
stakeholders to continue discussions and consultations
so as to reach a consensus on this question.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Mohamed (Somalia): First of all,
Mr. President, let me thank you and your able team for
your work in the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of June.
I am not here to make a statement but rather to
deliver a brief message on behalf of the highest level of
the Somali Government.
Somalia attaches great importance to the issue of
piracy. We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2011/360), and we greatly appreciate the
comprehensive briefing by Patricia O’Brien and the
work she and her team perform. But due to recent
political developments on Somalia, culminating in a
peace agreement brokered by the President of Uganda
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Mahiga, and ultimately the resignation of
the Prime Minister of Somalia last week, Somalia
unfortunately does not have the time or energy to
digest the report.

Still, at the same time, we want to reiterate to the
Council the utmost importance we attach to piracy. As
soon as we form a new government — and the President of
Somalia is going to appoint a new Prime Minister and
council of ministers very soon, possibly as early as this
week or next week — as soon as we complete the
process of forming a new government of Somalia, we
will provide our input and advice to the Council
regarding the report. We look forward to working with
the Council and Patricia O’Brien on the way forward
on this issue, but in the meantime I reiterate the great
importance Somalia attaches to the issue of piracy.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Somalia for his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. O’Brien, to respond to
comments and statements made by Member States.
Ms. O’Brien: I would like very briefly to
acknowledge the great interest demonstrated by
Member States in the debate and the close attention
with which the Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/360)
has been analysed.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
once again the Secretary-General’s deep commitment
to this issue and his concern about continuing concerns
that we have relating to piracy. My Office and other
relevant United Nations offices will continue to
contribute proactively to finding solutions to the
complex problems of piracy off the coast of Somalia,
and I of course stand ready to assist the Security
Council in any way I can as it takes forward its
deliberations on the basis of the Secretary-General’s
report.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at noon.

20

11-38134
