General ,hscmhl) - Thirt)-eighth Session

98

"Protected persons are entitled, in ali circumstances,
to respect for their persons ... They shall al ali tunes he
humanely trcatcd, and shall he protccted espccially
against ali aets of violcnce or threats thercof ... ",
Reaffirming the applicability of that Con\cntion to thc
Arab territorics occupicd by Israel since 1967, including
Jerusalcm,
I, ExprC'SSC'S dcep conccrn that Israel, thc occupying
Power, has failed for threc years to apprehend and prosccute the perpetrators of the assassination attemph:
2, DC'mands oncl' more that lsraeL the occupying
Power, inform thc Sccrctary-General oí Lhe rcsults of thc
investigations rclativc to the assassination attempts:
3, Requests the Secrctar)-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session a rcport on
the implcmentation of thc prcsent rcsolution.
91\th plcnary meeting
15 Decc111her /983

38/80.

International co-operation in the peaceful
uses of outer space

The GenC'ral Assemhly,
Recalling its resolutions 37 189 ami 37190 of 10 Dccem-

bcr 1982,
Deeply convinccd of thc common interest of mankind in
promoting the exploration and use of outcr spacc for
peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to cxtend to ali
States the bencfits dcrived therefrom, and of the importance of international co-opcration in this ficld, for which
the United Nations should continue to providc a focal
point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing thc rule of law for the advancement and prcservation of the explora! ion and peaceful
uses of outer spacc,
Grave/y conccrncd al the cxtension of the arms race into
outer space,
Aware of the need to increase the benelits of space technology and its applications and to contribute to an orderly
growth of space activities favourable to the socioeconomic advancement of mankind, in particular the peoples of developing countries,
Taking note with satisfactíon ofthe progress achieved in
the further development of peaceful spacc cxploration and
application as well as in various national and co-operative
space projects, which contribute to international cooperation in this field,
Taking note of thc report of the Serrctary-< icneral on
the implementation of resolution 37 /90, 10
Having considercd the rcport of the Committce on the
Peaceful Uses of Outcr Space on thc work of its twentysixth session, 11
l. Endorses the rcport of the Committce on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space:
2. Invites States that ha ve not yet become parties to thc
international treaties governing the use of outcr space 12 to
give consideration to ratifying or acccding to thosc trcatics:
10 A/38/412.
11 Ojficia/ Records ofthc General .·l.rn'l11hil". Th1rti·-e1ghth Scssion, Sup¡,/c-

ment No. 20 (A/38/20).
12 Treaty on Principies Goveming the Activities of States in thc Exploration and Use ofüuter Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Rodies
(resolution 2222 (XXI), annex); Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, thc
Retum of Astronauts and the Retum of Objects Launched into Outer Spacr
(resolution 2345 (XXII), anncx): Convent,on on lntcrnat1onal 11ahili1, for

>. l'ú11es that the Legal Sub-Committee of the Committec on thc Peaceful l lses of Outer Space al its twentysccond session continued:
(a)
lts effórts to formulate draft principies relating to
the legal implications of remole sensing of the Earth from
space:
(/1)
lts rnnsideration of thc possibility of supplementing the norms of international law relevant to the use of
nuclear power sources in outer space through its working
group:
(d lts discussion of mattns relating to lhe dcfinition or
delimitation of outer space and outer s¡:íace activities,
bt·aring in mind, 11I1cr alw, qucstions relating to the geostationary orbit:
4. :\'ntes w11h sa11stác11011 the successful efforts of the
Legal Sub-Committee· of the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses ofOuter Spaee in elaborating an agreed text concerning the formal and the procedure for notification in case of
malfunction of a spacecraft carrying a nuclear power
source on board:
S. Decides that the Legal Sub-Committee at its twenty1h1rd session should:
(a) Continuc, on a priority basis, its detailed consideration of the legal implications of remote sensing of the
Earth from space, with the aim of formulating draft principies rclating to remole sensing:
(/1) Continue its considcration of the possibility of supplementing the norms of international law relevant to the
use of nuclear powcr sources in outer space through its
working group:
(el Establish a working group to consider, on a priority
basis, matters relating to the definition and delimitation of
outcr space and to the character and utilization of the geostationary orbit, including the elaboration of general principies to govern the rational and equitable use of the geostationary orbit, a limited natural resource. and. to that
cnd, requests Membcr States to suhmit draft principies: in
doing so, it would havc to take account of the different
legal régimes governing airspace and outer spaee, respectively, and the need for technical planning and legal regulation of the geostationary orbit:
6. l\'otes that the Scientific and Technical SubCommittee of the Committee on the Pcaceful Uses of
Outer Space at its twentieth scssion continued:
(a) Its consideration ofthe United Nations Programme
on Space Applications and the co-ordination of space
activities within thc United Nations system:
(h) lts consideration of questions relating to remole
sen~ing of the earth by satellites:
(e) lts examinat1on ofthe physical nature and techni,·al
attributes of the geostationary orbit:
(d)
lts considcration of technical aspects and safety
measures rclat ing to the use of nuclear power sources in
outer spacc:
(e) Its considcration of questions rclating to space
transportation systems and their implications for future
activities in space:
(/) Its consideration of the implementation of the recommendations of the Second lJnited Nations Conference
on the Exploration and Pcaceful Uses of Outer Space: 13
Damage Caused hy Space Objects (resolutíon 2777 (XXVI), annex): Conventllln on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space (resolution 3235
(XXIX), annex): Agreement Goveming the Activities ofStates on the Moon
and Other Celestial Bodics (resolution .,4168, annex).
11 See Re¡>ort o(thc Second l'nited ,\"at,m,s Crmferenn' on thc Fxp/oratum
ami Peaceful Uses o(Out,·r Spacc. 1·1cn11a. 9-:!l AUK11Sf 1982 (AICONF.I0J.
1O and Corr. l and 2)

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Co,_n_m_it_te_r_·_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _9_9

7. Endorses the recommendation ofthe Committce on
the Peaceful Uses of Outcr Space that the Scicntific and
Technical Sub-Committec at its twcnty-first session
should:
(a) Consider the following items on a priority basis:
(i) United Nations Programmc on Space Applications and the co-ordination of spacc activities
within the United Nations systcm:
(ii) lmplementation of the recommendations of the
Second United Nations Confercncc on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space:
(iii) Questions relating to remotc scnsing of the Earth
by sa tellites;
(iv) Use of nuclear powcr sources in outer space:
(b) Consider the following items:
(i) Questions relating to space transportation systems
and their implications for future activities in
space;
(ii) Examination of the physical nature and technical
attributes of the geostationary orbit:
8. Endorses Jurther the recommendation of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that, during
the twenty-first session ofthe Scientific and Technical SubCommittee, the Working Group on the Use of Nuclear
Power Sources in Outer Space should be reconvened to
conduct additional work on thc basis of the report of the
Working Group on the work of its third session: 14
9. Endorses the United Nations Programmc on Spacc
Applications for 1984, as proposed to the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space by the Expert on Spacc
Applications;
1O. Emphasizes the urgency and importance of implementing fully the recommendations of thc Second United
Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space as early as possible:
11. Reaffirms its approval of the recommendation of
the Conference regarding the establishment and strengthening of regional mechanisms of co-opcration and their
promotion and creation through thc United Nations system;
12. Expresses its appreciation to ali Governments that
made or expressed their intention to make contributions
towards carrying out the recommendations of the Conference;
13. Invites ali Governments to take cffective action for
the implementation of the recommendations of the Conference;
14. Calls upon ali States, in particular those with major
space capabilities, to undertake prompt negotiations,
under the auspices of the United Nations, with a view to
reaching agreement or agreements designed to halt the militarization of outer space and to prevent an arms race in
outer space, thus contributing to the achievement of the
internationally accepted goal of ensuring the use of outer
space exclusively for peaceful purposes:
15. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to consider, as a matter of priority, the questions relating to the militarization of outer space, taking
into account that, in General Assembly resolution 3 7/83 of
9 December 1982, the Committee on Disarmament 15 was
requested to consider as a matter of priority thc question
of preventing an arms race in outer space, and also taking
into account the need to co-ordinate the cfforts of the

Committec on the Peaccful Uses of Outer Space and the
Committee on Disarmament:
16. Requcsts the Committec on the Pcaceful Uses of
Outcr Space to report to the General Assembly at its
thirtv-ninth session on thc outcomc of its considcration of
thc ¿ubject rcfcrred to in paragraph 15 abovc:
17. Endorses thc rccommendation of thc Committee
on thc Peaceful Uses of Outcr Spacc that, of the study
projects proposed by the United Nations Conferencc on
the Exploration and Peaceful Uses ofOuter Space, the following three studies be carried out on a priority basis:
(a) Assistance to countrics in studying their remotesensing nccds and assessing appropriate systems for
meeting such needs (United Nations, United Nations
Environment Programme, United Nations Development
Programme and Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations):
(h) The feasibility ofusing direct broadcasting satellites
for educational purposes and of intemationally or regionally owned space segments (United Nations, United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
and lnternational Telecommunication Union):
(e) The feasibility of obtaining closer spacing of satellites in the geostationary orbit and their satisfactory
coexistcnce, including a closer examination of technoeconomic implications. particularly for dcveloping countries, in order to ensure the most effective utilization of
this orbit in the interest of ali countries (United Nations,
lnternational Telecommunication Union and other organizations):
18. Approves the rccommendations of the Committee
on thc Peaceful U ses of O uter Space concerning the procedures for carrying out these studies;
19. Dendes that the United Nations should bear the
travel and per dicm expenses of the experts to be
appointed by the Secretary-General for carrying out the
studies referred to in paragraph 17 above;
20. Afjirms that the interference that satellite systems
to be newly cstablished may cause to systems already registcrcd with thc lnternational Telecommunication Union
shall not exceed the limits specified in the relevant provision of the International Teleeommunication Union radio
regulations applicable to space services;
21. Requests ali organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations systcm and other intergovernmental
organizations working in the field of outer space or on
spaee-related matters to co-operate in the implementation
of the recommendations of the Conference:
22. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session on the implementation of the recommendations of the Conference;
23. Requests the specialized agencies and other international organizations to continue and, where appropriate,
enhance their co-operation with the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and to provide it with progress reports on their work relating to the peaceful uses of
outer space;
24. Takes note ofthe invitation by the Government of
Austria to hold the twenty-seventh session ofthe Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at Vienna;
25. Decides to convene the twenty-seventh session of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at
Vienna from 11 to 22 .lune 1984:
26. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its work, in accordance with the

14 A/AC. 105/287, annex 11.
15 From 7 February 1984, the date of commencement or its annual session.
the Committee on Disarmamcnt is to he known as the "Conference on Dis-

armamcnt" (sce Offinal Record¡ o/ rhc (ienNal ·lsscmhlr, Thirtv-cigh1h Sesmm, S11pp/cment No. l7 (A/J8/~7), para. 21 ).

100

General Assembly- Thirty-eighth Session

present resolution, to consider, as appropriate, new
projects in outer space activities and to submit a report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session, including
its views on which subjects should be studied in the future.
98th plenary meeting
15 December l 983

38/81. Comprehensive review of the whole question
of peace-keeping operations in ali their
aspects
The General Assembly,
Reca/ling its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965. 2053 A (XX) of 15
December 1965, 2249 (S-V) of23 May 1967, 2308 (XXII)
of 13 December 1967, 2451 (XXIII) of 19 December
1968, 2670 (XXV) of 8 December 1970, 2835 (XXVI) of
17 December 1971, 2965 (XXVII) of 13 December 1972,
3091 (XXVIII) of 7 December 1973, 3239 (XXIX) of 29
November 1974, 3457 (XXX) of 10 December 1975, 31/
105 of 15 December 1976, 32/106 of 15 December 1977,
33/114 of 18 December 1978, 34/53 of 23 November
1979, 35/121 of 11 December 1980, 36/37 of 18 November 1981 and 37/93 of 10 December 1982,
Taking account ofthe views expressed and issues raised
on the question of peace-keeping during the debate on the
ítem,
Reaffirming the primary responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace and
security,
Conscious of the vital role played by United Nations
peace-keeping forces in support of decisions of the Security
Council in discharging its primary responsibility in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing that the presence of United Nations peacekeeping forces authorized by the Security Council in conflict areas demonstrates the common concern of Members
ofthe United Nations in the preservation of stability and
easing of tension in those areas,
Aware ofthe extremely difficult financia! situation ofthe
United Nations peace-keeping forces in the light of the
heavy burden incurred by troop contributors, especially
those from developing countries,
Stressing the collective responsibility of Member States,
in accordance with the Charter, to share equitably the
financia! burdens of such operations established by the
Security Council, which should continue to be conducted
with maximum efficiency and economy,
Urging, at the same time, that other areas of cooperation with and support for United Nations peacekeeping forces should be encouraged,
Recognizing the need to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of United Nations peace-keeping forces,
Commending the Secretary-General for the way he is
carrying out peace-keeping operations of the United
Nations decided upon by the Security Council,
Convinced that the importance of the issue of United
Nations peace-keeping is such that the United Nations
should continue to work for a comprehensive review ofthe
whole question of peace-keeping operations in ali their
aspects,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee on
Peace-keeping Operations, 16
16 N38/381.
17 See A/38/132-S/15675 and Corr.l and 2. annex. sect. L para. 171.
18 See A/34/542, annex, sect. l. paras. 280-299.

l. Expresses its conviction that peace-keeping operations ofthe United Nations, conducted with the consent of
the host country and with respect for its sovereignty and
territorial integrit). in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. are an essential function of the United
Nations, though not a substitute for the peaceful settlement of disputes and therefore of a temporary nature;
.., Urges ali concerned to co-operate fully in the implementation of United Nations peace-keeping operations;
3. Reaffirms and renews the mandate given to the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations by relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
4. Expresses concern about the difficult financia! situation of United Nations peace-keeping operations;
5. Urges again the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, in accordance with its mandate, to
renew its efforts to work towards the completion of agreed
guidelines that will govern the conduct of United Nations
peace-keeping operations in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, and to devote further attention to
specific questions relating to the practica! implementation
of peace-keeping operations;
6. Requests the Special Committee on Peace-keeping
Operations to submit a status report on its present situation, to determine the areas of possible progress and other
arcas where progress would be difficult to achieve or is still
pending, and to consider proposals to reactivate and
rationalize its work;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth session the item entitled "Comprehensive
review of the whole question of peace-keeping operations
m ali their aspects".
98th plenary meeting
15 December 1983

38/82. Questions relating to information
A
The General Asscmblr.
Recalling its resolutions 34/ l 8 l and 34/ l 82 of 18
December 1979, 35/201 of 16 December 1980, 36/149 A
of 16 December 1981 and 3 7/94 A and B of 1O December
1982,
Stressing anew the importance of the establishment of a
new world information and communication order and, in
this regard, recalling the relevant provisions of the Political Declaration of the Seventh Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983, 17 as well as the relevant provisions of the Final Declaration of the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Havana from 3 to 9 September
1979, 18 of the Declaration of the Conference of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs ofNon-Aligned Countries, held at New
Delhi from 9 to 13 February 1981, 19 and of the fifth and
sixth meetings of the Intergovernmental Council of Ministers of lnformation of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Georgetown in May 1981 and at Valletta in June 1982,
Recalling the relevant resolutions adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its eighteenth ordinary
session, held at Nairobi from 24 to 27 June 1981, 2º
¡q See A/36/116 and, orr. l. annex.

2il See Ai36!534. annn 11
