S/2021/485

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 May 2021
Original: English

Situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 16 of Security Council
resolution 2540 (2020) and paragraph 41 of resolution 2568 (2021). It provides
updates on the implementation of those resolutions, including on the mandates of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The report covers significant developments in
Somalia from 10 February to 7 May 2021.

II. Political, security and economic overview
A.

Political developments
2.
The political stalemate in the electoral process continued to affect the stability
of Somalia. International partners intensified their efforts to assist the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states in overcoming the impasse
regarding implementation of the electoral agreement of 17 September 2020. A
technical committee comprising representatives of the Federal Government and the
federal member states met in Baidoa, Bay Region, on 16 February and developed
proposals to overcome the three contentious issues, namely the composition of the
electoral management bodies, the selection of the “Somaliland” repres entatives and
the management of elections in the Gedo Region of Jubbaland.
3.
A summit between the Federal Government and the federal member states for
the final validation of the proposals was initially scheduled for 18 February but was
not held owing to disagreement over the agenda, participation and the venue.
Following extensive efforts by international partners, the Presidents of all the federal
member states arrived in Mogadishu in anticipation of a summit with the federal
leadership between 9 and 18 March. While Jubbaland and Puntland desired to widen
the summit agenda, the Federal Government rejected preconditions. Subsequently, the
President of Somalia, Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed “Farmajo”, the leaders of
South-West State, Hirshabelle and Galmudug and the Governor of Banaadir met on
22 and 23 March without the participation of Jubbaland and Puntland.
4.
On 27 March, facilitated by international partners, Mr. Farmajo met the leaders
of all five federal member states on 3, 4 and 7 April for closed -door consultations on

21-06162 (E)

210521

*2106162*

S/2021/485

the agenda of the summit. However, the meeting ended without agreement. On
7 April, the federal Minister for Information announced that the talks had broken
down, accusing the Presidents of Puntland and Jubbaland of blocking them. In
response, both Presidents publicly reiterated their willingness to re -engage in the
talks. On 10 April, international partners urged the leaders to resume dialogue,
reiterating that a parallel process, partial elections or new initiatives leading to
mandate extensions would be detrimental to the stability of Somalia.
5.
After the talks between the Federal Government and the federal member states
broke down, the House of the People convened on 12 April and passed the Special
Electoral Bill for Federal Elections, which replaced the agreement of 17 September
with a one-person, one-vote electoral process, to be conducted within two years, and
extended the terms of the Parliament and the President of Somalia by the same
duration. The vote was held after the Police Commander of Banaadir, Sadik Omar
Hassan “Sadik John ”, declared the parliamentary session illegitimate and attempted
to block access to the Parliament building; he was subsequently dismissed by the
Federal Police Commander.
6.
Mr. Farmajo signed the Special Electoral Bill into law on 13 April. On 19 April,
he visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo to meet the Chair of the African
Union, Félix Tshisekedi, and requested the African Union to take a leading role in
facilitating a Somali-owned, Somali-led engagement process leading to elections. On
8 May, the Chairperson of the African Union Commission appointed the former
President of Ghana, John Dramani Mahama, as his High Representative for Somalia.
7.
On 20 March, a group of opposition figures, including members of the Council
of Presidential Candidates, the Presidents of Puntland and Jubbaland and the Speaker
of the Upper House, established the National Salvation Forum with the objective of
ensuring consensus-based elections and national unity and protecting the stability and
security of the country. The Forum has strongly rejected the law of 13 April and
continued to call for dialogue.
8.
Amid mounting political tension, fighting broke out in Mogadishu on 25 April
between security forces loyal to the Federal Government and military personnel with
ties to the opposition. On 26 April, the Prime Minister, Mohamed Hussein Roble,
called for a ceasefire in Mogadishu and appealed for dialogue so that security could
return to the city. On 27 April, Mr. Roble and the Presidents of Galmudug, Hirshabelle
and South-West State made separate statements, opposing the extension of the federal
mandates and calling for a return to dialogue on the basis of the agreement of
17 September.
9.
On 27 April, Mr. Farmajo addressed the nation, stating that he would engage the
House of the People on 1 May to “gain its endorsement” for elections based “purely”
on the agreement of 17 September and the recommendations made by the technical
committee at Baidoa on 16 February. On 28 April, Mr. Roble met the Presidents of
Galmudug and Hirshabelle, as well as representatives of the Council of Presidential
Candidates, to discuss ways to deescalate tension in Mogadishu. On 1 May, during an
extraordinary session, the House of the People rescinded the Special Electoral Bill,
in effect returning to the agreement of 17 September as the basis for the electoral
process. In his address to the House, Mr. Farmajo entrusted responsibility for
organizing the process to the Prime Minister.
10. On 2 May, the Council of Presidential Candidates welcomed Mr. Roble’s lead
in implementing the electoral agreement and managing electoral security. It urged
him to maintain neutrality and work to implement the electoral process as soon as
possible, in a credible and transparent manner. On the same day, Mr. Roble extended
invitations to the signatories of the agreement of 17 September for a consultative
meeting on 20 May, after Ramadan, to overcome the electoral impasse. On 3 May, the
2/18

21-06162

S/2021/485

First Vice-President of Jubbaland, Mohamud Sayid Aden, confirmed that Jubbaland
would participate in the meeting to be held on 20 May.
11. On 5 May, following consultations to resolve the security challenges related to
the current political crisis, Mr. Roble and the opposition Council of Pr esidential
Candidates reached a 10-point agreement on the disengagement of opposing armed
forces and their return to their respective bases.
12. In a separate development, on 24 March, the Minister of Security of Jubbaland,
Abdirashid Hassan Abdinoor “Janan”, surrendered to senior Federal Government
officials in Beled Xaawo in the Gedo Region. The President of Jubbaland immediately
dismissed the Minister from his state functions. It was later reported that, on
23 March, acting on the recommendation of the Attorney General, the Banaadir
regional court had dropped past charges against the Minister for human rights
violations, including torture, arbitrary arrest and corruption.
13. On 6 May, the Federal Government announced the resumption of diplomatic
relations with Kenya, following facilitation by Qatar. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of Kenya took note of the announcement, expressing hope for “further normalization
of relations with regard to trade, communication, transportation, people -to-people
relations and cultural exchanges”.

B.

Security developments
14. The security situation remained volatile, with a monthly average of 275
incidents recorded. Most of the incidents continue to be perpetrated by Al -Shabaab,
primarily as hit-and-run attacks targeting Somali security forces and the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and involving improvised explosive devices.
The regions most affected were Banaadir, Shabelle Hoose and Shabelle Dhexe.
15. Al-Shabaab maintained the capability to infiltrate Mogadishu and carry out
high-profile attacks. On 13 February, a suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive
device detonated near Parliament in the Waberi district after the vehicle forced its
way through a security checkpoint, killing three people. On 5 March, another such
device targeted a restaurant popular among government officials and security forces
in the Hamarjajab district. A nearby building collapsed as a result of the explosion,
killing at least 10 people and injuring 30 others. On 28 April, an other suicide vehicleborne improvised explosive device detonated outside the Custodial Corps
headquarters in the Dharkenley district, killing 5 people and injuring 15 others. At
least three vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices were intercepted by se curity
forces in Shabelle Hoose in February, March and April, reportedly bound for
Mogadishu. On 23 February, a suspected Al-Shabaab member threw what was
reported to be a suicide vest near a police station in the Xamar Weyne district of
Mogadishu when intercepted by security forces, injuring three people, including a
police station commander. On 3 April, a person-borne improvised explosive device
detonated inside a restaurant in the Shangani district, killing five civilians and
injuring four others.
16. On 4 March, Al-Shabaab attacked and overran the central prison of Boosaaso,
Puntland, freeing all 337 prisoners (including 10 women), of whom 140 were in jail
for extremism-linked crimes. Two Custodial Corps personnel and seven Puntland
Security Force soldiers were killed, while two were injured, including the prison
commander.
17. Aden Adde International Airport, which hosts the United Nations, AMISOM and
diplomatic missions, was targeted on 9 March and 26 March, with six mortar rounds
in each attack. The mortars impacted the AMISOM force headquarters camp, injuring

21-06162

3/18

S/2021/485

two soldiers. Villa Somalia in Mogadishu was also targeted with indirect fire on
21 April, but the government building was not impacted. The main targets of attacks
remained AMISOM and local security forces in Juba Hoose, Shabelle Dhexe, Hiraan,
Bakool, Gedo and Mudug Regions.
18. In Shabelle Hoose, on 3 April, Al-Shabaab carried out coordinated complex
attacks on Somali National Army bases in Bariirre and Awdheegle, in Afgooye
district. The attacks were initiated with vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices
and resulted in about 20 soldiers of the Somali National Army killed and 45 injured.
The attacks demonstrated the continued ability of Al-Shabaab to generate, equip and
move forces undetected, despite ongoing security operations. In Bakool, an attack
using a person-borne improvised explosive device near a police station in the town of
Waajid on 5 March reportedly injured four people. On 10 April, an attack using
another such device in a restaurant in Baidoa targeted the Governor of the Bay
Region, who survived the attack. There were 5 people reportedly killed, and 11 others
injured.
19. Activity by pro-Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) elements was
reported in Bari Region, where Puntland forces were targeted with an improvised
explosive device attack in Qandala district on 3 April. Two soldiers were reportedly
killed. Security operations in the area led to clashes with pro -ISIL elements on 4 and
5 April, with unconfirmed casualties on both sides.
20. On 19 February, armed clashes between the security forces loyal to opposition
presidential candidates and government forces in the Bondhere district, as well as
during protests held in Wadajir district near Aden Adde International Airport, led to
at least three civilian casualties. A projectile landing inside the airport, and the
subsequent explosion, resulted in a fire and damage to shops near the airport
commercial terminal, with no casualties reported.
21. On 25 April, further armed clashes between government and opposition-aligned
security forces occurred in various districts in Mogadishu, leading to population
displacement. The clashes started after opposition-aligned forces moved to the capital
from Shabelle Dhexe and took positions in various areas. On 5 May, the Federal
Government and the opposition reached a disengagement agreement.

C.

Economic developments
22. On the basis of trends during the reporting period, it is projected that the
economy will recover modestly from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
with estimated growth in terms of gross domestic product of 2.9 per cent for 2021.
However, a spike in COVID-19 infections, the political situation or another wave of
the locust infestation could impede the recovery. Fo llowing the economic downturn
in 2020 and the projected modest recovery in 2021, the percentage of people in
Somalia living below the poverty line is expected to increase to 71 per cent of the
total population in 2021.
23. Declining domestic revenue and reduced budget support from international
partners owing to the political crisis has led to a monthly deficit of $6 million to
$7 million in the 2021 federal budget since February, posing serious challenges to the
implementation of the budget.
24. The financial sector has shown stability in bank deposits and recorded increases
in official remittances, although it is estimated that informal inflows have declined.
Efforts to leverage mobile money to deepen financial sector intermediation continued.
On 27 February, the Central Bank of Somalia announced that the country’s first
mobile money licence would be awarded to Hormuud Telecom, which could

4/18

21-06162

S/2021/485

contribute to formalizing the digital payments system in Somalia with a view to
integration into the global financial system.
25. A second joint survey, in January, by the World Bank, the International Finance
Corporation and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, in
cooperation with the federal Ministry of Commerce and Industry and the Chamber of
Commerce and Industry, assessed that the impact of the pandemic had eased
compared with July 2020, although market activities were still below 2020 levels.
Some 68 per cent of small and medium-sized enterprises considered access to credit
to be constrained. The survey was conducted across five cities (Baidoa, Beledweyne,
Boosaaso, Kismaayo and Mogadishu), among over 500 small and medium -sized
enterprises with five or more employees.

III. Support for peacebuilding and State-building efforts
A.

Support for strengthening federalism
Preparations for elections
26. The United Nations continued to assess the plans and operational requirements
of the Federal Elections Implementation Team and the Electoral Dispute Resolution
Committee. This assessment was aimed at ensuring coherence between current
electoral planning and the electoral budget developed in January 2021.
27. The National Electoral Security Task Force secretariat has established a regular,
technical-level coordination mechanism to ensure momentum o n preparations for
electoral security. The Integrated Electoral Support Group, UNSOS and UNSOM
police, together with AMISOM and the Folke Bernadotte Academy of Sweden,
continue to plan for the establishment of 12 joint operations centres in all federal
member states and Banaadir, with full-scale resumption of support expected
following a political agreement on electoral implementation.
Deepening federalism
28. Building on the inter-ministerial working sessions on functional assignments
convened in December 2020 by the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and
Reconciliation and the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, Puntland, Jubbaland and
Galmudug shared with the Federal Government their perspectives with regard to the
allocation of power and the distribution of resources among the Federal Government,
the federal member states and district administrations. The exercise was aimed at
informing the ongoing constitutional review process and developing policy options
for equitable functional assignments between the Federal Government and the federal
member states. Hirshabelle and South-West State are expected to conduct the same
exercise in the second quarter of 2021.
29. The Peacebuilding Fund continued to assist the good offices of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, in particular by funding the
Supporting Reconciliation and State-building Processes project, which supported
efforts directed at maintaining constructive dialogue between the Federal Government
and the federal member states, including the summit meetings held in Dhuusamarreeb
in February and in Mogadishu in April 2021.
Constitutional review
30. Owing to the political impasse and the presidential decree of December 2020 to
defer the constitutional review process to the next session of Parliament, there was
no tangible progress on the matter. However, in March, the Ministry of Constitutional

21-06162

5/18

S/2021/485

Affairs, the Oversight Committee and the Independent Constitutional Review and
Implementation Commission prepared comprehensive handover reports for the new
executive and Parliament. The reports provide a full account of all the consultations
held to date, list necessary technical amendments and outline the constitutional
articles that require further political consideration.
Prevention and resolution of conflicts
31. On 13 February, the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation
facilitated a preliminary ceasefire agreement between the Ayr and Saleeban sub -clans
in Hananbure, Galgaduud Region. On 10 March, talks between the two sub-clans were
held in Dhuusamarreeb to address the root causes of the conflict. On 12 April, the
Ministry, with the support of the United Nations, held an initial coordination meeting
on reconciliation and stabilization to improve information-sharing among
stakeholders and harmonize responses in order to prevent conflicts and build lasting
peace. Effective coordination with federal counterparts, international partners and
Galmudug ministries was identified as an important step for regional reconciliation.
32. The dispute between Hawadle clan members and the newly elected Hirshabelle
administration remained unresolved. In meetings with Hawadle clan representatives
and other stakeholders held in Beledweyne from 24 to 26 February, the Ministry of
the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation called for the formation of a
committee to resolve inter- and intra-clan differences in the Hiraan Region, but the
proposal did not receive widespread support. Separately, efforts by the Hirs habelle
administration to address the land dispute between the Hawadle and Reer Aw Xassan
clans was opposed by Hawadle elders, who challenged the authority of the
administration to resolve the dispute with the Somali region of Ethiopia. On 5 May,
in the Baladu Nur, Dabaan and Harcadeey areas, on the outskirts of Beledweyne, there
were clashes between the Jejele and Makane clans over agricultural farmland, after
which the areas were taken over by the 27th Division of the Somali National Army.

B.

Cross-cutting issues
Gender equality and the empowerment of women
33. During the reporting period, UNSOM, along with the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Population Fund and the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerm ent of Women (UN-Women),
continued to advocate meeting the minimum quota of 30 per cent for the participation
of women in the forthcoming elections, engaging with civil society organizations and
women leaders.
34. On 16 February, my Special Representative met with 15 women representatives
of Leadnow, a women’s movement advocating the political representation and
participation of women in peace and political processes. Women leaders urged the
United Nations and international partners to maintain pressure on federal and state
leaders to resolve the electoral impasse peacefully and increase the role and
representation of women in political processes.
35. On 19 February, following violent clashes in Mogadishu, over 70 women leaders
of Leadnow expressed their concerns and condemned the violence. On 24 and
26 March, in press conferences, women leaders from across the country called on
federal and state leaders to peacefully resolve their differences for the sake of the
country.
36. On 8 March, International Women’s Day was celebrated across Somalia with
the theme “Women in leadership: achieving an equal future in a COVID -19 world”.

6/18

21-06162

S/2021/485

The United Nations provided support to government and civil society partners
through pooled resources operationalized by the United Nat ions Theme Group on
Gender. Activities included awareness-raising on gender equality, the 30 per cent
quota for the political participation of women, the role of women in leadership, peace
and security and the COVID-19 pandemic. Personal protective equipment was
distributed to internally displaced persons, including women and girls.
Youth empowerment
37. To promote the participation of young people in the electoral process, the United
Nations, with support from partners, trained 34 young political aspir ants from
different political parties to strengthen the capacity of young candidates and
overcome barriers to the participation of young people in electoral processes.
38. Through the Dalbile Youth Initiative, led by the United Nations Population
Fund, 225 young people participated in entrepreneurship boot camps in Kismaayo
and Mogadishu, with start-up funds granted for 24 business concepts. The initiative
provides support to young entrepreneurs who would otherwise not qualify for loans
from credit facilities. In addition, dialogues on the participation of young people in
decision-making were held in Mogadishu, Jawhar, Kismaayo and Dhuusamarreeb.
39. From 14 to 18 February, the United Nations Children’s Fund UPSHIFT
innovative livelihoods programme organized training for 50 young people, including
5 from minority clans. A total of 10 business enterprise groups were formed and are
developing business plans. The UPSHIFT initiative supports children in conflict with
the law, returnees, young people at risk of migration, survivors of gender-based
violence and children associated with armed actors.
40. Through the MOST (Management of Social Transformation) initiative, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization organized reflection
sessions on Security Council resolution 2250 (2015) on youth and peace and security,
targeting young researchers and policymakers from States members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD). A policy paper on youth and
peace and security in the Horn of Africa is being developed as an outcome.

C.

Development coordination
41. To promote implementation of the cross-cutting priorities of the national
development plan of Somalia related to the humanitarian-development-peacebuilding
nexus, a high-level Triple-Nexus Steering Committee was launched during the
reporting period to provide a platform for joined-up approaches. The committee will
engage Somali and international decision makers to ad vance issues that require
additional support, in order to ensure that short-term nexus task forces have a clearly
defined and achievable purpose.
42. The task force on the environment, comprising United Nations agencies,
continued to meet monthly to coordinate contributions to the Environmental
Management Act and the national environment action plan and to enhance
international coordination on the environment. Work commenced on piloting
innovative mediation approaches to the relevant conflicts in Hirshabell e. The United
Nations set up a working group on the environment and climate change on 6 May, in
the Somalia aid architecture, and also established local task forces on flooding and
water management, leveraging the peace-development nexus approach. The United
Nations Environmental Adviser to Somalia has also contributed to the new site
planning for displaced populations, leading to a more environmentally sustainable
site in Luglow, near Kismaayo.

21-06162

7/18

S/2021/485

43. On 18 March, the United Nations anti-corruption task force approved the
concept note of a programme aligned with the five priorities of the national
anti-corruption strategy of the Federal Government: (a) harnessing political will and
engagement; (b) strengthening the integrity, independence and capacity of key
institutions; (c) following the money and protecting the public purse; (d) building a
merit-based professional and inclusive civil service; and (e) creating a society that
rejects corruption.
44. On 28 March, with technical and financial support from the U nited Nations, the
national durable solutions strategy was endorsed by the Federal Government to ensure
government leadership, operational guidance and clear objectives towards durable
solutions for the United Nations, non-governmental organizations and donor partners.
The working group on durable solutions agreed on its priorities for 2021, which
include advocating an extended moratorium on forced evictions and linking durable
solutions programming to inclusive local development processes.

IV. Human rights and protection
Human rights
45. UNSOM recorded 260 civilian casualties (116 killed and 144 injured) during
the reporting period, compared with 200 killed and 163 injured during the previous
reporting period. Al-Shabaab remained the single largest perpetrator of civilian
casualties in Somalia, responsible for 177 casualties (68 per cent), followed by
unknown actors (33 casualties, or 13 per cent), state security forces (27 casualties, or
10 per cent), clan militias (17 casualties, or 7 per cent) and AMISOM (6 casualties,
or 2 per cent).
46. Al-Shabaab executed 12 male civilians for alleged espionage during the
reporting period. On 20 February, the group attacked and set fire to civilian houses
and vehicles in villages in Shabelle Hoose, apparently in retaliation for the burning
by the Galjel clan of commercial trucks heading to Baidoa, in early January.
47. Somali authorities arbitrarily arrested and detained 49 individuals: 18 suspected
Al-Shabaab members, nine clan elders, nine politicians, six busi nesspersons, five
journalists and two religious leaders. In addition, at the intervention of clan elders
and senior state officials, 52 individuals, including 25 alleged clan militia members
held in detention since 17 November 2020 on suspicion of involvem ent in the killing
of a female civilian and her two children and injuring another woman and a five -yearold child in Warshiikh district, Shabelle Dhexe, were released without charges. A total
of 15 death sentences were issued by courts in Puntland (13 Al-Shabaab members)
and South-West State (one civilian and one police officer) during the reporting period.
On 14 April, security forces publicly executed a National Intelligence and Security
Agency officer after he was found guilty by the military court of fi rst instance of
killing a male civilian from the Hawadle clan on 8 April in Beledweyne.
48. UNSOM documented the killing of a prominent journalist in the town of
Gaalkacyo, Puntland, on 1 March, by two unidentified men. In Mogadishu, on
4 March, soldiers of the Somali National Army allegedly assaulted a radio journalist
in Hodan district and confiscated his equipment. UNSOM also recorded the arbitrary
arrest and detention of five journalists, including three arrested in Puntland following
their reporting on a speech made by the President of Puntland on 21 February
regarding the federal election. The other two journalists were arrested in Mogadishu
on 25 April for their coverage of the armed confrontations between security forces.
All were subsequently released without charges. In addition, a journalist detained
since 27 December in Puntland was sentenced to three months’ imprisonment for

8/18

21-06162

S/2021/485

public incitement on social media and, on 17 March, the military appeal court
increased the sentence to three years. The President of Puntland pardoned the
journalist on 22 March.
Compliance with the human rights due diligence policy
49. Pursuant to Security Council resolutions 2520 (2020) and 2568 (2021)
mandating UNSOS to provide support for an additional 3,000 members of the Somali
security forces, and within the framework of the human rights due diligence policy,
UNSOM concluded a risk assessment for an additional 1,000 officers of the Somali
Police Force. In February, it also conducted a risk assessment for an additional 2,000
members of the Somali National Army. Both risk assessments provided an update to
the general and preliminary risk assessments for the Army and the Police Force
conducted in 2016 and 2017. My Special Representative communicated relevant
mitigation measures to the Federal Government on 2 and 11 March , and UNSOM and
UNSOS are working closely with the Federal Government on their implementation.
Children in armed conflict
50. As at 7 May, the country task force on monitoring and reporting on grave
violations against children had verified 460 grave violations against 449 children (339
boys and 110 girls), including four attacks against schools, one against a hospital and
six cases of denial of humanitarian access. A total of 192 children were abducted,
216 recruited and used and 104 killed or maimed, and 61 girls were subjected to rape
or other forms of sexual violence. A total of 281 violations were attributed to
Al-Shabaab (61 per cent), 72 to federal and state armed forces (16 per cent), 77 to
unknown armed elements (17 per cent) and 30 to clan milit ias (7 per cent). During
the same period, 14 incidents of detention affecting 26 boys and one girl were
documented and verified. Cases were also attributed to the Somali Police Force (12),
the Somali National Army (5), the Galmudug police (4), Jubbaland fo rces (3) and the
Jubbaland police and the National Intelligence and Security Agency (1 each).
51. As part of the implementation of the children and armed conflict mandate,
UNSOM, jointly with the Ministry of Defence child protection unit, conducted a
series of awareness-raising activities on child rights and child protection through
radio and television in Banaadir, from 7 to 12 February, to commemorate International
Day against the Use of Child Soldiers and deter the recruitment and use of children
by Somali security forces and armed groups.

V.

Prevention of sexual and gender-based violence
52. UNSOM has recorded cases of conflict-related sexual violence committed by
security forces. It has also documented a case of obstruction of investigations into
sexual and gender-based violence cases by authorities in Puntland. On 31 March, a
Puntland Police Force officer allegedly raped a woman in Boosaaso. The Puntland
police opened an investigation against the perpetrator, but no arrest has been made.
53. In a case illustrative of the challenges faced by women working on women’s
protection issues and the prevention of sexual violence, on 23 March, the Head of the
Sexual and Gender-based Violence and Child Protection Unit in Garoowe was
physically assaulted and beaten by four police officers, including the commander of
Garoowe central police station. The female officer was reviewing the sexual violence
cases registered at the police station, and the commander reportedly accused her of
interference. A male police officer was also assaulted for trying to assist her. The
alleged perpetrators were arrested and released the same day, and the investigation
into the incident has been suspended. The Police Commissioner of the Nugaal Region

21-06162

9/18

S/2021/485

has also reportedly prevented the female officer from further investigating rape cases
and prohibited her from visiting police stations in Garoowe.
54. In a related case, on 24 March, a female journalist was detained at Garoowe
central police station on the orders of the Police Commission er of the Nugaal Region
after she followed up on the assault described in paragraph 53 and wrote a post on
social media criticizing the Puntland police force for its handling of rape cases in
Garoowe. She was released without charges on the same day follow ing an
intervention by the Office of the Puntland Human Rights Defender and the Puntland
media.
55. On 21 March, the Somali National Army executed one of its soldiers by firing
squad in Beledxaawo, Gedo Region, after the military court found him guilty of
raping and killing a 17-year-old girl on 15 November 2020.
Humanitarian situation
56. Erratic weather conditions, political instability and food insecurity contributed
to the worsening of the humanitarian situation during the reporting period. In
February, water shortages and pockets of drought-like conditions were reported in
“Somaliland”, Puntland, Galmudug, Hirshabelle and Jubbaland. On 25 April, the
Federal Government, in consultation with the United Nations, declared a drought.
More than 80 per cent of the country is currently experiencing moderate to severe
drought conditions. While gu rains have started in parts of the country, projections
indicate below-normal precipitation. Over 116,000 people have been displaced by
severe water shortages and drought conditions since October 2020.
57. The Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General and United Nations
Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator for Somalia mobilized $13.3 million from
the Somalia Humanitarian Fund and up to $27 million from two Central Emergency
Response Fund allocations to facilitate rapid response efforts and ac tivate the
anticipatory action framework for populations hardest hit by the water shortage crisis
in all key areas. Humanitarian access remained challenging, in particular in key
locations such as Ceel Waaq in Jubbaland, where the population is hardest hit by water
shortages.
58. The vulnerability of populations already at risk increased as a result of both
climatic conditions and political instability. Assessments conducted in the areas
affected by water shortages indicated the increased exposure of women and children
to female genital mutilation, sexual violence, harassment and abuse, given the
difficulty in terms of access to water points and poor protection. Political instability
has further exacerbated protection concerns. Recent conflict and violence h ave
displaced 250,000 people in Banaadir, Bardaale and Badweyn, including 200,000
displaced around Mogadishu since 15 April. This is in addition to the almost 61,000
people who were newly displaced in February and March owing to conflict and
insecurity.
59. Poor weather patterns are expected to continue owing to La Niña conditions and
a second consecutive season of below-average rainfall, with a below-average gu
rainfall season forecast from April to June. There was an increasingly widespread
food security crisis (Integrated Food Security Phase Classification phase 3), which
was expected to last until September 2021. The impact of the drought on livelihoods
will be exacerbated by the ongoing desert locust infestation, which is forecast to
continue spreading following reports of newly formed immature swarms breeding in
northern parts of the country. Control operations by aerial and ground teams continued
in the first quarter of the year, bringing the total area treated in Somalia since 2020 to
209,419 ha.

10/18

21-06162

S/2021/485

60. Without sustained humanitarian assistance, an estimated 2.7 million people are
projected to be at risk of crisis or emergency levels of food insecurity by mid -June,
including approximately 839,000 children under five who are likely to suffer from
acute malnutrition.
61. The number of confirmed COVID-19 cases spiked in the first quarter of 2021.
From 16 March 2020 to 7 May 2021, more than 11,504 cases have been confirmed in
Somalia, including 537 associated deaths. On 15 March 2021, the country received
its first batch of 300,000 doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine under the COVID -19
Vaccine Global Access programme, and the vaccination campaign is being rolled out
across the country with a view to vaccinating 20 per cent of the population
(3.5 million people). As at 29 April, 121,700 people had been vaccinated. Additional
resources are urgently needed to cover the rest of the population.
62. The 2021 Humanitarian Response Plan for Somalia was launched on
15 February, calling for $1.09 billion to meet the needs of 5.9 million people. Despite
increasing needs, funding levels are alarmingly low: as at 6 May, they were at
$207.6 million (19 per cent of the total needed). Timely and proportionate funding is
urgently required to address the shocks confronting Somalia.

VI. Comprehensive approach to security
A.

Implementation of the transition plan
63. Following publication of the Somali transition plan in February 2021, the
Somali National Army and AMISOM, supported by the United Nations and
international partners, started to develop a plan to meet the operational objectives of
the plan.
64. In February, the Ministry of Defence requested a review of the priorities for
closures of forward operating bases. In line with the transition plan and the
reconfiguration of AMISOM, in March the AMISOM Force Commander and the
Chief of the Defence Force of the Somali National Army jointly visited the sectors to
harmonize the handover of pre-identified AMISOM forward operating bases. Of
seven bases, one has been closed and another handed over to the Somali security
forces: the Mashaalay base was closed on 24 January and the Afgooye base was
successfully handed over to the Army on 24 March. A joint agreement between the
Chief of the Defence Force and AMISOM with regard to the futur e reconfiguration
of forces was also reached at a joint meeting held on 14 and 15 April.
65. Further to Security Council resolution 2568 (2021), the Federal Government of
Somalia informed the President of the Security Council, by letter dated 30 April, that
it had indeed endorsed the transition plan at a meeting of the Security and Justice
Committee chaired by the Prime Minister on 1 December.

B.

Operations
66. Preliminary planning for operations to secure the main supply routes as part of
Operation Badbaado has commenced and is expected to be a key part of future
discussions on the transition plan. Military operations in Shabelle Hoose continued
to consolidate gains and set the foundations for future operations. However, the
limited progress in force and resource generation could delay meeting the targets in
2021.
67. The planned deployment of 525 trained federal Darwish police to support
Operation Badbaado faced technical delays. This had an impact on the donation of

21-06162

11/18

S/2021/485

equipment and vehicles by the European Union. In response, the Joint Police
Programme suspended support until the trained Darwish are deployed.
68. The Mine Action Service supported AMISOM and Somali security forces in
improvised explosive device threat mitigation by providing seven threat analysis
reports, two studies on vulnerable points along supply routes and one report on
improvised explosive device awareness.
69. To curb the spread of COVID-19 in the justice sector, on 4 March the Chief
Justice of the Federal Government suspended until further notice all court
proceedings in civil matters, as well as prison visits.

C.

Institutional capacity-building
70. On 10 February, the “Somaliland” Custodial Corps concluded a four-week
training programme on prison management for 15 officers (13 men and two women).
On 12 February, the Joint Justice Programme steering committee, comprising the
Federal Government, the United Nations, the European Union and the Netherlands,
endorsed the workplan for January to April 2021, which is focused on service
delivery, including support for mobile courts, legal aid and altern ative dispute
resolution centres.
71. On 23 March, a technical-level meeting of the working group on strand 2C on
the rule of law of the comprehensive approach to security was held, led by the
Director General of the federal Ministry of Justice, with the E uropean Union and the
Netherlands as co-chairs. Discussions were focused on the development of the justice
sector strategic plan. The Ministry of Justice is consulting the federal Supreme Court,
the federal Office of the Attorney General and federal member states to finalize the
strategic plan by May 2021. Technical sub-working groups, including on alternative
dispute resolution and corrections and rehabilitation, were established.
72. UNSOM supported the Office of the Special Envoy of the President for the Horn
of Africa, the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden to reactivate the National Maritime
Coordination Committee to advance maritime governance and blue economy
objectives, and delivered training on international maritime conventions together with
the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea in the Office of Legal Affairs,
between 19 and 28 April.
73. On 31 March, the executive board of the Joint Police Programme approved a
20 per cent reduction in Programme-funded stipends for equipped and deployed
federal member state police officers, and a 50 per cent reduction in stipends for
federal member state police officers who were recruited and trained but have yet to
be equipped and deployed. The reductions will take effect on 1 July. The revised
request by Galmudug to train 700 state police officers was also approved to help to
re-establish the Galmudug state police.
74. The Police Professional Development Board under strand 2B of the
comprehensive approach to security, involving representatives of the Somal i Police
Force, the federal member state police services and international partners, supported
the drafting of a Somali police training policy, which will identify further police
training in Mogadishu and the federal member states.
75. UNSOM met with the Office of the Prime Minister to discuss the participation
of women in the security sector to advance the women and peace and security agenda
in Somalia. The Federal Government acknowledged the importance of this priority
and agreed to launch a cross-ministerial initiative in this regard.

12/18

21-06162

S/2021/485

76. The joint security sector governance programme will be concluded on 30 June.
The United Nations is currently developing the foundations for a new programme to
support dialogue between the Federal Government and the feder al member states on
security and civilian oversight of the federated security model.

D.

Supporting activities
77. The Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation, together with
federal member state counterparts, continued to implement the national stabilization
strategy in connection with Operation Badbaado in Shabelle Hoose. Furthermore,
community recovery and reconciliation initiatives in the area supported by
international partners installed solar street lights in Jannaale, rehabili tated the
Jannaale-Bufoow road, made pre-gu season repairs to flood defences, provided sports
activities for local young people and completed a new police station and clinic in
Awdheegle.
78. A coordination meeting on strand 4 of the comprehensive approach to security
was held on 22 March. The CAS Strand 4 terms of reference were amended to reflect
the new aid architecture adopted during the Somali Partnership Forum in December
2020. The coordination unit on preventing and countering violent extremism withi n
the Office of the Prime Minister presented a six-step plan for revising the national
dialogue and tolerance strategy to be achieved in 2021. The Global Community
Engagement and Resilience Fund announced that the first grant of $2 million for
community resilience in Gedo had been assigned.
79. UNSOM worked with international partners to keep rehabilitation centres for
low-risk former Al-Shabaab fighters COVID-19-free and open to prospective
beneficiaries. As at 6 May, there were 361 male and 203 female ben eficiaries in the
centres. Since 1 January, 42 men and 69 women have been rehabilitated and
reintegrated within host communities.
80. The Mine Action Service delivered 2,204 in-person explosive ordnance risk
education sessions to 2,042 women, 1,735 men, 2,592 girls and 2,068 boys most at
risk from explosive ordnance across Somalia (except in Juba Dhexe). Sessions were
also delivered remotely in hard-to-reach areas, using 1,215 solar-powered devices
with pre-recorded audio risk messages.

VII. United Nations Support Office in Somalia assistance for the
African Union Mission in Somalia and Somali security forces
A.

Support for African Union Mission in Somalia operations
81. In February, the letter of assist for the deployment of three Kenyan milita ry
helicopters was extended for a further year, until 14 December 2021. Unfortunately,
a helicopter from the Ugandan military aviation unit was severely damaged in an
accident on 5 February in which several crew members were injured. Investigations
into the accident are ongoing, and Uganda is in the process of replacing the helicopter.
82. AMISOM requested the repatriation of the eight items of oversized contingent owned equipment of the Ghanaian formed police unit that could not be transported
from Mogadishu to Baidoa. This is expected to be completed by the end of June.
UNSOS provided appropriate alternatives from its fleet to enable the unit to operate
effectively.

21-06162

13/18

S/2021/485

83. The forward operating base wellness programme continues in most sectors but
was delayed owing to damaged roads and COVID-19 restrictions. UNSOS delivered
6 armoured personnel carriers each to sectors 1, 5 and 6 from the consignment of
30 carriers that have arrived for the mission enabling units. It also supported the
100 Djiboutian troops deployed to Dhuusamarreeb with the construction of a forward
operating base.
84. UNSOS supported the rotation of 1,941 Kenyan troops from 16 February to
4 March, 2,428 Ugandan troops from 24 March to 17 April and 160 Nigerian formed
police unit personnel on 17 April.
85. UNSOS has made progress in its environmental initiatives and has, among other
things, installed 511 air conditioner timers, 364 movement sensors and 4,691 light emitting diode lights, synchronized 14 power houses and established treated
wastewater recycling systems in all the sector hubs to irrigate plants and lawns and
clean vehicles. In March, UNSOS established a tree seedling nursery programme at
Aden Adde International Airport, which will be rolled out to all the sector hubs for
planting by United Nations personnel, AMISOM and local communities. A
reforestation project in Baidoa, which began in February, is in progress, using a drone
to drop seed balls. As at 30 April, the balance in the United Nations trust fund in
support of AMISOM was $2.9 million, which is enough to support the engagement of
AMISOM consultants and medical welfare officers for 12 months.
86. The Mine Action Service, with assistance from UNSOS, continued to support
AMISOM security operations and stabilization efforts by pr oviding improvised
explosive device threat mitigation advice, analysis, training and mentoring on the
use of specialized equipment, explosive detection dogs, community liaison and
explosive ordnance clearance teams. During the reporting period, the Service trained
1,207 AMISOM and African Union Police uniformed personnel to enhance their
capability to locate and destroy improvised explosive devices and operate safely
within the threat environment, specifically along the main supply routes. The
Service contributed to the safety and security of strategic infrastructure by
deploying 26 explosive detection dog teams working with 52 detection dogs to conduct
searches of 23,374 pieces of luggage, 67,428 vehicles, 130 buildings, 34,300 m2 of
building areas and 7,378,020 m2 of open areas throughout the sectors.

B.

Support for Somali security force operations
87. In March, UNSOS began to deliver logistical support to the additional 3,000 Somali
security forces authorized by Security Council resolution 2520 (2020). The Head of
UNSOS met with the Commissioner of the Somali Police Force, the Commander of
the Somali National Army, the Director General at the Ministry of Defence, the Senior
Security Adviser at the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ambassador of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to Somalia to discuss the support
arrangements and associated accountability measures, including implementing
mitigation measures of the human rights due diligence policy, for the 3,000 additional
Somali security forces personnel supported. The memorandum of understanding
between the United Nations and the Federal Government for the delivery of logistics
support to the Somali security forces is still pending agreement by the Government.
88. As at 30 April, the balance in the United Nations trust fund in support of the
Somali security forces was $2.7 million, enough to sustain UNSOS logistics support
until June 2021. To replenish the trust fund, my Special Representative, the Head of
UNSOS and the Senior Security Adviser at the Office of the Prime Minister
co-chaired a briefing for the international community on 2 March. This effort was

14/18

21-06162

S/2021/485

followed by another appeal to Members States in New York on 23 M arch by the
Under-Secretary-General for Operational Support.
89. The Mine Action Service, with support from UNSOS, completed improvised
explosive device threat mitigation training for 5 Somali National Army teams
(45 members) deployed in Shabelle Hoose and started similar training for an
additional 11 Army teams (99 members), thereby strengthening the Somali security
forces’ capacity to assume responsibilities for security, in line with the transition plan.

VIII. United Nations presence in Somalia
90. United Nations entities continued to be present in Baidoa, Beledweyne, Berbera,
Boosasso, Dhooble, Dhuusamarreeb, Doolow, Gaalkacyo, Garoowe, Hargeysa, Jawhar,
Kismaayo and Mogadishu. As at 5 May, 388 international staff and 1,299 national
staff were deployed throughout Somalia.
91. The United Nations in Somalia continues to implement its COVID -19 response
strategy, including support for United Nations and AMISOM personnel and
operations through the local vaccine deployment plan. The vaccination of pers ons at
high risk has begun. Adequate medical capacity has been established to support a
population at risk in excess of 25,000, which includes the United Nations, its third party contractors in Somalia and AMISOM.

IX. Observations
92. The recent turn of events in Somalia is a source of grave concern. Despite
several rounds of consultations among a broad range of actors, Somali leaders have
failed to agree on the modalities for the implementation of the electoral agreement of
17 September. As a result, the security situation in Mogadishu has rapidly deteriorated
and fractures have appeared within the Somali security forces.
93. The action taken in the House of the People on 12 April created a new rift and
threatened to exacerbate the political divide and create instability in the country. It is
regretful that this action was taken contrary to clear positions of the United Nations,
the African Union, IGAD, the European Union and many bilateral partners of
Somalia, who have consistently cautioned against un ilateral action and emphasized
the need for dialogue to reach a consensus-based agreement. However, it is
encouraging that, at the request of Mr. Farmajo, on 1 May the House of the People
reversed its earlier decision and restored the agreement of 17 Septe mber.
94. The agreement of 17 September remains the basis on which stakeholder
consensus can be built and the most viable path towards holding credible elections in
a timely manner. It is therefore essential that the leaders of Somalia demonstrate
leadership by placing the country’s interests above their own and urgently re -engage
in dialogue to achieve the consensus necessary for holding credible, inclusive and
consensus-based elections without further delay and on the basis of the electoral
agreement of 17 September and the recommendations made by the technical
committee at Baidoa on 16 February. I also reiterate that the threat or use of violence
is unacceptable and urge all actors to exercise maximum restraint. All efforts should
be made to secure the minimum quota of 30 per cent for the representation of women
in the electoral process.
95. The ongoing political crisis is diverting attention and resources away from the
development, humanitarian, rule of law and security priorities of Somalia and
seriously threatens to reverse the gains achieved over the course of the past decade.
Cooperation between the Federal Government and federal member states, as well as
21-06162

15/18

S/2021/485

the holding of agreed-upon elections as soon as possible, is critical to allow further
pursuit of the many pressing tasks towards building sustainable peace in Somalia.
Dialogue and broad consensus remain imperative and the only viable way forward to
overcome the challenges that the country faces.
96. Recurrent and systematic attacks by Al-Shabaab on civilians, government
officials, security forces, AMISOM and the international community remain of utmost
concern. Al-Shabaab has demonstrated its continued capability and intent to exploit
any political impasse to intensify its attacks. I strongly condemn these attacks and
extend my deep condolences to the victims’ families. I am gravely concerned about
the civilian casualties and appeal to the Federal Government to intensify its efforts to
safeguard civilians and hold the perpetrators accountable.
97. The high number of cases of conflict-related sexual violence, which
disproportionately affects girls, remains alarming. It is important that the Federal
Government takes steps to protect women and girls from sexual and gender-based
violence by enacting the original Sexual Offences Bill of 2018 and holding
perpetrators of sexual violence accountable. It is also important that “Somaliland”
authorities support the Rape and Sexual Offences Act of 2018 and reject the regressive
Rape, Fornication and Other Sexual Offences Bill of 2020, which contravenes
established regional and international human rights standards.
98. Regarding the ending of impunity, efforts to reform the judiciary, strengthen the
rule of law and fight against corruption are welcome. The allocatio n of sufficient
financial resources to the judiciary is fundamental to advancing these processes. It is
crucial that the Federal Government as well as the federal member states promote and
safeguard the independence of the judiciary in order to increase pu blic confidence in
governmental institutions.
99. I commend the ongoing response of the Somali authorities and health -care
workers to the COVID-19 pandemic at both the federal and state levels. In future,
Somalia will require the continued strong support of the international community to
overcome the pandemic, including for the vaccination of its citizens. I would like to
thank all partners involved in the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access initiative for
their support for the vaccine roll-out in Somalia and appeal to international partners
to work towards further vaccine donations to ensure sufficient provisions for the
country’s vaccination campaign.
100. With regard to the humanitarian situation, it is of grave concern that most parts
of the country are facing critical water shortages, with more than 50 districts facing
moderate to severe drought conditions. Forecasts indicate a second consecutive
season of below-average rainfall during the April-to-June gu season, and the
Humanitarian Response Plan for Somalia is currently only 19 per cent funded. While
cognizant of current global economic conditions in the light of the pandemic -related
recession, I call upon international partners to provide the funding necessary to save
lives, alleviate suffering and prevent further deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Somalia.
101. The recent revision of the Somali transition plan as Somalia aims to take the
lead in providing security is a welcome development. It is crucial that the Federal
Government redoubles its efforts to develop predictable and sustainable modalities to
generate the capabilities of the Somali security forces and civilians, which are critical
for successful implementation. The acceleration of transition -related operations and
the integration of existing forces into Somali National Army and state police services
are key elements to maintain current gains and achieve further progress under the
national security architecture towards achieving the goals outlined in the transition
plan.

16/18

21-06162

S/2021/485

102. The generous support of all donors for the United Nations trust funds for
AMISOM and the Somali security forces is welcome. It is, however, concerning that
the trust fund in support of the Somali security forces will be depleted at the end of
May. This will severely affect United Nations logistical support for the Somali forces
and compromise implementation of the Somali transition plan. While recognizing that
the current political impasse is a cause for significant concern to the country’s donors
and partners, it is essential that Member States continue their support for the trust
fund to ensure the effective implementation of the transition plan.
103. The recent announcements by Somalia and Kenya of efforts to restore
diplomatic relations, following facilitation by Qatar, are an encouraging development.
I hope that the announcements will lead to a full restoration of friendly relations
between Kenya and Somalia, which are crucial to the stability of and cooperation in
the region.
104. I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the African Union, IGAD, the
European Union, Member States, non-governmental organizations and other partners
for their steadfast and coordinated support and engagement in Somalia. It is also
important to pay tribute to the brave personnel of AMISOM, the Somali National
Army and the Somali police. Their sacrifices to protect the Somali people and support
the country on its path towards peace, stability and prosperity will not be forgotten.
105. I would like to conclude by expressing my deep appreciation to my Special
Representative, James Swan, and the United Nations staff in Somalia for their firm
dedication in implementing the mandate of the Organization in Somalia under very
challenging circumstances.

21-06162

17/18

S/2021/485

18/18

21-06162
