General Assembly-Fifth Session
472 (V). Unforeseen and extraordinary
penses for the financial year 1951

ex-

The General Assembly
Resolns that, for the financial year 1951,
The Secretary-G<'neral, ,vith the prior concurrence
of the Advisorv Committee on A(lministrative and
Budgetary Que~tions and :c;uhject to the Financial
Regulations of the United Nations, is authorizer! tt>
enter into co1rn11itnwnts tn meet unforeseen and extraordinary ex1wnsPs; prm·irlcd that the concurrence of
the Advisory Committee sl1all not he necPssary for:
(a) Such commitment;; not exceeding a total of
$US 2,000,000 if the Secretary-General certifie~ that
they relate to tlw maintenance of peace and sf'curitv
or to urgent economic rehabilitation;
( b) Such commitments as may be necessary to provide for reasonable expenses for the proposed Economic Commission for the Middle East, should the
Economic ,md Social Council decide that this Commission shall he created in 1951 ;
( c) Such commitments, duly certified by the President of the International Court of Justice, relating to
expenses occasioned:
(i) By the designation of ad hor judges (Statute,
Article 31 ) ,
(ii) By the appointment of assessors ( Statute, Article
30) or of witnesses and experts ( Statute, Article
50),
(iii) By the holding of sessions of the Court a way from
The Hague ( Statute, Article 22),
·
and which do not exceed $24,000, $25,000 and $75,000
respectively, under each of these three headings;
( d) Such commitments as relate to expenses
occasioned by an extraordinary session of the Economic, Employment and Development Commission
which may be called by its Chairman if exceptional
circumstan~es require;
( e) Such commitments not exceeding a total of
$40,000 as are required for the establishment of an
International Bureau for Declarations of Death, in
accordance with the terms of article 8 of the Convention on the Declaration of Death of Missing Persons;
(f) Such co111mitrnents as are occasioned hv the convening of an inter-governmental commodity c~nference:
The. Secretary-General shall report to the Advisory
~omm1ttec and to the next regular session of the
C~e:1eral Assembly all commitments made under the prov_1s10ns of the pr~sent resolution, together with the
c1rcumstanc~s relatmg thereto, and shall submit supplementary estimates to the General Assembly in respect
of such commitments.
·
326th plenary meeting,
15 December 195().

473 (V). Working Capital Fund
The General Assembly
Resolves that:
1. The \Vorking Capital Fund shall be maintained
to 31 December 1951 at the amount of $US 20,000,000;

2. \fr111hers shall make ad,·ances to the Working
Capital Fund in accordance with the scale 24 adopted
by the General Assembly for contributions of '.\{embers
to the sixth annual budget;
3. Then' shall he set off against this new allocatio11
of ac\y;rnces the ;mHHmts paid hy \frrnhers to the
\Vorkinf.; Capital 1:1111<1 for the fi11ancial year 1()50:
pn1\'ided th:it. should the a(h·;rncc paid bv ai1y 1-femher
to the \\'orking Capital Fn11cl for the financial year
]()SO cxccnl the amount of that l\femher's advance
1111dn the pnwision of paragraph 2 hereof, the excess
shall lw set off against the amount of contributions
payable ll\· that J\Iemher in rrspect of the sixth annual
budget, or :rny prc,·ious budget ;
4. The Secretarv-General is authorized to advancr
irom the \Vorking' Capital Fund:
(a) Such sums as may he necessary to finance
lmdgetan· appropriations pending receipt. of contrilmtions, sums so ach·ancecl shall he reimhursrd as soon
a;; receipts from contributions are ayailable for the
purpose;
( h) Such srnns as may he nccessarv to financ-e corn•
mitments which may he <luly authorized under the pro,·isions of the resolution"'' relating to unforeseen and
extraordinary expenses. The Secretary-General shall
make provision in the budget estimates for reimbursing
the Working Capital Fund;
( c) Such sums as, together with net sums outstanding for the same purposes, do not exceed $250,000 to
continue the renilving fund to finance miscellaneous
self-liquidating purchases and activities. Advances in
excess of the total of $250,000 may be made with the
prior concurrence of the Advisorv· Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions. The SecrrtarvGeneral shall submit. with the annual accounts, an
explanation of the ontstanding balance of the revolving
itmds at the l'nd of each year;
( d) Loans to specialized agencies and preparatorv
commissions of agencies to he established hv intergovernmental agreement under the auspices· of the
United Natio~1s to nnance their work, pending receipt
hv the :,genc1es concerned of sufficient contributions
nnder their own budgets. 111 making such loans, which
-;_hall norm~lly he repayable within two years, the
Secretary-( ,eneral shall have regard to the proposed
finar!cial resources of the agency concerned, and shall
ol'.ta111 the pri~r. con~urrence of the Advisory Committee on Adn11111strative and Budgetarv Questions for
any cash issues ,vhich ,vould increas; the aggregate
!,;dance ontstan,ling ( including amounts previouslv advanced and outstanding) at any one time to an amount
in excess of $3,000,000, and for any issue which would
mcn:ase the balance outstanding (including amounts
prenously advanced and O\ltstanding) in respect of any
one agrncy to an amount 111 excess of $1,000,000;

. ( c) Such s11!lls as, togethci: with the sums prevH,usly advanced and outstanding for the same purpose, do not exceed $500,000 to continue the Staff
Housing Fund in orde: to finance advance rental payment, guarantee deposits and working capital require"' See resolution 462 (V), page 64.
"'' See resolution 472 (V) (this page).
