United Nations

A/RES/68/254

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 January 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 143

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 27 December 2013
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/670)]

68/254. Administration of justice at the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XI of its resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001, its resolutions
57/307 of 15 April 2003, 59/266 of 23 December 2004, 59/283 of 13 April 2005,
61/261 of 4 April 2007, 62/228 of 22 December 2007, 63/253 of 24 December 2008,
64/233 of 22 December 2009, 65/251 of 24 December 2010, 66/237 of 24 December
2011 and 67/241 of 24 December 2012, as well as its decisions 63/531 of
11 December 2008 and 65/513 of 11 December 2010,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of
justice at the United Nations 1 and on the activities of the Office of the United
Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services, 2 the report of the Internal Justice
Council on administration of justice at the United Nations 3 and the related report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 4 as well as the
letter dated 11 November 2013 from the President of the General Assembly to the
Chair of the Fifth Committee, 5
1.
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of
justice at the United Nations 1 and on the activities of the Office of the United
Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services;2
2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 4 subject to
the provisions of the present resolution;

_______________
1

A/68/346.
A/68/158.
3
A/68/306.
4
A/68/530.
5
A/C.5/68/11.
2

13-45469

*1345469*

Please recycle

A/RES/68/254

Administration of justice at the United Nations

I
System of administration of justice
3.
Reaffirms that the resolutions of the General Assembly are binding on the
Secretary-General and on the Organization;
4.
Stresses that all elements of the system of administration of justice must
work in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the legal and
regulatory framework approved by the General Assembly, and emphasizes that the
decisions of the Assembly related to administrative and budgetary matters are
subject to review by the Assembly alone;
5.
Reiterates that decisions taken by the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals
Tribunal shall conform with the provisions of General Assembly resolutions on
issues related to human resources management;
6.
Acknowledges the evolving nature of the system of administration of
justice and the need to carefully monitor its implementation to ensure that it remains
within the parameters set out by the General Assembly;
7.
Emphasizes the importance of the principle of judicial independence in
the system of administration of justice;
8.
Stresses the importance of ensuring access for all staff members to the
system of administration of justice, regardless of their duty station;
9.
Reaffirms its decision, contained in paragraph 4 of resolution 61/261, to
establish a new, independent, transparent, professionalized, adequately resourced
and decentralized system of administration of justice consistent with the relevant
rules of international law and the principles of the rule of law and due process to
ensure respect for the rights and obligations of staff members and the accountability
of managers and staff members alike;
10. Notes with appreciation the achievements produced since the inception
of the system of administration of justice, regarding both the disposal of the backlog
and the addressing of new cases;
11. Recalls paragraph 20 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly for consideration
at its sixty-ninth session a revised proposal for conducting an interim independent
assessment of the system of administration of justice, to be carried out in a costefficient manner by independent experts, including experts familiar with internal
labour dispute mechanisms;
12. Decides that the assessment requested in paragraph 11 above shall
examine the system of administration of justice in all its aspects, with particular
attention to the formal system and its relation with the informal system, including an
analysis of whether the aims and objectives of the system set out in resolution
61/261 are being achieved in an efficient and cost-effective manner;
13. Stresses the importance of good management practice to promote a
positive and transparent work environment in order to address the underlying factors
that give rise to disputes in the workplace, and requests the Secretary-General to
report on efforts made in this regard to the General Assembly at the main part of its
sixty-ninth session;
14. Notes with concern that performance management is still highlighted as
the single most important cross-cutting issue in the report of the Secretary-General
2/6

Administration of justice at the United Nations

A/RES/68/254

on the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation
Services, and encourages the further use of approaches that serve to systematically
address performance management issues at the highest levels;
15. Recognizes that sound performance management can greatly contribute
to avoiding conflict in the workplace, and requests the Secretary-General to
redouble his efforts to continue to develop and implement a credible, fair and fully
functioning performance appraisal system;
II
Informal system
16. Recognizes that the informal system of administration of justice is an
efficient and effective option for staff who seek redress of grievances and for
managers to participate in;
17. Reaffirms that the informal resolution of conflict is a crucial element of
the system of administration of justice, emphasizes that all possible use should be
made of the informal system in order to avoid unnecessary litigation, without
prejudice to the basic right of staff members to access the formal system of justice,
and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to recommend to the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session additional innovative measures to encourage
recourse to informal resolution of disputes;
18. Recognizes the importance of the Office of Staff Legal Assistance as a
filter in the system of administration of justice, and encourages the Office to
continue to advise staff on the merits of their cases, especially when giving
summary or preventive legal advice;
19. Welcomes the outreach activities of the Office of the United Nations
Ombudsman and Mediation Services to encourage informal dispute resolution;
20. Also welcomes the recommendations to address systemic and cross-cutting
issues contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office
of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services, and requests the
Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at the main part of its sixty-ninth
session on progress made on the implementation of those recommendations;
21. Recalls paragraph 20 of resolution 66/237, welcomes the information
provided informally by the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation
Services on the financial and administrative implications resulting from settlements
reached through informal dispute resolution, and requests the Office to report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on such implications;
22. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that management
responds to requests of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation
Services in a timely manner;
23. Requests that information on the number and nature of cases from
non-staff personnel, as well as data on the distribution of workload among conflict
resolution, systemic issues and conflict competence, be clearly set out in future
reports of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services;
24. Reiterates its requests to the Secretary-General, contained in
paragraph 67 (a) of resolution 62/228, paragraph 21 of resolution 63/253,
paragraphs 16 to 18 of resolution 65/251, paragraph 19 of resolution 66/237 and
paragraph 27 of resolution 67/241, to report to the General Assembly on the revised
3/6

A/RES/68/254

Administration of justice at the United Nations

terms of reference for the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation
Services, regrets that the Secretary-General has not fulfilled those requests, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the terms of reference and guidelines
for the Office are promulgated as soon as possible;
III
Formal system
25. Reaffirms that, in accordance with paragraph 5 of resolution 67/241 and
paragraph 28 of resolution 63/253, the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal
shall not have any powers beyond those conferred under their respective statutes; 6
26. Also reaffirms that recourse to general principles of law and the Charter
by the Tribunals is to take place within the context of and consistent with their
statutes and the relevant General Assembly resolutions, regulations, rules and
administrative issuances;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to track the data on the
number of cases received by the Management Evaluation Unit and the Dispute
Tribunal in order to identify any emerging trends and to include his observations on
those statistics in future reports;
28. Reaffirms the need for fully equipped courtrooms and other
administrative requirements for the Tribunals, and welcomes the progress made by
the Secretary-General in ensuring the provision of functional courtrooms with
adequate facilities, as a matter of urgency;
29. Requests the Internal Justice Council to report on the impact of the
request contained in paragraph 33 of resolution 67/241, taking into account the
views of all relevant stakeholders;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to propose an amendment to the statute
of the Appeals Tribunal, taking into account the recommendation of the Internal
Justice Council relating to qualifications of Appeals Tribunal judges;
31. Takes note of paragraph 42 of the report of the Advisory Committee,
recognizes that the immunities of the judges of the two Tribunals should be clearly
specified, requests the Secretary-General to examine this issue further and present to
the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session recommendations that would not
result in a change in the rank or conditions of service of the judges, and invites the
Sixth Committee to consider them, without prejudice to the role of the Fifth
Committee as the Main Committee entrusted with the responsibility for
administrative and budgetary matters;
32. Recognizes the ongoing positive contribution of the Office of Staff Legal
Assistance to the system of administration of justice;
33. Decides that the funding of the Office of Staff Legal Assistance shall be
supplemented by a voluntary payroll deduction not exceeding 0.05 per cent of a
staff member’s monthly net base salary and that this funding mechanism shall be
implemented on an experimental basis from 1 January 2014 to 31 December 2015,
and requests the Secretary-General to report on its implementation;

_______________
6

4/6

Resolution 63/253, annexes I and II.

Administration of justice at the United Nations

A/RES/68/254

34. Requests the Secretary-General to track, on a monthly basis, the opt-out
rate and the amount of revenue generated under the supplementary funding
mechanism mentioned in paragraph 33 above, and authorizes him to enter into
commitments for the period from 1 January 2014 to 31 December 2015, from this
revenue, in an amount not exceeding this revenue, to finance any additional
resources for the Office of Staff Legal Assistance during the experimental phase of
the mechanism;
35. Reiterates that all staff members will continue to have access to the
services of the Office of Staff Legal Assistance during the experimental period;
36. Stresses the need to raise awareness among staff of the importance of
financial contributions of the staff to the Office of Staff Legal Assistance;
37. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to include information on
disputes involving non-staff personnel in the context of both management
evaluation and informal mediation in his respective reports, and reiterates its request
that he provide information on existing measures to institutionalize good
management practice that aim to avoid or mitigate disputes involving the different
categories of non-staff personnel;
38. Stresses the need to ensure that all individuals acting as legal
representatives, whether they are staff members representing other staff members,
staff members representing themselves or external counsel representing staff
members, are subject to the same standards of professional conduct applicable in the
United Nations system, and requests the Secretary-General to present the code of
conduct for external legal representatives, including appropriate sanctions for
breaches thereof as safeguards against frivolous applications, to the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
IV
Other issues
39. Stresses that the Internal Justice Council can help to ensure independence,
professionalism and accountability in the system of administration of justice, and
requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Council with including the views of
both the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal in its annual reports;
40. Recalls paragraph 41 of the report of the Advisory Committee, regrets
that the Secretary-General has deemed it necessary to submit the matter of the
overpayment of four judges to the General Assembly, and decides that the SecretaryGeneral should investigate how this administrative error remained undetected for
almost two years and institute measures to ensure that such a situation does not
occur again;
41. Requests the Secretary-General to recover the overpayment made to the
four judges, and recognizes that the salary of the judges should remain fixed at the
equivalent of the D-2 level, step IV;
42. Recalls paragraph 30 of the report of the Advisory Committee and
paragraph 8 of resolution 61/261, and requests the Secretary-General to present to
the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session proposals with reference to the
accountability of all individuals where violations of the Organization’s rules and
procedures have led to financial loss;
43. Stresses the growing need for a modernized and upgraded search engine to
facilitate streamlined access to the jurisprudence and outcomes of past relevant cases;
5/6

A/RES/68/254

Administration of justice at the United Nations

44. Invites the Sixth Committee to consider the legal aspects of the report to
be submitted by the Secretary-General, without prejudice to the role of the Fifth
Committee as the Main Committee entrusted with responsibilities for administrative
and budgetary matters.
72nd plenary meeting
27 December 2013

6/6
