A/77/600

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 December 2022
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 3 (b)
Credentials of representatives to the seventy-seventh
session of the General Assembly

Report of the Credentials Committee
Chair: Ms. Carolyn Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana)
1.
At its 1st plenary meeting, on 13 September 2022, the General Assembly, in
accordance with rule 28 of its rules of procedure, appointed a Credentials Committee
for its seventy-seventh session consisting of the following Member States: Angola,
Austria, China, Guyana, Maldives, Russian Federation, United States of America,
Uruguay and Zambia.
2.

The Credentials Committee held one meeting on 12 December 2022.

3.
The Permanent Representative of Guyana to the United Nations, Carolyn
Rodrigues-Birkett, was unanimously elected Chair.
4.
The Committee had before it a memorandum by the Secretary-General dated
7 December 2022 concerning the credentials of representatives of Member States to
the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly. The Assistant Secretary General for Legal Affairs made a statement in relation to the memorandum.
5.
As noted in paragraph 1 of the memorandum by the Secretary-General, as
updated by the statement made by the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs,
formal credentials issued by the Head of State or Gov ernment or by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs as required by rule 27 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly had been submitted by the following 96 Member States in respect of their
representatives to the seventy-seventh session of the Assembly: Albania, Algeria,
Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Ric a, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominica, Ecuador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Indonesia, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname,

22-26400 (E)

131222

*2226400*

A/77/600

Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, and
Zimbabwe.
6.
As indicated in paragraph 2 of the memorandum, as updated by the statement
made by the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, information concerning
the appointment of representatives of Member States to t he seventy-seventh session
of the General Assembly had been communicated to the Secretary -General by means
of a copy of formal credentials signed by the Head of State or Government or the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, or by means of a letter or note verbal e from the
Permanent Mission concerned, by the following 93 Member States: Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad,
Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Iceland, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Oman, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, and Zambia.
7.
As indicated in paragraph 3 of the memorandum, the following Member State
had not transmitted any communication to the Secretary-General: Sao Tome and
Principe.
8.
The Committee had before it two communications concerning the representation
of Myanmar at the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly, indicating
different individuals as representatives to the seventy-seventh session of the
Assembly. The first was dated 19 August 2022 from the Permanent Representative of
Myanmar to the United Nations in New York. The second was dated 24 August 2022
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Myanmar.
9.
The Committee had before it two communications concerning the representation
of Afghanistan at the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly, indicating
different individuals as representatives to the seventy-seventh session of the
Assembly. The first was dated 6 September 2022 from the Chargé d ’affaires a.i. of
Afghanistan to the United Nations in New York. The second was dated 17 September
2022 from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan.
10. The Committee had before it two communications concerning the representation
of Libya at the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly, indicating different
individuals as representatives to the seventy-seventh session of the Assembly. The
first was dated 13 September 2022 from the “Minister of Foreign Affairs and
international cooperation” and the communication referred to the decision of the
House of Representatives to appoint Fathi Bashagha as “Prime M inister” and to
approve the formation of a “Government of National Stability”. The second was dated
5 October 2022 from the Permanent Mission of Libya to the United Nations in New
York.
11. The Chair proposed that the Committee postpone its consideration of the
credentials pertaining to the representatives of Myanmar, of the credentials pertaining
to the representatives of Afghanistan and of the credentials pertaining to the
2/3

22-26400

A/77/600

representatives of Libya to the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly, and
to revert to consideration of these credentials at a future time in the seventy-seventh
session. The proposal was adopted without a vote.
12. The Chair also proposed the following draft resolution for adoption by the
Committee on the understanding that the formal credentials of the representatives of
the Member States referred to in paragraph 6 of the present report would be
communicated to the Secretary-General as soon as possible:
The Credentials Committee,
Having examined the credentials of the representatives to the seventyseventh session of the General Assembly,
Accepts the credentials of the representatives of the Member States
referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of the memorandum of the Secretary -General,
as updated.
13.

The draft resolution proposed by the Chair was adopted without a vote.

14. The representative of the United States of America dissociated from the
adoption of the Committee’s resolution, solely with respect to the acceptance of the
credentials submitted by the Maduro representative on behalf of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
15. The Chair then proposed that the Committee recommend to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution entitled “Credentials of representatives
to the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly” (see para. 17). The proposal
was adopted without a vote.
16. In the light of the foregoing, the present report is submitted to the General
Assembly.

Recommendation of the Credentials Committee
17. The Credentials Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption
of the following draft resolution:

Credentials of representatives to the seventy-seventh session of the
General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Credentials Committee and the
recommendation contained therein,
Approves the report of the Credentials Committee. 1

__________________
1

22-26400

A/77/600.
3/3
