SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
. DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. S9
15geme et 160eme seances

159th and 160th meetings

17 juillet 1947

17 July 1947

( 50 p.)

Lake Success
New York

TABLE DES MATIERES

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Hundred and fifty-ninth meeting

Cent-cinquailte-neuvieme seance
Page

Pages

222. Provisional agenda
1343
223. Adoption of the agenda
1343
224. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question
1346

222. Ordre du jour provisoire
1343
223. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
1343
224. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque
1346

Hundred and sixtieth meeting

Cent-soixantieme seance

225. Provisional agenda
1375
1375
226. Adoption CIf the agenda
227. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question
1375

225. Ordre du jour provisoire
1375
226. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
1375
227. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque
1375

Documents

Documents

The following ·documents, relevant to the hundred an~ fifty-ninth and hundred and sixtieth
meetings, appear as follows:
Official Records of the Security Council:
First 'Year, Second Series, Supplement No. 10,
Annex 16
Letter from the Acting Chairman of the delegation of Greece to the Secretary-General, and
enclosed memorandum (document S/203).
First 'Year, Second Series, Supplement No. 12,
Annex 23
Documents presented by the Prime Ministu of
Greece at the eighty-third meeting of the Security Council (document 8/218).
Second Tear, Special Supplement No. 2
Report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council (document S/360).

Les documents se rapportant aux cent-cinquanteneuvieme 'et cent-soixantieme seances figurent
dans les publications suivantes:
Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite:
Premiere Annee, Deuxieme Sbie, Supplement
No 10, Annexe 16
Lettre du President par interim de la delegation
grecque au Secretaire general, cc memorandum l'accompagnant (document 8/203).
Premiere Annee, Deuxieme Sbie, Supplement
No 12, Annexe 23
Documents presentes par le Premier Ministre de
Grece a la quatre-vingt-troisieme seance du
Cons, de securite (document S/218).
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement Special No 2
Rapport presente au Conseil de securite par la
Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la frontiere grecque (document
8/360) .

1375
Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): Mr. Presidem, I
should like to call your attention to another point
concerning the question we are discussing. Not
only the Security Council is lister..mg to the discussion on the Greek question, but also the punlie is liJtening to it over the radio. There are
many people who are waiting to hear the discussion either in one language or in the other.
Therefore, it is necessary not only to have written
copies of the French translation, but also to have
an oral French interpretation. The statement
made by the representative of Yugoslavia should
be broadcast equally in both languages.

A~~. EL 'J'.
~ '. Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
:M:unsiev
._ iesident, je voudrais attirer votre
atcentioll sur '-ltl autre point concernant la
que:;tiun en discussion. Ce n'est pas seulement
le Conseil de securite qui ecoute la: discussion
sur la question grecque: le public l'ecoute
egalement a la radio. Nombreux sont ceux qui
ont l'intention d'ecouter la discussion dans l'une
ou l'autre langue. n faut done, non seulement
avoir des exemplaircs de la traduction fran~aise
ecrite, mais aussi faire donner !a traduction orale
en fran~ais de la declaration faite par le representant de la Yougoslavie. I1.conviendrait de la
faire radiodiffuser, egalement dans les deux
langues.

The PRESIDENT: We will meet again at 3 p.m.
today.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de ranglais):
Nous nous reunrrons de nouveau aujourd'hui a
15 heures.

The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

La seance esi levee

a13 h. 30.

HUNDRED AND SIXTIETH MEETING

CENT-SOIXANTIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Thursday, 17 July 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenue Lake Success, New-York,
le jeudi 17 juillet 1947, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. O. LANGE (Poland).

President: M. O. LANGE (Pologne).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Chilla, Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom, United
States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants: .
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, France, Pologne,
Royaume-Uni, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

225. Provisional agenda (document
5/418)

225. Ordre du iour provisoire (dl:.cument·
S/418)

a

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. The Greek question: report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council (document S/360).1

2.. La question grecque: rapport presente au
Conseil de securite par la Commission
cl' enquete sur les incidents survenus a la
frontiere grecque (document 8/360) 1.

226. Adoption of the agenda

226. Adoption de I'ordre du iour

The agenda was adopted.

Vordre du jour est adopte.

227. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question

227. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque

At the invitation of the President, Colonel Kerenxhi, representative of Albania, Mr. Mevorah,
representative of Bulgaria, Mr. Dendramis, representative of Greece, and Mr. Vilfan, representative of Yugoslavia, took their seats at the
Council table.
The PRESIDENT: We will now have the
French translation of the speech delivered this
morning by the representative of Yugoslavia.
The statement made in English by lv.[r. Vilfan,
representative of Yugoslavia, at the hundred and
fifty-ninth meeting of the Security Council, was
then interpreted into French.

Sur l'invitation du President, le colonel
Kerenxhi, representant de il'Albanie, M. M evorah, representant de la Bulgarie, M. Dendramis,
representant de la Grece, et M. Vilfan, representant de la Y ougoslavie, prennent place la
table du Conseil.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de ranglais):
Nous allons entendre maintenant l'interpretation
en fran~ais du discours prononce ce matin par
le representant de la Yougoslavie.
La declaration faite en anglais par M. Vilfan,
representant de la Y ougoslavie, au eours de lq,
cent-cinquante-neuvieme seance du Conseil de
securite est alars interpretee en frangais.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Special Supplement No. 2.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de slcuTitl~
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement special No 2.

a

1376
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I have
already expressed in my earlier statement the
views of the USSR delegation on the question
under discussion. Today I should like to give a
few additional explanations about the position
of the USSR delegation, mainly relating to the
text of the specific resolutions.
.

M. GROMYKO (Union des RepubIiques
socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe):
Dans ma declaration precedente, j'ai deja expose
les vues de la delegation de I'URSS sur la
question que nous discutons., Aujourd'hui, je
voudrais donner quelques ec1aircissements complementaires au sujet de la position de la
delegation de I'URSS en ce qui concerne
principalement le texte des resolutions dont nous
sommes saisis.
In the first place, I should like to draw the
Je voudrais tout d'abord faire observer au
Security Council's attention to the fact that we Conseil de securite que nous discutons en ce
are discussing the report of a commission of in- moment le rapport d'une commission d'enquete,
vestigation and that we have had no such com- alors que, pour l'examen d'autres questions, nous
mission when we were considering other ques- n'avions pas eu de commission de ce genre. Ceci
tions. This is the Security Council's first experi-. constitue la premiere experience que fait le
ment iT! the field of investigating disputes which Conseil de securite en matiere d'enquetl~ portant
have arisen between Governments and have sur des differends qui ont surgi entre des Etats
been brought to its knowledge.
'
et dont il a ete saisi.
This fact obIlges us to consider the whole
Ce fait nous impose le devoir d'examiner
question with special care and attention and not toutes ces questions avec le plus grand soin et
allow decisions to be taken which would not la plus grande attention, et de ne pas permettre
be in conformity with ~e facts or the actual que des decisions soient prises qui ne corresponsituation.
draient pas aux faits ou a la situation reelle.
The Security Council's decision on this report
La decision que le Conseil de securite prendra
of the Commission of Investigation will, in one a la suite du rapport de la Commission d'enquete
way or another, indubitably influence similar influera indubitablement, d'une fa~on ou d'une
cases in the future. Whether or not we consider autre, sur les cas analogues qui pourraient se
the experiment of this Commission's work as a produire a l'avenir. Que nous le considerions ou
precedent, this experiment will in fact constitute non comme un precedent, l'usage que nous
a precedent. I feel I can emphasize this fact be- ferons du travail de ceUe Commission constituera
cause, at the very outset of the consideration of un precedent. Je crois devoir souligner ce fait
the Commission's report, there was an obvious parce que, des le debut de la discussion portant
tendency to draw conclusions not consonant with sur le rapport de la Commission, une tendance
the factual data contained in the Commission's s'est fait jour qui consistait a tirer des conclusions
report.
ne correspondant pas aux faits contenus dans le
rapport de la Commission.
La discussion qui s:lest deroulee au Conseil de
The course of the discussion held in the Security Council has merely confirmed the impres- securite n'a fait que confirmer l'impression que
sion received by the USSR delegation at the very la delegation de I'URSS s'etait faite des les
beginning of the discussion of this question in premie:r;s debats du Conseil de securite portant
the Security Council (I mean the discussion sur cette question (j'entends les dcbats qui ont eu
which took place after the Commission's report lieu apres la reception du rapport de la Comwas received). The conclusions reached by the mission). Les conclusions auxqueIIes a abouti la
Commission and also the conclusions which, as Commission et le!! conclusions auxqueIIes, dans
a whole,. were endorsed by certain members of l'ensemble, se sont associes certains membres du
the· Security Council, do not correspond to the Conseil de securite, ne correspondent pas a la
actual situation in Greece and on Greece's north- situation reelIe qui existe en Grece et aux fronern frontiers; nor do they correspond to the facts tieres nord de la Grece; elIes ne correspondent
contained in the Commission's report. These pas non plus aux faits contenus dans le rapport
conclusions, based on those drawn by the ma- . de la Commission. Ces conclusiGns, qui sont
jority of the Commission, cannot be called ob- fondees sur des deductions faites par la majorite
jective.
de la Commission, il est impossible de les qualifier
d'objectives.
Comment peut-on s'attendre qu'une enquete
How can we expect an objective approach to
an investigation of tbe position on Greece's sur la situation qui existe aux frontieres nord de
northern frontiers and to the situation in Greece la Grece et en Grece meme soit objective, quand
from persons representing States in whose capi- eIle est confice a des gens qui representent des
tals voices have been heard passing judgment on pays dans les capitales desqueIs on a pu entendre
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania, even at a des voix se prononcer pour la Yougoslavie, la
time when the Commission was only beginning Bulgarie et l'Albanie au moment Oll la Comto investigate the facts? Obviously, no objective mission commen~ait a peine son enquete? nest
attitude to the investigation could be expected clair qu'on ne pouvait s'attendre que les reprefrom the representatives of such countries, even sentants de ces pays fissent preuve d'objectivite
if they arrived at the place where the investiga- au cours de leur enquete, meme si ces represen-

1377

tion was to be held with good intentions and
with a wish to see how matters actually stood.

tants etaient arrives sur les lieux de l'enquete
avec de bonnes intentions et avec le desir de voir
reellement queUe etait la situation.

The bias thus shown in investigating and
analysing the situation in Greece and on Greece's
northern frontiers was reflected in the Commission's conclusions, which were confirmed and
adopted by the majority of the Commission. It
was also reflected in the resolution submitted to
us some time ago by the United States representative. If we adopted the resolution, it would
mean that the Security Council had taken a decision incompatible with the United Nations
Charter.

Ce manque d'objectivite au cours de l'enquete
et dans l'etude de la situation qui existe en Grece
et aux frontieres nord de la Grece s'est traduit
dans les conclusions de la Commission, conclusions confirmees et adoptees par la majorite de
la Commission. Ce manque d'objectivite se
retrouve egalement dans la resolution qui a ete
presentee il y a quelque temps par le representant
des Etats-Unis. Si nous adoptions cette resolution,
cela voudrait dire que le Conseil de securite
aurait pris une decision incompatible avec la
Charte des Nations Vnies.

I shall dwell briefly on the main provisions of
the United States proposals based on the Commission's recommendations.

If we consider carefully the content of that
recommendation, it is not difficult to see that the
United States resolution recommends no more
and no less than that we should acknowledge in
advance that the future activities of Yugoslavia,
Bulgaria and Albania-and no one knows which
activities-shall be regarded as activities constituting a threat to the peace.
This proposal is absolutely unjustified, both
from the point of view of the actual state of
affairs on the spot· and from the point of view
of the Charter. It is absolutely inadmissible.

Je m'arreterai brievement sur les dispositions
principales des propositions des Etats-Unis, fondees elles-memes sur les recommandations de la
Commission.
Prenons la recommandation A, qui est
approuvee par la resolution des Etats-Unis.
Cetterecommandation contient la proposition
suivante:
"A la lumiere de la situation examinee par
elle, la Commission croit que, dans la zone qui
a fait 1'0bjet de son enquete, le Conseil de
securite devrait considerer comme une menace a
la paix dans l'acception de la Charte des Nations
Unies les cas suivants: appui fourni dorenavant
aux bandes armees formees sur le territoire d'un
Etat et penetrant dans le. territoire d'un autre
Etat, ou refus par un Gouvernement, en depit de
demandes faites par I'Etat interesse, de prendre
toutes les mesures possibles sur son propre temtoire en vue de suspendre toute aide ou protection a des bandes de ce genre:'
Si 1'0n etudie attentivement le contenu de
cette recommandation, on voit aisement que la
resolution des Etats-Unis nous recommande
purement et simplement d'admettre par. avance
que les activites futures de la Yougoslavie, de la
Bulgarie et de I'Albanie - sans qu'on sache
lesquelles - constitueront une menace contre la
paix.
Cctte proposition n'est absolument pas fondee,
soit qu'o;n la considere du point de vue de la
situation reelle sur les lieux ou du point de vue
de la Charte. Elle est absolument inadmissible.

It may well be asked who is to decide, in the
event of future incidents, if they take place,
which of the countries is to blame? Who is to
decide that question? Apparently-and this is
the inference from the United States resolution-the Commission will decide. Is it necessary to
prove that such a method is in flagrant contradiction with the United Nations Charter, which
provides that, whenever a dispute is considered
by the Security Council, the latter takes a deci~
sion following consideration of a concrete question-a dispute or a situation? Such a decision
is taken by the Security Council. The Counci,l
cannot, and has no right to, delegate its powers
and functions to any subsidiary or auxiliary body
whatsoever.

Vne question se pose alors: en cas de nouveaux incidents, s'il s'en produit a l'avenir, qui
determine~a quel est le pays coupable? Qui tranchera cette question? Ce sera evidemment, et
cela decoule de la resolution des Etats-Unis, la
Commission. Est-iJ besoin de demontrer que
cette methode est en contradiction formelle avec
la Charte des Nations "{T- ;~s, laquelle prevoit
que, lorsqu'un differend quelconque est examine
par le Conseil de securite, c'est ce dernier qui
prend une decision apres avoir examine la question dont il est saisi, differend ou situation? C'est
le Conseil de securite qui prend une decision.
11 ne peut deIeguer ses pouvoirs ct ses droits a
que1que organe subsidiaire ou auxiliaire; il n'en
a pas le droit.

Let me take recommendation A, which is approved by the United States resolution. The following proposal is contained ih that recommendation:
"In the light of the situation investigated by
it the Commission believes that, . . . in the area
of its investigation, future cases of support of
armed bands formed on the territory of one State
and crossing into the territory of another State,
or of refusal by a Government in spite of the
demands of the State concerned to take all possible measures on its own territory to deprive
such bands of any aid or protection, should be
considered by the Security Council as a threat
to the peace within the meaning of the Charter
of the United Nations."

1378
Thus, the proposal contained in the United
States resolution, in the first place, does not correspond to the actual situation on the Greek
frontiers and in Greece, and in the second place,
is contrary to the Charter. Such proposals can
only be made by someone who really sets little
value on his words. Need I say that this proposal
will not stand the test of criticism in the light
either of our experience when preparing the
ratification of the United Nations Charter or of
past experience of the Security Council's work?

Ainsi donc, la proposition contenue dans la
resolution des Etats-Unis, prima, ne correspond
pas a la situation de fait qui existe aux frontieres
grecques et en Grece, et secunda, est contraire a
la Charte. Pour faire de telles propositions, il
faut Vraiment attribuer une faible valeur a ses
propres paroles. Est-il, necessaire de dire que
cette proposition ne resiste pas non plus a la
critique si on l'examin,e a la lumiere de l'experience qu'ont representee les travaux preparatoires de la Charte des Nations Unies ou bien
encore l'activite passee du Conseil de securite?

I might remind you that when the question
arose whether a definition of a breach of the
peace should be included in the United Nations
Charter, the representatives of the United States,
and also the representatives of the United Kingdom and of the USSR, agreed that this was impossible and that the Security Council should
consider specific situations or specific disputes
and take decisions .accordingly.

Je vous rappellerai que lorsque s'est posee la
question de savoir si une definition de la rupture
de la paix devait figurer dans la Charte des
NationS Unies, les representants des Etats-Unis
ainsi que les representants du Royaume-Uni et
ceux de l'URSS sont tombes d'accord pour dire
que c'etait impossible et que le Conseil de
securite devrait examiner le differend ou la
situation qui se presenterait, et prendre une
decision en consequence.

In this connexion I should also like to recall
that the proposal made by the representatives of
China at Dumbarton Oaks was :Qot accepted by
the other Powers for the reasons which I have
stated.. At the San Francisco Conference, when
the Charter of the United Nations was drawn
up on' the basis of, the proposals adopted at the
Dumbarton Oaks Conference, it was also not
considered possible to include any definition of
a breach of the peace in the United Nations
Charter, or, consequently, to lay down any preestablished standard for defining the existence of
a threat to the peace or a bre~ch of the peace.
The decision which was finally taken when the
Charter was drawn up, namely th,at the Security
Council be given the right to decide such a question with reference to a specific situation, is the
only correct decision. It constitutes the law of
the United Nations and of the Security Council.

A ce propos, je rappellerai egalement que la
proposition faite a l'epoque par les representants
de la Chine a la Conference de Dumbarton Oaks
n'a pas ete acceptee par les autres Puissances
pour les raisons que j'ai indiquees. En preparant
la Charte des Nations Unies sur la base des
propositions approuvees par la Conference de
Dumbarton Oaks, la Conference de San-Francisco n'a pas non plus cru possible de donner
dans la Charte des Nations Unies une definition
de la rupture de la paix ni, par consequent, de
poser a l'avance un critere pour de:finir l'existence
d'une menace contre la paix ou d'une rupture
de la paix. La decision a laquelle on s'est arrete
finalement lors des travaux preparatoires de la
Charte - decision qui donne au Conseil de
securite le droit de trancher cette question
d'apres la situation dont il est saisi - est la seule
correcte. Elle fait loi pour l'Organisation des
Nations Unies et pour le Conseil de securite.
Hence, any standards which, in addition,
Pour cette raison, tout critere qui permettrait,
would enable subsidiary bodies to decide the au surplus, a des organes subsidiaires de deterquestion of the existence of a threat to the peace miner s'il y a une menace contre la paix est
can only be regarded as inadmissible and such purement et simplement inadmissible,. et il y a
proposals should be rejected. We have no right lieu de repousser les propositions qui ont ~te
to deviate from the Charter of the United faites dans ce sens. Nous n'avons pas le droit de
Nations.
nous ecarter de la Charte des Nations Unies.
The United States resolution contains another
La resolution des Etats-Unis contient une
important section in which the functions of the autre partie importante, ou sont enumerees les
commission are enumerated. The f1Jnctions of fonctions de la commission. Comme elles sont
the cOTYl m1ssion, as presented in the United States presentees dans cette resolution, ces fonctions
resoluvc,n, are such that, firstly, they go beyond sont telles que, prima, elles sortent du cadre
the limits of the functions and powers assigned des droits et des pouvoirs conferes au Conseil
to the Security Council and, secondly, they are de securite et, secundo, elles sont contraires
contrary to those provisions of the Charter which aux dispositions de la Charte qui sauvegardent
protect the sovereign rights of States Members les droits souverains des Etats Membres de
of the United Nations. For instance, if we take l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Prenons, par
its functions with regard to frontier incidents, exemple, les fonctions qui se rapportent aux
we shall see that, according to this proposal, the Lrlcidents de frontiere et nous verrons que,
Security Council is to set up its own frontier ob- d'apres cette proposition, le Conseil de securite
servers along the Greek frontier, on Greek, Al- devrait installer ses propres observateurs le long
banian, Yugoslav and Bulgarian territories. Such 'de la frontiere, sur le territoire de la Grece, de
, a proposal is unjustifiable both from the point l'Albanie, de la Yougoslavie et de la Bulgarie.

,"

~tfi~~~~v~~~~~~~~,;;'i'BI'"t~t;-~~~X'i(:.1:;_~~~1'!Zl$'W;~;t~..:~~~~~::;:-::;,..:y.r,:~~;"'i;';';:'--'''~~~~~1<!;'~;'
'';:-''';~~;t.",_.,,_._,,~~;~~ ~"'~i1.~K'¥:T{V~'fo:::;"~F-~.r~*t"?';;;~f&t~
.•

1379
of view of the actual situation in these countries
and on these frontiers, and as I have already
pointed out, from the point of view of the Charter of the United Nations. The adoption of such
a proposal would constitute a flagrant infringement of the provisions of the Charter which pro.tect the sovereign rights of States.

Cette proposition ne peut se justifier en aucun
cas, ni par la situation reelle existant dans ces
pays et le long de ces frontieres, ni, comme je
1'ai deja indique, par la Charte des Nations
Unies. Accepter cette propnsitlon, ce serait commettre une grave violation des dispositions de la
Charte qui sauvegardent les droits souverains des
Etats.

It is also impossible to adopt such a proposal
from the point of view of the nature of the situation under discussion. We are considering a dispute which falls under Chapter VI, relating to
the pacific settlement of disputes. What the
United States resolution proposes is action which
goes further than the pacific settlement of disputes. I would ask: What is, the Security Council to do, if its recommendations to some State
prove unacceptable (and the Security Council's
decisions under Chapter VI cannot be considered
as other than recommendations)? The United
States representative deliberately mentioned in
his speech-I mean his first' speech-Chapter
VII of the Charter, which provides for compulsory action to be taken. This was done because
the trend of the recommendations contaL.lled in
the United States resolution shows that these
recommendations go further than the provisions
of Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter.

La nature de la situation soumise a notre
examen ne nous permet pas non plus d'accepter
cette proposition. Nous sommes en train
d'examiner un differend qui releve du Chapitre
VI, relatif au reglement padfique des differend".
Mais ce que nous propose la resolution des
Etats-Unis, ce sont des mesures qui vont plus
loin que le reglement pacifique des differends.
Et alors la question suivante se pose: si les
recommandations du Conseil de securite sont
inacceptables pour un Etat - et les decisions
que le Conseil de securite prend en vertu du
Chapitre VI ne peuvent etre considerees que
comme des recommandations - que devra faire
le Conseil de securite? Ce n'est pas par hasard
que le representant des Etats-Unis a mentionne
dans son discours - je veux pader de sa premi.ere intervention - le Chapitre VII de la
Charte qui prevoit des mesures de coercition. Il
1'a fait parce que la tendance generale des
recommandations contenues dans la resolution
des Etats-Unis montre que ces recommandations
vont plus loin que ne le prevoient les dispositions
du Chapitre VI de la Charte des Nations Unies.

Or let us take the recommendation on the
settlement of the question of displaced persons
and refugees. Here again we are confronted
with the same tendency. Here again the sovereign rights of States are flagrantly ignored. Here
again it is proposed to impose a form of settlemept of this problem which cannot be justified
either by the actual situation on the spot or by
the Charter of the United Nations. Should this
recommendation be adopted, it would mean that
the so-called International Refugee Organization which is being set up would control the
refugee camps in the countries whose conneJPon
with the alleged frontier incidents we are discussing, although some of these countries, realizing what an extremely unfortunate experience
this Organization has had and that it is designed
to complicate rather than to facilitate the solution of the problem of displaced persons, have
not joined the International Refugee Organization.

Prenons maintenant la recommandation qui
se rapporte au reglement de la question des
personnes deplacees et des refugies. Id encore,
nous trouvons la meme tendance. Ici encore on
meconnait gravement les droits souverains des
Etats. Id encore, on veut imposer un mode de
solution de ce probleme que ne peuvent justifier
ni la situation qui existe sur les lieux, ni la
Charte des Nations Unies. Si cette recommandation etait acceptee, nous verrions ce qu'on
appelle I'Organisation internationale pour les
refugies regir les camps de refugies qui se trouvent dans les pays dont nous examinons 1'attitude
a 1'egard des pretendus· incidents de frontiere,
alors que certains de ces pays n'ont pas accede a
1'Organisation internationale pour les refugies, en
raison de, la deplorable activite passee de cette
Organisation, destinee a compliquer la solution
de la question des personnes deplacees plutot
qu'a la faciliter.

There are several other recommendations in
the United States resolution wlllch it is quite
impossible to accept. Bearing this in mind,what
view can we in general tflke of the proposal for
the establishment of a commission of the type
provided for in the United States resolution?
Any unbiased person can only draw one conclusion, namely, that the purpose of setting up
this commission is not so much to secure a peaceful settlement of the friction which has arisen
between Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania on
the one hand, and Greece on the other, as to

La resolution des Etats-Unis contient un
certain nombre d' autres recommandations avec
lesquelles on ne peut en aucun cas se declarer
d'accord. Pour ces raisons, on peutse demander
ce qu'il faut penser en general de la proposition
de Creel' une cor..lmission, sous la forme prevue
par la resolution des Etats-Unis. Que1qu'un qui
pense de fa<;on objective ne peut aboutir qu'a
une seule conclusion: en creant cette commission
on ne cherche pas tant a regler pacifiquement les
difficultes qui se sont produites entre la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie, d'une part, et la

_c..

1380
achieve some other purpose. If the Security
Council adopted this resolution, impartial people
might consider such a step as creating a screen
to conceal the activities of certain Powers in
Greece, which take the form of interference in
the internal affairs of that country.
What I have said does not me~n that there
are no problems to be settled between Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania on the one hand,
and Greece on the other. Such problems do
exist.. They are enumerated in the USSR resolution. They include, for instance, the problem of
conventions. This problem is self-evident, as the
representatives of Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania have already expressed positive views on
it. The Greek Government, however, stubbornly
refuses to fall in with these proposals. This is
deliberate. If the Greek Government really
wished to settle the existing misunderstandings,
it. could not refuse to fall in with proposals for
the conclusion of new frontier conventions or
the reVival of old conventions. The Greek Government says nothing. We have heard no statement on this subject from the Greek representative. He listens calmly to the proposals regarding
conventions and says nothing, although this is
a matter affecting the settlement of the frontier
questions, frontier friction and misunderstandings which are going on.
The question of refugees requires solution. In
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania there are tens
of thousands of refugees; people who have found
refuge in these countries from persecution by the
Greek police and gendarmerie and bands of all
kinds. In Greece there are refugees from Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania, a large number of
whom are traitors to their country and quislings.
This question also requires to be settled. Why
should the Council not address an appeal to
these countries, to all the countries concerned,
to Greece, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, and Albania,
for a settlement of the refugee problem in such
a spirit as to establish friendly relations between
these States?
The USSR resolution contains a proposal to
that effect. This has been mentioned by the
representatives of Yugoslavia, 'Bulgaria and Albania. The Greek representative, however,
calmly listens to the representatives of these three
countries expressing their willingness to settle
this problem, but says not a single word about
Greece being agreeable to settle the problem by
immediate discussions between the countries concerned with a view to establishing friendly relations between them. Instead of this, plans are
being proposed to us for setting up a special international agency which would assume control
over all displaced persons in the territories of
Greece, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania and
would become an administrative and financial
organization dealing with questions of migration.

Grece, de I'autre, qu'a satisfaire d'autres visees.
Si le Conseil de securite adopt:lit cette resolution,
les esprits impartiaux pourraient voir dans cette
mesure la creation d'un ecran pour dissimuler les
activites de certaines Puissances en Grece,
activites qui prennent la forme d'une intervention dans les affaires interieures de ce pays.
Ce que je viens de. dire ne signifie pas qu'il
n'y ait pas de problemes a resoudre entre la
Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie d'une part,
et la Grece de I'autre; il y en a, et la resolution
de I'URSS les enumere. Ils comprennent, par
exemple, la question des conventions. Cette
question se presente tout naturellement, etant
donne que les representants de la Yougoslavie,
de la Bulgarie et de l'Albanie ont deja pris une
attitude positive a cet egard. Mais le Gouvernement de la Grece refuse avec obstination d'aller
au-devant de ces propositions. Ce n'est pas la le
fait du hasard. Si le Gouvernement grec voulait
reeIlement regler les malentendus existants, il ne
pourrait pas refuser d'aller au-devant des propositions concernant la conclusion de nouvelIes
conventions frontalieres ou le renouveIlement des
anciennes. Le Gouvernement grec garde le
silence. Nous n'avons pas entendu d'cxplications
du representant de la Grece a ce sujet. I1 ecoute
tranquillement les propositions concernant ces
conventions et il garde le silence, bien que cette
question concerne le reglement des questions
frontalieres, des incidents de frontiere et des
malentendus qui se produisent.
La question des refugies appelIe un reglement.
Il y a en territoire yougoslave, bulgare et
albanais des dizaines de milliers de refugies, de
gens qui ont trouve un asile dans ces pays contre
les persecutions de la police et de la gendarmerie
grecques et de bandes de toutes sortes. En.
territoire grec, il y a des refugies de Yougoslavie,
de Bulgarie et d'Albanie, dont un grand nombre
ont trahi leur pays et sont des quislings. Cettl:;
question aussi doit etre regIee. Pourquoi le
Conseil n'adresserait-il pas un appel a ces pays,
a tous les pays interesses: Grece, Yougoslavie,
Bulgarie et Albanie, pour qu'iJs reglent la question des re£ugies dans un esprit permettant le
retablissement de relations amicales entre ces
Etats?
La resolution de I'URSS contient une proposition a cet efl'et. Les representants de la
Yougoslavie, de la Bulgarie et de l'Albanie ont
fait des declarations a ce sujet. Quant au representant de la Grece, il ecoute tranquillement les
declarations des representants de ces trois pays
affirmant qu'ils sont prets a regler cette question,
mais il ne prononce pas ~a moindre parole qui
indiquerait que la Grece soit prete, elle aussil, a
regler cette question par des negociations directes
avec les pays interesses, en vue d'etablir avec reux
des relations amicales. Au lieu de cela, on nous
propose des projets pour la creation cl'un
organisme international special, qui prendrait
sous son controle toutes les personnes deplacees
se trouvant en territoire grec, yougoslave, bulgare
et albanais et qui se transformerait en agence
administrative et financiere pour la migra,tion
des re£ugies.

1381
Clearly, if it were desired, a correct solution
of tbis problem too could be found, a solution
in conformity not only with our common interests, the interests of the United Nations, but with
the interests of those four States. We all know
that ther~ are no diplomatic relations between
Bulgaria and Albania, on the one hand, and
Greece on the other. The formal diplomatic relations existing between Greece and Yugoslavia
are abnormal. This state of affairs should be
corrected. The Security Council has the power
to call upon the countries concerned to see to it
that normal diplomatic relations are established
between them; that might clear the way to settling their relations in other spheres, such as the
economic - .,here, the cultural sphere, etc.

Il est clair que, si on le voulait, on pourrait
trouver pour cette question egaIement une solution juste, solution qui servirait non seulement
nos interets communs, les iIlterets des Nations
Unies, mais aussi les interets de ces quatre pays.
Tout le monde sait qu'il- n'y a pas de relations
diplomatiques entre la Bulgarie et l'Albanie,
d'une part, et la Grece, de l'autre. Les relations
diplomatiques qui existent pour la forme entre
la Grece et la Yougoslavie ne sont pas normales.
Cette situation doit etre redressee. Le Conseil
de securite a la possibilite d'inviter les pays
interesses a retablir entre eux des relations
qui preparerait la
diplomatiques normales,
voie a des relations meiUeures en d'autres
domaines, comme les domaines economique,
culturel, etc.

The Securi'. :ouncil can use its influence and
its authority and can make recommendations to
the countries concerped on these questions3 but
it is not proposed that we should do so. More
than that.1. the authors of the proposals (I mean
the United States resolution) are, in fact, evading this question altogether and, in doing so, are
actually encouraging the irresponsible policy of
the present Greek Government, which still declares that it is in a stllte of war with Albania
and does so in order to .1ave a freer hand, apparently thinking that it Dlay thus bear less responsibility for its actions. That is a wrong assumption. I repeat that we might, if we desired,
improve the situation in this connexion too by
using the authority and influence of the Security
Council.

Le Conseil de securite peut user de son
influence et de son -autorite pour faire des
recommandations sur ces questions aux pays
interesses, mais ce n'est pas la ce qu'on nous
propose de faire. Bien au contraire, les auteurs
des propositions dont je parle (je veux dire la
resolution des Etats-Unis) passent, en fait, completement a cote de ces questions, et par la-meme
encouragent effectivement la politique irresponsable du Gouvernement grec actuel, qui continue
a declarer qu'il se trouve en etat de guerre avec
l'Albanie;il le fait pour avoir les mains plus
libres, croyant sans doute pouvoir se soustraire
ainsi, en partie, a la responsabilite de ses actes.
En quoi il se trompe. Id encore, je le repete,
nous pourrions, si nous le voulions, redresser la
situation en employant l'autorite et l'influence
du Conseil de securite.

The USSR delegation does not think that a
commission of the kind proposed by the United
States representative can lead to improvement in
the relations between the four countries. It can
only cause additional friction between these
countries. This is not in the interests of the
United Nations. The commission, in the form
in which it is proposed by the United States
representative, can only aggravate the situation
and make it still more strained. I say nothing of
the fact that the adoption of the resolution establishing such a commission would, in a sense,
mean encou!"aging the activities of the present
Greek Government, which have led to the situation which has now arisen in the relations between Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania, on the
one hand, and Greece on the other.

La delegation de l'URSS ne pense pas qu'une
commission du genre propose par le representant
des Etats-Unis puisse contribuer a ameliorer les
relations entre les quatre pays. ERe ne peut que
creer des difIicultes supplementaires entre ces
pays; ce n'est pas la l'interet de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies. Sous la forme que propose le
representant des Etats-Unis, cette commission ne
peut qu'aggraver la situation et la rendre encore
plus tendue. Je n'insisterai pas davantage sur le
fait qu'en adoptant la resolution de creer cette
commission, nous encouragerions dans une certaine mesure les activites du Gouvernementgrec
actuel, qui ont precisement cree la situation
presente dans les relations entre la Yougoslavie,
la BUlgarie, et l'Albanie cl'une part, et la Grece
de l'autre.

What I have said is confirmed also by the past
experience of the Commission of Investigation.
We know that, while the Commission was at
work, it did not in every respect promote the
settlement of relations between these countries;
often it merely- aggravated the tenseness of these
relations. What I have said is especially confirmed if we bear in mind the experience of the
so-called Subsidiary Group, which is behaving
clumsily, ineptly and tactlessly, is needlessly and
unnecessarily putting an increased strain on the
relations between these countries and is thus further complicating the situation. In this con-

Ce que je viens de dire est confirme par
l'experience que nous avons faite avec la
Commission d'enquete. Au cours de ses travaux,
nous le savons, la Commission a ete loin de
contribuer dans aucun domaine a l'amelioration
des relations entre ces pays; eUe n'a fait souvent
qu'aggraver la tension qui existe entre eux. Ce
que je viens de dire est confirme en particulier
par l'experience que nous avons faite avec
ce qu'on appelle le Groupe .3ubsidiaire de
la Commission; ce dernier fait preuve de .
maladresse, d'ineptie et de manque de tact; sans
nul besoin, il rend encore plus tendues les rela-

ce

1382

nexion I woulc\ point out that the Subsidiary tions entre ces pays et, par Ia-meme, complique
Group is behaving in such a manrier_ that a sec- encore la situation. Je rappellerai, a ce propos,
tion of it, apparently imagining that it is su- que le Groupe subsidiaire se conduit d'une telle
preme, has submi.tted several reports to the maniere qu'une partie de ce Groupe, s'imaginant
Security Council without discussing these reports sans doute etre tout-puissant, a adresse au
at meetings of the Group. Furthermore, this sec- Conseil de securite plusieurs rapports sans les
tion of the Group sends the reports in a form avoir discutes aux reunions du Groupe. Bien
which is inadmissible from the point of view of plus, cette partie du Groupe envoie ces rapports
normal work, since only the opinion of the ma- sous une forme inadmissible du point de vue de
jority of the Subsidiary Group is reported, while la procedure normale, car on n'y mentionne que
the opinion of the minority, in spite of that l'avis de la majorite de ce Groupe subsidiaire et
minority's requests, is not reported. It is clear . non l'avis de la minorite, maJgre la demande de
that such methods will do anything but promote celle-ci. 11 est clair que cette fac;;on de proceder
a settlement of the misunderstandings and fric- est loin de contribuer a aplanjr les frictions et
ies malentendus qui existent entre ces Etats.
tion which exist between these States.
Both the experience of the Commission of
Investigation which has existed hitherto and the
experience of the Subsidiary Group lead us to
th~ conclusion that the commission 2 ,in the form
in which it is proposed by the United States
representative~ would not promote any improvement in the relations between these countries
but, on the contrary, might further complicate
the relations between them. For these reasonS,
the USSR delegation cannot agree with the proposals for the establishment of a commission.
The USSR is interested in seeing the relations
between these countries made normal. To
achieve this it is necessary to use normal ways
and means for their settlement. In the first
place, it is essential for these countries, which
are directly concerned, to settle a number of the
problems which have arisen by immediate and
direct discussions. In the course of our debates
the prestige of the SeCurity Council is often
mentioned, and, in this case, when it is mentioned, it is usually pointed out that it is absolutely essential, if the Security Council's prestige
is to be preserved and kept at its proper level,
to adopt the United States resolution, or else
the Council's prestige will, it is said, be undermined.

L'experience que nous avons faite avec la
Commission d'enquete qui a existe jusqu'a ce
jour, aussi bien qu'avec le Groupe subsidiaire,
nous permet de conclure que la commission
qu'on veut creer, sous la forme proposee par le
representant des Etats-Unis, ne contribuerait pas
a ameliorer les relations entre ces pays, mais les
rendrait au contraire encore plus di£ficiles. Pour
ces raisons, la de1<~gation de l'URSS ne peut
accepter les propositions tendant a creer une
commission. Il' est de l'interet de l'URSS que les
relations entre ces pays deviennent normales.
Pour cela, il faut employer les voies et methodes
normales pour ameliorer ces relations. n faut en
premier lieu que les pays directement interesses
reglent les questions qui se posent entre eux au
moyen de negociations directes. Au cours de nos
debats, on parle souvent du prestige du Conseil
de securite; dans le cas present, on ajoute
d'habitude que, pour maintenir dument. le
prestige du Conseil de securite, ,il faut obligatoirement adopter la resolution ,des Etats-Unis,
sinOl.'l le prestige du Conseil de securite s'en
trouverait, dit-on, compromis.

It is extremely characteristic that statements
about the necessity to maintain the prestige and
authority of the Security Council emanate
mainly from the representatives of those countries which, as experience has shown, have least
regard for the presti~e and authority of the
Security Council and, more often than not,'
ignore it. Evidently words are one thing and
deeds are another. In these circumstances talk
of prestige and the phrases which are often used
in the course of our debates regarding the Security Council's prestige lose their meaning and
become banal, empty phrases.

C'est un fait caracteristique que les declarations sur la necessite de maintenir le prestige et
l'autorite du Conseil de securite emanent surtout
des representants des pays qui, l'experience l'a
prouve, montrent le moins de respect pour le
prestige et l'autorite du Conseil de securite et
tiennent le moins compte de son existence.
Evidemment, les actes sont une chose, les paroles
en sont une autre. Dans ces conditions, ces allusions au prestige et ces phrases, si frequentes au
cours de nos debats, au sujet du prestige du
Conseil de securite perdent leur signification et
deviennent banales, vides de sens.

In order to maintain the prestige and authority of the Security Council at their proper
level it is essential to be guided not by the interests of the individual countries, but. by our common interests and the desire to settle relations
between Greece, on the one hand, and Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania on the other, and
not to take decisions which would involve putting a greater strain on these relations. The Security Council should use its influence to facili-

Pour mairltenir comme il coilvient le prestige
et l'autorite du Conseil de securite, nous devons
nous laisser guider, non par les interets de tel ou
tel pays, mais par nos interets communs et par
le souci d'ameliorer les relations entre la Grece
d'une part, et la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et
l'Albanie de l'autre; nous ne devons pas prendre
de decisions qui rendraient leurs relations encore
plus tendues. Le Conseil de securite doit user de
son influence pour faciliter une entente directe

1383
tate the possibility of direct and immediate
agreement between these countries and to facilitate the possibility of establishing normal relations between them.In my first speech,l I pointed out where the
fundamental reasons for the situation prevailing
in Greece are to be found and also the reasons
for the so-called frontier incidents. We should
look for foreign interference, but in a different
direction, not where the authors of the United
States resolution try to look for it.
Finally, I should like to draw the Security
Council's attention to a point which was incidentally raised in the course of the discussion:
How are we to evaluate the Council's decision
on this matter? It is clear that any decision on
this question is a decision taken in conformity
with Chapter VI of the Charter, relating to the
pacific settlement of disputes. This means that
any decision we may take in the Council on this
question will be in the nature of a recommendation and will have nothing in common with the
decisions provided for in Article 25 -of the Charter. I think it advisable to emphasize this idea,
mainly in connexion with the elucidation given
at the last meeting of the Council by the United
States representative. In his reply to the representative of Bulgaria the United States representa~ive gave an explanation which was at variance with the Charter.
In connexion with the Trieste question, in the
matter of appointing a governor for Trieste, the
United States representative attempted to prove
that the powers and functions of the Security
Council are not confined only to the chapters
referred to in Article 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations, in which the functions and
powers of the Council are defined. I should
like to draw your attention to the fact that the
question which arose in connexion with the discussion of the appointmevt of a governor for
Trieste is the problem not of the nature of the
Security Council's decisions, but of the extent of
the Security Council's powers. This puts the
matter on an absolutely different plane and .the
reference to a memorandum of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Trygve Lie, offers no confirmation,
as this memorandum deals with an absolutely
different question, the question of the extent and
scope of the Security Council's powers, and not
with the nature of the Security Council's decisions.
I have thought it necessary to give these additional explanations in order to stress once more
that the USSR delegation is anxious to see the
dispute which has arisen between Yugoslavia,
Bulgaria and Albania, on the one hand, and
Greece on the other, settled in the interests of
the United Nations and also in the interests of
these four States. The USSR delegation could
not, of course, be guided by any other interests in
considering this question. The U~SR delegation
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 55.

et immediate entre ces pays, pour faciliter le
retablissement de relations normales entre eux.

Dans ma premiere d';clarationl, j'ai deja
indique ou resident les causes fondamentales
de la situation qui s'est creee en Grece, ainsi que
des pretendus incidents de frontiere. EIles resident
dans une intervention de l'etranger, mais il faut
la chercher ailleurs, pas la OU les auteurs de
la resolution des Etats-Unis s'efforcent de la
trouver.
Pour conclure, je voudrais attirer l'attention
du Conseil de securite sur un point qui a ete
aborde en passant au cours de ces debats:
comment qualifier la decision que le Conseil
prendra sur ceite question? 11 est clair que toute
decision sur cette question sera une decision prise
conformement au Chapitre VI de la Charte,
relatif au reglement pacifique des differends.
Cela signifie que toute decision que nous pouvons
prendre au Conseil sur cette question aura le
caractere d'une recommandation, et n'aura rien
de commun avec les decisions mentionnees a
I'Article 25 de la Charte. I'ai crn bon de souligner ce point, en raison surtout de l'explication
que nous a donnee le representant des EtatsUnis a la precedente seance du Conseil. En
repondantau representant de la Bulgarie, le
representant des Etats-Unis a donne une expli-cation non conforme a la Charte.
En parlant de la question de Trieste et au
sujet de la nomination d'un gouverneur, le representant des Etats-Unis a tente de demontr~r que
les droits et pouvoirs du Conseil dr.; securite
n'etaient pas restreints a ceux qui sont definis
dans les chapitres cites a l'Article 24 de la
Charte des Nations Unies, a propos de l'enumeration des droits et pOlivoirs du Conseil. Je
voudrais faire remarquer que la question qui
s'est posee au cours de la discussion sur la nomination du gouverneur de Trieste concernait,
non pas la nature des decisions du Conseil de
securite, mais l'etendue de ses pouvoirs. EIle se
posait donc sur' un tout autre plan et, en se
referant au memorandum du Secretaire general,
M. Trygve Lie, on ne prouve rien du tout, etant
donne que ce memorandum traite, non de la
nature des decisions du Conseil de securite, mais
d'une tout autre question: ceIle de l'etendue et
de la portee de ses pouvoirs.
I'ai crn necessaire de presenter ces explications
compIementaires afin de souligner encore une
fois que la delegation de I'URSS s'attache a ce
que le differend qui a surgi entre la Yougoslavie,
la Bulgarie, et l'Albanie d'une part, et la Grece
de l'autre, sait regIe dans l'interet des Nations
Unies aussi bien que dans celui de ces quatre
Etats. La delegation de l'URSS, cela va de so;
ne peut se laisser guider par aucun autre intel'~t
dans l'examen de cette question. La delegation
1 Voir les Proces-verbaux o/ficiels du Conseil de secv.rite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 55.

1384
would like to express the·conviction that all the
other representatives on the Security Council
also will, in the settlement of this problem, be
guided only by these interests, that is to say, the
interests of the United Nations and the interests
of the countries immediately concerned.

de l'URSS voudrait pouvoir exprimer sa conviction que tous les autres representants siegeant
au Conseil de securite se· laisseront egalement
guider, dans le reglement de cette question, par
le seul souci des interets des Nations Unies et des.
interets des pays directement en jeu.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
I should not have asked leave to speak at this
time, and I do not wish to make a long statement on all the varied points which have arisen
in the course of the discussion as far as it has
gone, but there is one point I wish to make tllli:
evening. It relates to a passage in your speech
of this morning,l Mr. President. You read from
the conclusions of the Commission of Investigation and drew attention to a particular passage.
You said-and I quote from the copy which I
have here:

What I wanted to say was that I think it
would have been only fair if you had given
equal emphasis to the sentence which you quoted
originally, which follows from that sentence to
which you drew particular attention. The sentence which followed was: "On the basis of the
facts ascertained by the Commission, it is its conclusion that Yugoslavia, and to Cl. lesser extent
Albania and Bulgaria, have supported the guerrilla warfare in Greece." A perusal of the rest of
the conclusion.:; would show quite clearly that it
is on the basis of positive evidence that eight of
the eleven members of the Commission reached
their conclusions. After the passage which you
quoted, they deal with Yugoslavia, and there
you will find passages, on page 168 for instance,2
as follows: "The evidence indicated that during
the spring and at least through the summer of
1946 actual training in partisan warfare was
given . . ." and so on. In the following paragraph they referred to "evidence indicating". In
paragraph (d) on page 168 they say: cc••• the

Sir Alexandre CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l'anglais): Je n'avais pas l'intention
de demander la parole maintenant et je ne desire
pas faire une longue declaration sur les differentes questions qui ont ete soulevees au cours
de la discussion, mais il y a un point que je tiens
a regler des ce soir. I1 s'agit d'un passage
de votre discours de ce matin\ Monsieur le
President. Vous avez cite certaines parties des
conclusions de la Commission d'enquete et vous
avez attire l'attention du Conseil sur un passage
particulier. Vous avez dit (je cite d'apres
l'exemplaire que j'ai en main) :
"Je voudrais examiner ce passage. I1 etablit
que le Gouverne nent grec a formu16 certaines
accusations; que les agents de liaison des autres
pays, contre lesquels etaient portees ces accusations les ont deniees; et il declare ensuite qu' "on
a produit peu de temoignages directs qui en
infirment le bien-fonde". Vous avez poursuivi
par ces mots: "Vraiment, en lisant ce passage,
je trouve bien difficile d'en croire mes yeux.
Toutefois, je vous assure que cette phrase figure
dans le texte, et que c'est dIe qui sert de fondement a la conclusion concernant l'appui que
l'Albanie, la Yougoslavie et la Bulgarie auraient
accorde aux bandes annees grecques. Qui, elle
se fonde sur le fait que la majorite des mcmbres
de la Commission a crn a cette accusation et
n'a, pu la refuter. Je repete que cette conc1usio~
est fondee sur le fait que la Commission n'a pu
refuter les accusations portees et non sur le fait
qu'elle en a fait le preuve."
Ce que je voulais dire, c'est que, a mon avis,
il aurait ete honnete de votre part d'insister
egalement sur la phrase que vous avez citee an
debut et sur celle qui venait immCdiatement
apres la phrase sur laquelle vous avez attire
l'attention du Conseil. Cette phrase est la
suivante: "La Commisison conc1ut, d'apres les
faits qu'elle a etablis, que la YO'lgoslavie et,
dans une moindre mesure, l'fJbanie et la Bulgarie, ont soutenu la guerilla de Grece." En
parcourant la suite du texte des conclusions, iJ
apparalt nettement que c'est en se fondant sur
des preuves positives que huit des onze membres
de la Commission sont arrives a ces conclusions.
A la Imite du passage que vous avez cite, le
rapport parle de la Yougoslavie. Vous trouverez
certains passages, page 176, par exemole2 : "Les
temoignages recueillis indiquent qu'au cours du
printemps et,. en tout cas, de l'ete cie 1946, un
efIectif choisi parmi les re£ugies ... a bel et bien
re~u une instruction militaire . . . " Dans le para"
graphe suivan'.. il est question de "temoignages

1 See page 1350.
• See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Special Supplement No. 2, part Ill, chapter I,
section A-I.

Voir page 1350.
• Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securiM,
Deuxieme Annee, 3upplernent special No 2, troisieme •
partie, chapitre I, section A-I.

"I should like to examine tllis passage. It
states that the Greek Government made certain
charges; that liaison representatives of the other
countries against which these charges were made,
denied them; and it then states that 'little direct
evidence was brought forward to disprove
them'." You went on: "Indeed, when I read
this passage, I found it difficult to believe my
eyes. However, I assw'e you that that sentence
is in the text, and that it is on that sentence that
the conclusion about the alleged support given
to the Greek guerrillas by Albania, Yugoslavia
and Bulgaria is based. Yes, it is based on the
fact that the majority of the Commission believed, and was unable to disprove, the charges.
I repeat that the conclusion is based on inability
to disprove the charges, not on ability to prove
them."

1

1385
evidence showed. . ." With regard to Albania,
they say: "In the case of Albania, evidence presented to the Commission indicated that ...",
etc. In regard to Bulgaria there is much the
same thing: "The evidence submitted to the
Commission regarding Bulgarian aid to the
Greek guerrilla movement indicated...."

indiqu ant que ... " Au paragr aphe d) de la
page 177 011 lit: " ... les pieces et temoignages
montre nt ... " A propos de l'Albanie, la Commission declare: "les temoignages re~us par la
Commission indiquent que ,... " Pour la Bulgarie
les expressions sont identiques: "Les pieces et
temoignages presentees a la Commission sur
1'aide donnee par la Bulgarie a la guerilla en
Grece indiquent ... "
Therefore, it is unfair to try to represent, as
Il est donc deloyal d'essayer de faire croire,
the passage I have quoted from your speech comme semble le faire le passage
de votre disappears to do, that the Commission pronounced cours que j'ai cite, que la Comm
ission a prononce
a verdict of guilty because the charges were not un verdict de culpabilite unique
ment parce que
disproved. They based their verdict of guilty, as les accusations n'avaie nt pas ete
re£utees. La
they say themselves, on "the . . . facts ascer- Commission a fonde son verdict,
selon les propres
tained by the Commission".
termes du rapport, sur "les faits qu'elle a etablis".
You went on shortly afterwards, Mr. PresiSi vous me permettez de citeI' encore votre
dent, if you will allow me to read again from discours, Monsieur le President, vous
avez conyour speech: "I do not know how many of the tinue ensuite par ces mots: "J'igno
re combien
members of the Security Council are trained de membres du Conseil de securite
sont des
lawyers. However, even a layman knows that juristes ·professionnels. Toutefois, meme
un
under any modern legal system charges must be profane sait que, dans tout systeme juridiq
ue
proved. A verdict of guilty cannot be based moderne, il faut faire la prenve des accusa
tions
on the mere inability to disprove charges. I qu'on porte. Un verdict de culpabilite ne
peut
really do not know how the Commission, which se fonder sur la simple incapacite de refuter
les
certainly has many able and eminent men among accusations formuIees. Je ne comprends vraime
nt
its members, was able to base a conclusion on pas comment la Commission, qui
comprend
such a level of argumentation. My only ex- certainement plus d'un homme capabl
e et emiplanation is that the members of the Commis- nent au nombre de ses membres, a pu
fonder ses
sion, for some extraneous reasons, were com- conclusions sur des arguments aussi faibles
.Ma
pelled to establish a verdict of guilty against seule explication est que, pour des motifs
qui ne
the northe rn neighbours of Greece in spite of se rappor tent pa~ a la question, les membr
es de
their inability to prove it."
la Commission ont ete contraints de rendre un
verdict de culpabilite contre les pays limitrophes
du nord de la Grece, bien qu'ils aient ete incapables de prouver cette culpabilite."
I admit, Mr. President, that you are entitled
Je reconnais, Monsieur le President, que vous
to say that eight out of the eleven members of avez le droit
de declarer que huit des onze
:\'.e Commission were misled by the evidence; membres de la
Commission ont ete trompes par
fOU are equally entitled yourself not to accept
de faux temoignages; vous avez egalement le
that evidence, but I do submit, with all respect, droit de recuser les
temoignages, mais j'affirme,
that you are not entitled to say that eight of the sans vouloir vous
offenser, que vous n'avez pas
eleven members of the Commission were, "for le droit de dire que
huit des onze membres de
some extraneous reasons", compelled to give a la Commission ont
ete "pour des motifs qui ne
particular judgment.
se rappor tent pas a la question" obliges de rendre
un verdict partial.
I hope that, after reflecting on this passage in
J'espere qu'apre s avoir revu cette partie de
your remarks, you may agree with me that unless votre discours, vous
conviendrez avec moi que,
it were corrected, and corrected this evening, it si dIe n'est pas modifi
ee ce soir meme, elle risque
might give a wrong and very unfortu nate im- de produire une impres
sion des plus facheuses.
pression. There must, of course, on occasions be La majorite et la
minorite peuve:.~t avoir des
a majority opinion and a minority opinion on opinions differentcs sur
une question quelconque.
any given question. That is always unfortunate, C'est sans doute
regrettable, mais on ne saurait
but it cannot be helped; it is a matter of an l'eviter et il n'y a la qu'une
divergence d'opinions
honest difference of opinion. What is to be tout a fait respectable.
Ce qui est bl';mable, me
deprecated, it seems to mc, is that either the semble-t-il, c'est que
la majorite ou la minorite
majority or the minority should accuse the other accuse la partie adverse
de porter un jugement
of arriving at a judgm ent "for extraneous rea- "pour des motifs qui
ne se rappor tent pas a la
sons". Such an accusation does not come well question". Formuler
une telle accusation confrom any member of this Council, and it seems vient mal a un membr
e de ce Conseil, surtou t
to me particularly unfortunate if it comes from lorsque celui-ci occupe
, par le jeu de la regIe
one who, by the hazard of the ~;Jpl;3.i:Jet, ll; .1t the alphabetique, le fauteui
l presidentiel.
same time occupying the Chair.
Colonel HODGSON (Austr alia): I had intended to speak on the latter 1'c1.'11 mentioned
~'"

. . . .

" - __ <o • • • - _ • • •

,,._.~.-.- --~--.••

•. -

-.----

Le colomJ HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): J'avais l'intention de parler sur le

---'~-----------'-------'-----

by the representative of the United Kingdom. dernier point mentionne par le representant du
I trust, Mr. President,that on reflection you RoyaumenUni. J'espere, Monsieur le President,
will withdraw the particular remark to which qu'apres reflexion vous :retirerez la remarque a
reference has been made and that you will have' laquelle le representa."1t du Royaume-Uni vieut
it struck from the rec9rd, because, in the opinion . de faire allusion et que vous la ferez rayer du
of my delegation, it is the' most insulting remark compte rendu, car, de l'avis de ma delegation,
ever made in the history of the Security Council, c'est la remarque la plus insultante qui ait jamais
about the Governments of other members of the ete faite dans I'histoire du Conseil de securite a
Security Council. As far as my oWn Government l'adresse des Gouvernements d'autres membres
is concerned, as I have told you, the remark is du Conseit En ce qui concerne mon Gouvernecompletely untrue. The Australian representa- ment, comme je vous l'ai deja dit, l'accusation
tive had no instructions .whatsoever; his only est absolument denuee de fondement. Le
duty was to ascertain t.b.e facts. Coming from representant australien .n'avait re~u aucune
you as President of the Council, the remark left instruction; son seul devoir etait de verifier les
faits. Faite par vous, President du Conseil, cette
a most unfortunate impression.
remarque a produit une impression des plus
facheuses.
Le PR~SIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Je desire tout d'abord prononcer quelques mots,
en tant que representant de la POLOGNE,
relativement a la declaration du representant du
Royaume-Uni. En lisant les conciusions de la
majorite des membres de la Commission, je
reconnais que, comme l'a dit le representant du
Royaume-Uni, ces conclusions enumercnt les
differentes accusations, donnent un compte
rendu sommaire des preuves et refutations qui
leur ont ete apportees et se terminent par un
certain npmbre de phrases de conclusion proprement dite.
However, I find that the method of argummt,
Mais la methode de raisonnement, pour ainsi
so to speak, is laid down in the introdut:tioll; dire, est exposee dans l'introduction; et, en
and, as I interpret the text of the conclUsions, interpretant le texte des conclusions, il me semble
it seems to me that every reader of this text que tout lecteur de ce texte doit avoir, tout au
must gain, at least at first sight, the same impres- moins a premiere vue, la meme impression que
sion which I gained, namely, that the method, fai eue en le lisant, a savoir que'la methode
used in reaching the conclusions seems to be to suivie pour aboutir aux conclusions :lC'.mble etre
find that there is no disproof of the charges. If d'etablir que les accusations n'ont pas ete
the majority of the Commission believed it acted refutees. Si In. majorite des membt".s de la
on the basis~of a different method, I am,. of COIllinission est persuadee qu'elle a suivi une
course, very gl~d to take note that such was the methoC'e differente, je suis evidemment tres
belief of the majority of 'the members of the heureux de prendre acte de cette conviction.
CommisSIon.
,:
En ce qui concerne la demiere remarque du
'In regard to the last point made by the representative of the United Kingdom, which was representant du Royaume-Uni, remarque faite
also mentioned by the representative of Australia, egalement par le representant de l'Australie, je
I should like to make the following observations. desire faire les observations suivantes. Tout
First of all, if the representative of Australia and d'abord, si le representant de l'Australie et le
the representative of the United Kingdom so de- representant du Royaume-Uni le desirent, je
sire, I shall be very glad to have that particular ferai volontiers supprimer du compte rendu la
sentence struck from the record. However, I phrase en questio<l. Mais je tiens a declarer que
should like to state the followinJ-alld I now - je parle maintenant en mon nom personnel
speak personally, for myself, and not for my et non en celui de mon Gouvemement-j'ai
Government-I have the impression that the in- l'impressl0n que la majorite des membres de la
terpretation of the evidence by the majority of Commission a interprete les temoignages tn
the Cornrnission was based on certain general partant de certaines idees generales et d'une
ideas and general views as to what the :;ituation certaine vue d'ensemble de la situation. Il me
is. It seems to me, and this is a fact which I semble, et je le regrette, que ces idees generales
regret, that these general ideas and gneral views et Cf;.i:t~ 'i,,"e d'ensf''IDble l'ont emporte sur l'ctude
rather prevailed over dle study of the detailed deu;,me~ ;ki; i".its. Ceci n'est evidemment que
moT" ..: ["Jm01t ;.:er.sonnelle.
facts. That is of course, my personal opinion.
Je poursuiVrai en citant le discours que le
I shall go on to say that in the speech which
was made by the representative of Australia on representant de l'Australie a prononce le '11
11 July,! he stated that, in so far as the views of i tliUet1 et dans lequel il a declare que pour ce
The PRESIDENT: I should first like to say a
few words, as the representative of POLAND, con""
cerning the statement made by the representative of the United Kingdom. As I read the
conclusions of the majority of the members of
the Commission, I am fully aware of the fact,
which was mentioned by the representative of
the United KingdoD' that the conclusions do
enumerate the differ,-__t charges, do enumerate
briefly the evidence and counter-evidence which
was brought forward, and finally present certain'
concluding sentences.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 57, 156th meetmg, page 8:

1 Voir leg Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securitl,
Deuxicme Annee, No 57. 156eme seance, page 8.

1387
the representatives, among others the representative of Poland, are concerned, they "are based
not ort facts at all, but rather on evidence which
they believe or do not believe. My delegation",
said the representative of Australia, speaking not
for himself persoJ.1ally, but officially far his delegation, "finds that these representatives approached the question with preconceived ideas."
I do not ask him to strike this from the record.

qui etait de l'opinion exprnnee par certains
representants et, notamment, par le representant
de la Pologne, elle "ne repose pas du tout$ur
des faits et se fonde sur des temoignages
auxquels ils accordent oU",n'accordent pas foi.
La delegation australienne considere, a ajoute
le representant de l'Australie, parlant non pas
en son nom personnel, mais officiellement au
nom de sa delegation, que ces representants ont
aborde le probleme avec des idees preconc;:ues".
Je ne demande pourtant pas au representant de
l'Australie de faire supprimer cette phrase du
compte :tenou.

. Mr. JOHNSOr-J (United States of America):

The exposition made·this afternoon by the USSR

M. JOHNSON (Etats,.Ul1is d'Amerique) (traduit de l~anglais): L'expose fait eet apres,.midi

representative really began, as he stated, a discussion of the United States resolution. May I
~quire whether the general debate is now closed
and whether we shall proceed with a detailed
discussion of the United States resolution tomorrow?

par ~e representant de I'TlRSS a en fait entame,
comme ill'a declare, la discussion de la resolution
presentee par les Etats-Unis. Puis-je demander si
la discussion generale est maintenant terminee et
si nous procederons demain a la discussion point
par peint de la resolution des Etats-Unis?

The PRESIDENT: The rules of procedure do
not give the President the power to close ~ debate, and I would be unable to prevent a speaker
from discussing the general subject. However,
I should like to make a personal request of all
members to avoid expounding their general
views which~ I think, have already been expressed, and to concentrate on the specific issues
of the resolution which are before us.
'

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Fanglais):
Le reglement interieur n'accorde pas au President le pouvoir de clore une discussion et il m'est
impossible d'interdire a un orateur de discuter
le projet general. Toutefois, en mon nom
personnel, jed~mande a tous Ies membres du
Conseil d'eviter de prendre la parole pour
exposer des considerations generales deja exprimees et de limiter la discussion aux points
particuliers de la resolution qui nous est soumise.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
Would it be consistent with our rules for general
debate to be interp6b.ted between discussions on
the resolution, or is it possible under our rules to
maintain a certain order and to exclude general debate when the resolution is being considered? The Council may not agree with me,
_ in which case I would have nothing more to say,
but perhaps the Council may be asked if it
would agree that general debate is now closed.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Notre reglement permet-il
qu'une discussion geneide interrompe la discussion d'une resolution, ou bien est-il possible,
selon notre reglement, d'obliger le Conseil a
suivre un ordre determine et d'interdire la
discussion generale pendant l' exam~n d'une
resolution? Il est possible que le Conseil n'accepte
pas mon point de vue. Dans ce cas, je ne dirai
plus rien, mais il serait peut-etre possible de
demander au Conseil s'il accepte de clore maintenant la discussion generale.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I think
that if no ~ne expresses a wish to speak in the
general debate before tomorrow's meeting, the
general debate will automatically be closerl and
we shall proceed to consider the concrete resolutions. I think this problem settles itself.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques
socialistes sovi6tiques) . (traduit du russe):
Il me semble que si cl'id demain personne
n'exprime le desir de prendr.e la· parole dans le
cadre de la discussion generale, celle-ci S~ trouvera par le fait meme terminee et que nous
pourrons passer a l'examen des resolutions
concretes. Ce probleme, me semble-t-il, se resout
de lui-meme.

The PRESIDENT: The rules of procedure make
no provision with regard to this question. There
is no point mentioned in eonnexion with the
closure of the debate. However, I think it is a
good and normal practice that the general debate should come to an end at some time, and
then the concrete resolutions can be taken up. I
think this practice has been followed more or
less in the past, and I trust that the members of
the Council will automatically adjust themselves
to it in this case.

Le .PRESIDENT (traduit' de l' anglais):
Le reglement interieur ne prevoit pas cette
situation. Aucun article ne mentionne la cl8ture
des debats.·Toutefois, j'estime qu'il serait parfois
souhaitable de clof(~ les debats au bout d'tm
certain. temps et d'aborder ensuite I'etude des
reSOlutions concretes. J e pense que le Conseil a
plus ou moins suivi cette pratique jusqu'a
maintenant et je presume que les m.embres du
Conseil voudront bien s'y conformer clans le cas
present.

bo....

1388

Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French): We might even go a little further in
the interpretation of our rules of procedure. If I
remember correctly, it is the duty of the President (I believe it is expressed in these very
terms) to lead and conduct debates, the purpose
of such direction being to assure their orderly
procedure. It seems to me, therefore, that in
view of this general rule, which applies to all
presidents, it would be possible to ask at tomorrow's meeting, for example, if any member
of the Council or other representative at the
Council table wishes to speak again in the general debate.
If no one wishes to speak, t.~e general debate
could be considered closed and we could proceed to a discussion of specific points.

M. PARODI (France): On pourrait meme allel
un peu plus loin dans l'interpretation de nos
regles de procedure. Si je me rappelle bien, le
president a normalement pour fonction (ie crois
que c'est dit en termes propres) de conduire les
debats, de les diriger, ce qui implique une direc<
tion ayant pour but d'y mettre de l'ordre. Il me
semble donc qu'en vertu de cette regIe generale
- qui est d'ailleurs la fonction de tout president - il serait possible de demander, a la
seance de demain, par exemple, si des membres
du Conseil ou quelque autre representant panni
ceux qui sont a la table du Conseil, desirent
encore prendre part au debat general.
Si personne ne le desire, le debat general
pourrait etre considere comme clos et nous
pourrions aborder une discussion plus precise.

The PRESIDENT: I think that the proposal of
the representative of France is entirely within
the framework of the rules of procedure, and I
propose to follow it. I shall therefore ask tomorrow morning whether anybody desires to
.speak on the general debate, and, if there are no
speakers, I shall declare the general debate
closed.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglais):
J'estime que la proposition du representant de
la France est parfaitement conforme n'esprit du
reglement interieur et je propose au Conseil de
la suivre. En consequence, je demandeiai demain
matin si quelqu'un desire parler dans le cadre
de la discussion generale et% si auenn orateur
ne demande la parole, je declarerai close la
discussion generale.

The next meeting of the Security Council will
be held tomorrow morning at 10.30 a.m. We
shall then consider the programme of meetings
for the following week.

La prochaine seance du Conseil de securite
aura lieu demain matin a 10 h. 30. Nous etudierons le programme des seances pour la
semaine suivante.

The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.

La seance est levee a 18 h. 25.

wc

SALES AGENTS OF UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATION"S'

DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Argentina-Argentine
Editorial Sudamericana
S. A.
Alsina 500
BUENOS AIREs

Austtalia-Australie
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.

Belgium-Belgique
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14-22 rue du Persil
BRUXELLES

Bolivia-BoUvie
Librerla Cie~tifica y
Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ

Canada
The R yerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO

Chile--Chili
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO

Ch$a--Chine
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
.<':-: SHANGHAI

10sta ii~a-Costa-Rica
I

/

J

Trejos Hennanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JOSE

Cuba
La Casa Be1ga
Relll~ de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA HABANA

Czechoslovakia
Tchecoslovaquie
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1

Denmark-Danemark
Einar Munskgaard
Norregade 6
h.JOBENHAVN

Dominican Republic
Republique Dominicaine
Libreria Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartado 656
CIUDAD TRUJILLO
P$ted in the U.S.A.

Ecuador--Equateur
Munoz Hennanos y Cla
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10-24
GUAYAQUIL

Egypt-Egypte
Librairie "La Renaissance
d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CAIRO

Finland--Finlmzde
Akateerninen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI

France
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue SoufHot
PA..lUS,

ve

Greece--Grece
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES

Guatemala
Jose Goubaud
Goubaud & Cla Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA

Haiti-Haiti
Max Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postale 111-B
PORT-AU-PRINCE

India-Inde
Oxford Book & Stationery
Co.
Scindia House
NEW DELHI

Iran
Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN

Iraq-Irak
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD

Lebanon-Liban
Librairie universelle
BEYROUTH

Luxembourg
Librairie J. Schummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG

Netherlands-Pays-Bas
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Langc Voor-hout 9
S'GHAVENHAGE
Price in the United States: 50 cents

New Zealand
Nouvelle-Zelande
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor StreetWELLINGTON

Norway-Norvege
Norsk Bokimport AjS
Edv. Storms Gate 1
OSLO

Philippines
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN

Sweden--Suede
A.-B. C. E. Fritzes Kungl.
Hofbokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM

Switzerland-Suisse
Librairie Payot S. A.
LAUSANNE, GENEVE, VEVEY,
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I

Syria-Syrie
Librairie universelle
DAMAS

Turkey-Turquie
Librairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU-IsTANBUL

Union of South Africa
Union Sud-Africaine
Central News Agency Ltd.
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG, CAPETOWN,
DURBAN

United Kingdom
Royaume-Uni
H.M. Stationery Office
p.a. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops at
LONDON, EDINBURGH,
MANCHESTER, CARDIFF,
BELFAST and BRISTOL

United States of America
Etats-Unis d'Ameriqtte
International Documents
Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.

Yugoslavia-Yougoslavie
Drzavno Preduzece
J ugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska UI. 36
BEOGRAD

.

22 March 1948~
