V.

32/3.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second {:ommittee

Assistance for the reconstruction of Viet
Nam

The General Assembly,
Having warmly welcomed the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations,
Expressing profound admiration to the courageous
Vietnamese people in their struggle for independence
and national reunification and their constant efforts
devoted to national reconstruction,
Deeply concerned over the grave economic and social
consequences of the long years of war further aggravated by recent severe natural calamities,
Recalling the Secretary-General's statement in his
report on the work of the Organization for 1974/1975
expressing the hope that the United Nations system
would be able to assist countries in the Indo-China
peninsula in their efforts for national rehabilitation
after the war,2
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1944 (L VIII) of 7 May 197 5 appealing to all
States to come to the assistance of the people of IndaChina in their efforts to bring about the reconstruction
of their countries, in accordance with the needs and
requests of those countries, by ways and means which
the latter deem most appropriate and with full respect
for their national sovereignty,
Recalling further resolution 33 adopted by the World
Conference of the International Women's Year, held
at Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 197 5, on aid
to the Vietnamese people, 3
Noting with appreciation the prompt and pertinent
efforts made by the Secretary-General and by the
organs, agencies and programmes of the United Nations
to mobilize assistance to meet the most pressing humanitarian needs in Viet Nam and to help organize relief,
rehabilitation and reconstruction assistance to the Vietnamese people,
Further concerned that massive international assistance, notably in respect of food, equipment and project
aid, remains urgently needed to speed up the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the social and economic infrastructure of the country,
Noting with satisfaction that the non-aligned group
of countries has established, by resolution 28 adopted
by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from
16 to 19 August 1976, 4 a solidarity fund for the reconstruction of the Lao People's Democratic Republic and
Viet Nam to help in the reconstruction effort,
1. Recommends that Viet Nam be included in the
list of the most seriously affected countries;:;
2. Appeals to the peoples and Governments of all
Member States and to all international economic, financial and social institutions to increase and intensify
their efforts and contributions on a bilateral and/ or
multilateral basis to help the Vietnamese people in the
reconstruction of their country;
2
See Official Records of the General Assemblv, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. JA (A/10001/Add.l), ·sect. XVII.
3
See Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.l ), chap. III.
4 See A/31/197, annex IV, sect. B.
6
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtyfirst Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/31/21), annex IV.

75

3. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to encourage further mobilization ?f re~ource_s and eff?rts
from the international commumty with a view to achieving the social and economic rehabilitation of Viet
Nam;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to utilize the
necessary resources for implementing the present resolution.
34th plenary meeting
14 Ortoher 1977
::\2/ 51.

United Nationi, Institute for Traininµ; and
Researeh

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-V]) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order,
Recalling also its resolution 3 281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States.
Recalling further its resolution 31 / 107 of 16 December 1976 on the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research,
Considering its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, which set in motion measures that form
the basis and framework for the work of the competent
bodies and organizations of the United Nations system,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Executive Director of the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research;"
2. Welcomes the emphasis and urges the continuation of the concentration of the work of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research in the
sphere of economic and social training and research
and the inclusion of specific projects on the problems in
the areas identified by the General Assembly at its sixth
and seventh special sessions and in the relevant decisions of the Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
3. Expresses the hope that the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research will have greater
and wider financial support from Member States and
organizations.
98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977
32/52.

Manila Communique of the World Food
Couneil: Programme of Aetion to Eradieate Hunger and Malnutrition

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3348 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, by which it established the World Food
Council to serve, in line with resolution XXII adopted
by the World Food Conference,7 held at Rome from
5 to 16 November 1974, as a co-ordinating mechanism
to provide over-all, integrated and continuing attention
for the successful co-ordination and follow-up of
6
Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/32/14
and Corr. I).
7
See Report of the World Food Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.II.A.3), chap. II.
