United Nations

A/RES/67/202

General Assembly

Distr.: General
27 February 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 20

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 21 December 2012
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/67/437)]

67/202. Entrepreneurship for development
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the commitments to development and poverty eradication
emanating from the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 1 and the commitments
made at the 2005 World Summit, 2 the 2010 high-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, 3 and other major United
Nations summits, conferences and special sessions,
Welcoming the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”, 4 and recognizing the
potential of entrepreneurship to contribute to specific sustainable development
objectives,
Reaffirming the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on
Financing for Development 5 in its holistic approach, and the Doha Declaration on
Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International
Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the
Monterrey Consensus, 6
Recalling the Istanbul Declaration and Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020, 7

_______________
1

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution 60/1.
3
Resolution 65/1.
4
Resolution 66/288, annex.
5
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico,
18–22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
6
Resolution 63/239, annex.
7
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey,
9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.
2

12-49072

*1249072*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/202

Entrepreneurship for development

Recalling also the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, 8 and the
agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women on access and
participation of women and girls in education, training and science and technology,
including for the promotion of women’s equal access to full employment and decent
work, adopted at its fifty-fifth session, 9 and stressing that women, particularly in
developing countries, are important drivers of entrepreneurship,
Taking note of the ministerial declaration adopted at the high-level segment of
the substantive session of 2012 of the Economic and Social Council on “Promoting
productive capacity, employment and decent work to eradicate poverty in the
context of inclusive, sustainable and equitable economic growth at all levels for
achieving the Millennium Development Goals”, 10
Welcoming the contribution of all relevant stakeholders, including the private
sector, non-governmental organizations and civil society, to the implementation of
the outcomes of the United Nations conferences and summits and their reviews in
the economic, social, environmental and related fields, as well as the realization of
the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals,
Recognizing the important contribution entrepreneurship can make to
sustainable development by creating jobs and driving economic growth and
innovation, improving social conditions and contributing to addressing
environmental challenges, and stressing the importance of giving appropriate
consideration to the promotion of entrepreneurship in the context of the discussions
on the post-2015 development agenda,
Emphasizes the need for improved regulatory environments and policy
1.
initiatives that promote entrepreneurship and foster small and medium-sized
enterprises, as well as microenterprises, and stresses the positive role entrepreneurship
plays in driving job creation and expanding opportunities for all, including for
women and youth;
Encourages Governments to take a coordinated and inclusive approach to
2.
promoting entrepreneurship involving all stakeholders, while noting initiatives of
civil society, academia and the private sector as important entrepreneurship drivers,
and to develop policies, taking into account national priorities and circumstances,
that address the legal, social and regulatory barriers to equal, effective economic
participation, and stresses the need for a comprehensive approach to entrepreneurship
that includes support from development partners in the areas of technology transfer
on favourable terms, including on concessional and preferential terms, as mutually
agreed, finance and capacity-building, with a focus on education and skills
development;
Acknowledges the important role trade plays in enhancing the capacity of
3.
enterprises, and reaffirms in this regard the critical role that a universal, rules-based,
open, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system can play in
stimulating economic growth and development worldwide, thereby benefiting all

_______________
8

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
9
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2011, Supplement No. 7 (E/2011/27), chap. I,
sect. A.
10
E/HLS/2012/1.

2

Entrepreneurship for development

A/RES/67/202

countries at all stages of development as they advance towards sustainable
development;
4.
Emphasizes that partnerships with the private sector play an important
role in promoting entrepreneurship, generating employment and investment,
increasing revenue potential, developing new technologies and innovative business
models and enabling high, sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth
while protecting the rights of workers;
Invites Member States to strengthen the capacity of national financial
5.
institutions to reach out to those who have no access to banking, insurance and other
financial services, and encourages them to adopt regulatory and supervisory
frameworks that facilitate the safe and sound provision of services to such
populations, increase access to information and promote financial literacy,
particularly for women;
Encourages Member States to expand alternative sources of financing
6.
and diversify the retail financial service system to include non-traditional providers
of financial services, such as microcredit and microfinance, stresses the value of a
sound regulatory framework in this regard, and also encourages the provision of
incentives to microfinance institutions that meet national standards for delivering
sound financial services to the poor, with particular emphasis on women;
Emphasizes the important role of national efforts aimed at bringing
7.
informal workers into the formal economy and integrating them into national social
security systems;
Recognizes that technological improvement, particularly through the
8.
diffusion of technology, can provide new opportunities for businesses to improve
their competitiveness, and in this regard encourages Member States to increase
cooperation in support of technology exchange and transfer, innovation and
capacity-building programmes for promoting entrepreneurship;
Also recognizes the value of teaching entrepreneurial skills at all levels
9.
of education, ensuring the full and equal participation of women and girls, and
encourages entrepreneurship education through skills development, capacitybuilding, training programmes and business incubators;
10. Acknowledges the role of entrepreneurship in enabling youth to turn their
creativity, energy and ideas into business opportunities by helping to facilitate their
entry into the labour market;
11. Recognizes that democratic political institutions, transparent and
accountable public and private entities, effective anti-corruption measures and
responsible corporate governance are key conditions for making market economies
and enterprises more responsive to the values and long-term goals of society;
12. Acknowledges that the private sector can contribute to the achievement of
sustainable development and support national regulatory and policy frameworks that
enable business and industry to advance sustainable development initiatives, taking
into account the importance of responsible business practices and corporate social
responsibility;
13. Encourages the international community to support the efforts of
countries to promote entrepreneurship and foster the development of small and
medium-sized enterprises and microenterprises, taking into account the challenges
and opportunities of increased trade liberalization;

3

A/RES/67/202

Entrepreneurship for development

14. Encourages countries to consider establishing or strengthening national
centres of excellence in entrepreneurship and similar bodies, and further encourages
cooperation and networking and the sharing of best practices between them;
15. Calls upon the relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system to further recognize and integrate entrepreneurship in its various forms into
their policies, programmes and reports, and to support national efforts in this regard,
as appropriate;
16. Requests the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh
session to convene a high-level thematic debate, to be held in plenary meeting, to
discuss promoting entrepreneurship in the context of sustainable development and
poverty eradication at the national, regional and international levels, and the role of
the United Nations and the international community in this regard;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-ninth session a report on the progress made in implementing the present
resolution, including highlighting best practices and identifying possible measures
which could be taken at all levels in support of entrepreneurship.
61st plenary meeting
21 December 2012

4
