A/65/PV.64

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

64

th plenary meeting
Monday, 13 December 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 122 (continued)

(i) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Economic Community of Central
African States

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations

(j) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Economic Cooperation Organization

Report of the Secretary-General (A/65/382)
(b) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Asian-African Legal Consultative
Organization
(c) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(d) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization
Draft resolution (A/65/L.35)
(e) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Caribbean Community
(f) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization
Draft resolution (A/65/L.6)
(g) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries
(h) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Council of Europe

Draft resolution (A/65/L.40)
(k) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Eurasian Economic Community
Draft resolution (A/65/L.32)
(l) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Organization of la
Francophonie
(m) Cooperation between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the InterParliamentary Union
Draft resolution (A/65/L.11)
(n) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Latin American Economic System
(o) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States
Draft resolution (A/65/L.33)
(p) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons

Draft resolution (A/65/L.41)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-68853 (E)

*1068853*

A/65/PV.64

(q) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe
(r) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of American States
(s) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference
(t) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Pacific Islands Forum
(u) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization
Draft resolution (A/65/L.34)
(v) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Draft resolution (A/65/L.29)
(w) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Southern African Development Community
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with resolution 35/2 of 13 October 1980, I now give
the floor to the Observer for the Asian-African Legal
Consultative Organization.
Mr. Lee (Asian-African Legal Consultative
Organization): On behalf of the Asian-African Legal
Consultative Organization (AALCO), I am very
pleased to have this opportunity to report to the
Assembly on the cooperative activities undertaken by
AALCO over the past two years.
The
Asian-African
Legal
Consultative
Organization is the institutional outcome of the historic
Bandung Conference, held in 1955. It is composed of
47 African and Asian member States that have been
working together over the past 54 years,
notwithstanding their different economic, social,
cultural, political and legal systems. The role of AsianAfrican countries in making, shaping and transforming
international law has been greatly enhanced as a result.
Since its establishment in 1956, AALCO has been
consistently working towards the progressive
development of international law and strengthening the
rule of law in international affairs. As an advisory body
to its 47 members, it ensures interregional cooperation
and exchanges of information and views on matters of

2

common concern in international legal matters. In
these areas, AALCO closely follows the work of the
General Assembly, the International Law Commission
(ILC), the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law and the specialized agencies.
AALCO has enjoyed permanent observer status at
the United Nations since 1980, when the General
Assembly recognized the importance of AALCO's
work, particularly in the development of the law of the
sea, and invited AALCO to participate in the work of
the United Nations. AALCO has endeavoured to
complement and supplement the work of the United
Nations ever since.
In August 2009, the States members of AALCO
decided to revitalize and strengthen the work of the
organization. The Putrajaya Declaration adopted in
Malaysia for this purpose states, in part:
“We are determined to act positively and
cooperate fully in order to shape our future,
advocating a new system of international
relations that is both democratic and
representative of all — inclusive of developing
countries — based on the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and respect
for the sovereign equality of nations.”
AALCO held an extraordinary session in 2008
and annual sessions in Malaysia, in 2009, and in
Tanzania, in 2010. A series of intersessional meetings,
seminars, training programmes and workshops were
also organized to focus on various aspects of
international law as reflected in its work programme.
I would now like to highlight some of the
activities undertaken by AALCO in the field of
international law, beginning with its work relating to
the International Law Commission. Under its statute,
AALCO is required to examine subjects that are under
consideration by the International Law Commission
and thereafter to forward the views of its members to
the Commission. The fulfilment of this mandate over
the years has helped to foster a closer relationship
between the two bodies. It has also become customary
for both bodies to be represented at each other's
sessions.
In 2007, the General Assembly invited Member
States, in association with regional organizations and
members of the Commission, to convene national or
regional meetings dedicated to the work of the

10-68853

A/65/PV.64

Commission. In response, AALCO organized a seminar
to commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of the
International Law Commission. Discussions were held
on the role of the ILC in the twenty-first century,
strengthening Asian-African solidarity in the ILC, and
ensuring adequate reflection of Asian-African concerns
in the work of the ILC.
A special debate was organized in 2010 on
making AALCO's participation in the work of the ILC
more effective and meaningful. Among the issues
discussed, AALCO members recognized in particular
the importance of responding in a timely fashion to the
questionnaires from the ILC on topics under
consideration.
The work of the ILC was also the subject of a
panel discussion held at United Nations Headquarters
in November. The Chair of the Sixth Committee,
together with ILC members, took part in the
discussion. Among the issues discussed was how to
bring matters of common concern to Asian and African
countries before the Commission. In this connection,
AALCO plans to organize a series of meetings at
United Nations Headquarters in the spring of 2011 to
introduce candidates from Africa and Asia for the
forthcoming elections of members of the ILC and the
International Court of Justice. Each meeting will be
devoted to a topic or theme, and candidates will be
invited to express their views thereon.
Turning to the subject of international criminal
law and the International Criminal Court (ICC),
AALCO attaches high importance to the subject of
international criminal jurisdiction. In order to facilitate
the participation of its member States in the Kampala
Review Conference of the Rome Statute, AALCO
convened a seminar and a round-table meeting of
experts. The outcomes of those meetings were
presented at the Kampala Review Conference. Special
meetings were also organized to focus on the principle
of complementarity and the crime of aggression.
Member States, as well as representatives of the ICC
and the International Committee of the Red Cross, took
part in the deliberations.
AALCO is concerned over the subject of
trafficking in human beings, especially women and
children, which has become a serious transnational
organized crime. It affects national security and human
rights and caters to illicit transnational migration.

10-68853

In 2009, AALCO established an open-ended
group to study the issue of mutual legal assistance in
criminal matters. A workshop on trafficking in persons,
the smuggling of migrants and international
cooperation was also organized in collaboration with
the Government of Malaysia.
Another area that AALCO has been considering
for more than three decades is the law of environment
and sustainable development. Our current area of
concern is the emerging legal architecture to combat
climate change beyond 2012. Member States
emphasize that the ongoing negotiations must be
conducted within the existing framework of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
and the Kyoto Protocol. We were extremely pleased to
learn of the significant achievements made in Cancún,
as just reported by the Secretary-General. We also wish
to congratulate the Government of Mexico on its
presidency of the Conference.
The law of the sea constitutes an important
element of the work programme of AALCO. It is
widely recognized that AALCO played an active part
in the development of the law of the sea and made a
significant contribution to the emergence of the
concept of exclusive economic zones.
Mr. Ould Hadrami (Mauritania), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
At a recent one-day special meeting on the law of
the sea, organized jointly with the International
Tribunal of the Law of the Sea, the principal themes of
the discussion were maritime security and piracy, and
the delimitation of maritime boundaries. Recognizing
that piracy constitutes a threat to international trade
and maritime safety and transportation, AALCO
members are of the view that a balanced, fair and
effective legal regime must soon be put in place. This
regime should be able to apprehend, investigate and
prosecute alleged criminals in accordance with due
process of law. However, such a regime should not
place an undue burden on the States in the affected
areas. A resolution was adopted encouraging AALCO
to make a contribution to this endeavour.
I now turn to the dissemination of international
law. AALCO organized a regional training exercise on
treaty law and practice in cooperation with the
Government of Indonesia and the United Nations
Office of Legal Affairs. Such training programmes are
designed to improve awareness of the issues involved

3

A/65/PV.64

in conducting negotiations in treaty-making and related
aspects of international law. All of these activities are
intended to strengthen our relationship with the United
Nations, in particular in the area of the progressive
development of international law.
AALCO pays tribute to the work of the General
Assembly and strongly supports this organ in
upholding its universal character and democratic
approach. Member States and regional and other
organizations need to work cooperatively to address
global challenges. Exchanging information and sharing
experiences is particularly important for this purpose.
For the betterment of peoples across the world, may all
our efforts be fruitful. We look forward to the
continued guidance and leadership of the President of
the General Assembly.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 477 (V) of 1 November 1950, I now call on
the Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to commend the
President of the General Assembly for his leadership
and guidance of the work of the General Assembly. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States, submitted to the General
Assembly in document A/65/382.
Cooperation between the League of Arab States
and the United Nations is based on the League’s
Charter. Its dual purpose is to maintain peace and
security and to organize economic and social relations
with a view to achieving the common goals and
purposes of the two organizations.
With regard to international peace and security,
the League of Arab States continues to follow
developments in the Sudan. The secretariat of the Arab
League has continued to cooperate with United Nations
bodies in monitoring the electoral process throughout
the provinces of the Sudan. In implementation of the
provisions of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement of
2005, the League of Arab States will participate in the
monitoring of the referendum on self-determination in
Southern Sudan, in cooperation with the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission and participating
international and regional organizations.
The Arab League continues to devote extensive
efforts in support of the African Union-United Nations

4

Hybrid Operation in Darfur in its role in promoting
development, voluntary returns and reconciliation in
Darfur.
The Arab League also continues its efforts to
resolve the crisis in Somalia in cooperation with the
Somali Transitional Federal Government, as well as
international and regional organizations, with a view to
achieving comprehensive reconciliation and strengthening
peace and security in Somalia. We participate in the
International Contact Group on Somalia and in
conferences addressing the reconstruction of that
country. The Arab League also participates in the
working groups relating to the fight against piracy and
armed robbery off the coast of Somalia.
The Arab League has also participated in the
efforts of the international community to reach a
settlement to the parliamentary crisis in the Comoros.
Based on those international efforts, the parties to the
dispute were able to reach agreement on the holding of
presidential and gubernatorial elections in the country
in November and December 2010, with the provision
of an interim period until the elected official assume
office.
Moreover, through high-level delegations, the
Arab League has participated in the meetings of the
technical committees pertaining to Iraq and in
monitoring the Iraqi elections. We have also helped
coordinate meetings with international monitoring
teams, including that of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq. In all its actions pertaining to Iraq,
the Arab League takes care to consult and coordinate
directly with the United Nations. It also participated in
monitoring the parliamentary elections in Lebanon
through an organizational meeting attended by United
Nations representatives and other international
observers.
The League continues to cooperate with the
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research,
including by organizing a seminar in Cairo in June
2010 under the rubric “Towards an arms trade treaty”.
The seminar achieved its desired goals. It allowed Arab
States to consider the latest developments on the
drafting of a legally binding international arms trade
treaty, and identified the international parties that
support such an agreement and the priorities, opinions
and concerns of Arab countries in this regard.
With regard to increasing cooperation between
the United Nations and the Arab League in the peaceful

10-68853

A/65/PV.64

settlement of disputes, the two organizations have
recently exchanged information in fields of common
interest, most notably conflict prevention and early
warning, peacebuilding and peacekeeping. The Arab
League looks forward to continuing this cooperation
and to strengthening it in the near future in order to
develop the functions and mechanisms of the Arab
Peace and Security Council. This will include creating
a databank and an early warning mechanism to help
develop Arab action in conflict areas where the Arab
League is working in cooperation with the United
Nations. The Arab League has signed an agreement
with the United Nations Development Programme and
the European External Action Service establishing an
early warning facility at the Arab League headquarters
in Cairo similar to that which exists at the European
Union.
The three organizations are working to formulate
a trilateral memorandum of understanding that would
bolster the capacities of the Arab League secretariat to
analyse and respond to risks and crises. It would also
encompass the establishment of early warning
mechanisms that would deal with any crisis in a
positive and timely manner, as well as the
establishment of a network linking a number of
organizations, research institutions and open-source
information centres, on the one hand, and national
decision-making centres in the Arab world, on the
other.
With regard to cooperation between the United
Nations and the Arab League, the two organizations
held their ninth sectoral cooperation meeting, with a
focus on climate change. The Arab League continues to
follow up on these issues with the parties concerned,
focusing its cooperation on mitigation and adaptation
efforts and measures, and efforts pertaining to crosscutting issues.
Further
cooperation
between
the
two
organizations is ongoing in many fields. There are also
many joint projects that entrench the purposes and
objectives of cooperation shared by the two
organizations. In this regard, the representative of the
United Arab Emirates introduced a draft resolution
(A/65/L.33) to the General Assembly at this morning’s
meeting on behalf of the Arab League.
The League of Arab States aspires to enhance its
cooperation with the United Nations in all fields based
on our clear desire for continued consultation and

10-68853

cooperation towards ensuring the implementation of all
United Nations resolutions, whether they pertain to
disarmament, the fight against terrorism or the peaceful
settlement of disputes. This cooperation between the
two organizations will strengthen ongoing efforts to
address international challenges and dangers and to
safeguard international and regional peace and security.
Therefore, we call on the members of the General
Assembly to adopt by consensus the draft resolution on
cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States, contained in document
A/65/L.33.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 122 and its
sub-items (b) to (w).
The Assembly shall now proceed to consider draft
resolutions A/65/L.6, A/65/L.11, A/65/L.29, A/65/L.32,
A/65/L.33, A/65/L.34, A/65/L.35, A/65/L.40 and
A/65/L.41.
The representative of the United States of
America has asked to speak in explanation of vote
before the voting. Before giving him the floor, may I
remind him that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Nickels (United States of America): The
United States welcomes cooperation between the
United Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization to address global challenges, as outlined
in draft resolution A/65/L.29 before us today. In
joining consensus, the United States underscores the
importance of Member States conducting their
activities, as outlined in the draft resolution, in
accordance with international human rights and
humanitarian law obligations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take decisions on draft resolutions A/65/L.6, A/65/L.11,
A/65/L.29, A/65/L.32, A/65/L.33, A/65/L.34, A/65/L.35,
A/65/L.40 and A/65/L.41.
Draft resolution A/65/L.6 is entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization”. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/65/L.6?
Draft resolution A/65/L.6 was adopted (resolution
65/122).

5

A/65/PV.64

The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/65/L.11, as orally corrected, is entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since draft resolution A/65/L.11 was
submitted, the following countries have become
sponsors: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Japan,
Jordan,
Lesotho,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, the
Russian Federation, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/65/L.11,
as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/65/L.11, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 65/123).
The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/65/L.29 is entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/65/L.29?
Draft resolution A/65/L.29
(resolution 65/124).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/65/L.32 is entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Eurasian Economic Community”. May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/65/L.32?

6

Draft resolution A/65/L.32
(resolution 65/125).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/65/L.33 is entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States”. May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/65/L.33?
Draft resolution A/65/L.33
(resolution 65/126).

was

adopted

The Acting President: We shall now turn to draft
resolution A/65/L.34, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Preparatory Commission
for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of draft
resolution A/65/L.34, the following countries have
become sponsors: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland,
Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Montenegro, Norway, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/65/L.34?
Draft resolution A/65/L.34
(resolution 65/127).

was

adopted

The Acting President: We shall now turn to draft
resolution A/65/L.35, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department of General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the introduction of draft
resolution A/65/L.35, the following countries have

10-68853

A/65/PV.64

become sponsors: Israel, Montenegro, Portugal and the
United States of America.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/65/L.35?
Draft resolution A/65/L.35
(resolution 65/128).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/65/L.40, as orally corrected, is entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Economic
Cooperation Organization”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the introduction of draft
resolution A/65/L.40, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
become a sponsor.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/65/L.40,
as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/65/L.40, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 65/129).

Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department of General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the introduction of draft
resolution A/65/L.41, the following countries have
become sponsors: Armenia, Austria, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Greece,
Israel, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Poland, Portugal, Serbia
and Slovakia.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/65/L.41?
Draft resolution A/65/L.41
(resolution 65/130).

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-items (d), (f), (h), (j) (k), (m), (o),
(u) and (v) of agenda item 122?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Before adjourning the
meeting, I would like to appeal to those Member States
intending to submit draft resolutions on the remaining
sub-items to do so as soon as possible.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

The Acting President: We shall now turn to draft
resolution A/65/L.41, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Council of Europe”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

10-68853

7
