UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/276
4 April 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 3 APRIL 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I refer to my predecessor's report of 19 November 1996 on the United
Nations Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) in the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia (S/1996/961) and to Security Council resolution 1082 (1996) of
27 November 1996 on the same subject.
In his report, my predecessor pointed out that the current mandate of
UNPREDEP in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is of a preventive nature,
aimed at enabling the country to weather a turbulent and hazardous period. The
role of UNPREDEP - previously a part of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) - under Security Council resolution 795 (1992) was to establish a
United Nations presence on the border of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia with Albania and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, with a view to
monitoring and reporting developments in those areas that could undermine
confidence and stability in the country or threaten its territory. It was
intended that such a presence would also deter threats from any source and help
prevent the possibility of clashes between external elements and the country's
forces.
As members of the Council will recall, my predecessor also noted in his
report that peace and stability in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
were intimately linked to the overall situation in the region. However, recent
developments had made the original purpose of deploying a United Nations
mission - to prevent conflicts elsewhere in the former Yugoslavia from spilling
over to that country - more remote. The relative tranquillity in the area and
the desire to achieve economies in peacekeeping operations therefore led my
predecessor to recommend a phased reduction of the military component of
UNPREDEP by 300 all ranks by 1 April 1997. The Security Council endorsed that
recommendation in resolution 1082 (1996) and decided that the proposed reduction
should be effected by 30 April 1997.
Recent developments in Albania and the resulting situation of lawlessness
and banditry in certain parts of that country have demonstrated that stability
in the Balkan region remains extremely fragile. The Security Council, in its
Presidential statement of 13 March 1997 (S/PRST/1997/14) and in its resolution
1101 (1997) of 28 March 1997, has expressed its deep concern over this
deteriorating situation, stressed the importance of regional stability and, in
97-09029 (E)

040497

/...

S/1997/276
English
Page 2

this context, expressed its full support for the diplomatic efforts of the
international community to find a peaceful solution to the crisis.
While there appears to be no imminent danger of the problems in Albania
spilling over to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the current crisis
is a source of great anxiety in that country. As members of the Security
Council are aware, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, in a letter addressed to me on 7 March 1997 (S/1997/205),
has underlined the seriousness of the situation and requested that the reduction
of the UNPREDEP military component be suspended. The volatility of the
situation has also caused both my Special Representative and the Force Commander
of UNPREDEP to convey to me their concern about the timing of the downsizing of
the Force.
As the Council was informed, UNPREDEP began the mandated reduction of its
military component at the end of March when it started the process of
dismantling its observation posts along the borders with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Albania. Although this did not affect the number of patrols or
the effectiveness of UNPREDEP's monitoring activities, the commencement of the
closure of the observation posts, which coincided with the crisis in Albania,
was misperceived and resulted in immediate criticism of UNPREDEP in the local
press. Considering the situation in the region, my Special Representative and
the Force Commander, with my agreement, have temporarily suspended the drawdown
of the military component. However, in order to meet the 30 April deadline for
the mandated reduction in force levels, UNPREDEP will be required to resume the
drawdown in the coming days.
UNPREDEP has considered the possibility of concentrating the drawdown on
the border between the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. However, there is a clear possibility that reducing
UNPREDEP's strength on the northern border at this sensitive time might have
negative repercussions. This would be particularly true if the situation in
Albania continued to deteriorate, with possible effects on minority Albanianspeaking populations throughout the region.
UNPREDEP has, to date, been a most successful mission. However, proceeding
with the planned reduction during a period when further regional instability
continues to be a possibility could put at risk the credibility of the
international community's first serious effort at preventive deployment. In the
light of the above, and on the basis of the advice of my Special Representative,
I recommend that the Security Council approve the suspension of the reduction of
the UNPREDEP military component until the end of the current mandate on
31 May 1997.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
