S/2000/413

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 May 2000
Original: English

Security Council special mission visit to Eritrea and
Ethiopia, 9 and 10 May 2000
I. Introduction
1.
By his letter dated 7 May 2000 (S/2000/392), the
President of the Security Council informed the
Secretary-General that the Council had decided to send
a special mission to Eritrea and Ethiopia. Accordingly,
the Council requested the Security Council mission
then in Kampala to proceed to Addis Ababa and
Asmara pursuant to this decision. The membership of
the special mission was as follows:
United States of America (Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke — Head of Mission)
France (Ambassador Jean-David Levitte)
Mali (Ambassador Moctar Ouane)
Namibia (Ambassador Martin Andjaba)
The Netherlands (Ambassador A. Peter
van Walsum)
Tunisia (Ambassador Saïd Ben Mustapha)
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland (Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock)
2.
The terms of reference of the mission are annexed
to S/2000/392.

II. Activities of the special mission
3.
The Security Council ambassadors left Kampala
on 8 May for Addis Ababa, where they met that
evening with Prime Minister Meles Zenawi. After
being informed of the terms of reference of the special
mission, Prime Minister Meles set out at length his
Government’s position with regard to the suspension of
the proximity talks at Algiers, as well as providing a
detailed account of the situation between Ethiopia and
Eritrea. In particular, Prime Minister Meles described
00-42651 (E) 110500
`````````

the course of the talks as conducted by the facilitators
and the points of contention that remained to be
resolved. In this connection, the Prime Minister
outlined his Government’s posture regarding the
Framework Agreement for a Peaceful Settlement of the
Dispute between Eritrea and Ethiopia (S/1998/1223,
annex) developed by the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), the modalities for its Implementation
(S/1999/794, annex III) and the technical arrangements
proposed to put them into effect.
4.
The following day, 9 May, after an early morning
breakfast with representatives of OAU and the chargé
d’affaires of the Government of Algeria, the special
mission proceeded to Asmara, where it met with
President Isaias Afwerki. President Afwerki in turn
explained to the mission the views of his Government
of the current situation and its position on the
documents in question.
5.
Returning to Addis Ababa the same evening, the
special mission met again with Prime Minister Meles
to clarify the precise position of his Government with
regard to the Framework Agreement and the modalities
for its Implementation.
6.
That night, the special mission met with the
Assistant Secretary-General of OAU, Saïd Djinnit, and
other OAU officials to seek their views on their
situation and their interpretation of wording in the
OAU documents. Secretary-General Djinnit stressed
that only the French text of the documents concerned
was authentic. This raised a possible difference in
meaning concerning the phrase “consolidated technical
arrangements”, which in English is preceded in most
instances by the word “the”, but in French by the word
“des”.

S/2000/413

7.
On 10 May, the special mission returned to
Asmara, where they sought the views of President
Afwerki on a draft text elaborated overnight by its
members. Following further discussion, the text was
conveyed to Prime Minister Meles in Addis Ababa for
his views.

journey to Ethiopia and Eritrea thus turned into
something of a textual negotiation, with each side
seeking wording which favoured its position. The
mission, however, stressed that any Security Council
resolution would be the sole responsibility of the full
Security Council and that the mission would only seek
the views of the two sides, not be bound by them.

III. Observations

12. In the course of these exchanges, the special
mission’s understanding of the complexities of the
problem grew, as did its appreciation of the frankness
and clarity of the policy presentations by Prime
Minister Meles and President Afwerki. The members
of the mission made it repeatedly clear that they would
not enter into the substance of the OAU texts, nor
substitute for the OAU process, but that the two leaders
had to understand that, as seen from the outside, the
differences between them on the territorial issue in
itself did not warrant a return to fighting.

8.
The OAU negotiations have produced, over time,
a substantial corpus of agreements and drafts on a
ceasefire, withdrawal, interim arrangements and
arbitration and final demarcation of the disputed
territory between Eritrea and Ethiopia. The final
elements to be put in place in the technical
arrangements are a very small proportion of the whole.
OAU is to be congratulated on its accumulated
achievement. The differences between the two sides,
while real, are clearly, in the view of the mission,
relatively small and manageable and could be resolved
by intensive negotiations over time.
9.
Nevertheless, the two sides are on the verge of
resuming a senseless war over these differences. The
war, which could resume at any time, would not only
cause enormous numbers of casualties on both sides,
but would greatly add to deaths from famine, as the
war would divert much-needed transportation from
famine relief. This, in fact, has already happened, to
the utter disgrace of all concerned. Meanwhile,
Ethiopia accuses Eritrea of stringing out negotiations to
avoid redressing its offensive of May 1998; Eritrea
accuses Ethiopia of actively holding to the option of
resuming the conflict while negotiations continue.
10. The special mission concentrated therefore on
creating a mechanism to get past this blockage without
going inside the “box” of the details of the OAU
negotiations. The renewal of conflict would be such a
catastrophic step in the circumstances of the two
nations that the mission felt that there had to be strong
motives for avoiding it. The members of the mission
were, therefore, disappointed to find that such large
scope for further fighting still remained, but decided to
test various mechanisms to encourage the resumption
of talks.
11. The mechanism eventually agreed upon took the
form of a draft Security Council resolution calling for
proximity talks to resume at the invitation of OAU (see
annex). OAU was consulted and agreed. The double

2

13. At the time of the finalization of the present
report, the special mission did not know whether the
Security Council would adopt a resolution, whether the
parties would both decide to resume early discussions
or whether renewed conflict can be avoided. The
members of the mission tended to a pessimistic view
on the last point. It was nevertheless right from every
perspective, moral, political, strategic, and from the
standpoint of the interests and role of the Security
Council, that the mission to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo was extended to include Addis Ababa and
Asmara. Any diplomatic effort, even if it is not
successful, is worthwhile when the consequences of
war for the peoples of the two nations would be so
disastrous.
14. The members of the special mission wish to
express their appreciation to Prime Minister Meles
Zenawi and President Isaias Afwerki for their
hospitality and for the frankness with which they
responded to our questions and comments. The mission
also expresses its gratitude to the resident coordinators
of the United Nations Development Programme and
their staff for ensuring all the necessary logistical
support, despite very short notice. Finally, the members
are happy to acknowledge, with appreciation, the
indispensable services of Captain Khaled Bassiouny
and his crew of AMC Aviation, without whom it would
not have been possible to carry out their ambitious and
exhausting travel schedule across the African
continent.

S/2000/413

Annex
Draft Security Council resolution
Recalling its resolutions 1177 (1998) of 26 June 1998, 1226 (1999) of
29 January 1999 and 1227 (1999) of 10 February 1999,
Recalling also the acceptance by the Governments of Eritrea (S/1999/215) and
Ethiopia (S/1998/1223) of the Framework Agreement for a Peaceful Settlement of
the Dispute between Eritrea and Ethiopia (S/1998/1223, annex), as approved by the
Central Organ Summit of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, held on 17 and 18 December 1998,
Recalling further the acceptance by the Governments of Eritrea (S/1999/794)
and Ethiopia (S/1999/789) of the Modalities for the Implementation of the OAU
Framework Agreement on the Settlement of the Dispute between Ethiopia and
Eritrea (S/1999/794, annex III), as endorsed by the thirty-fifth Conference of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, held in Algiers from
12 to 14 July 1999,
Noting the commitment of both parties to the delimitation and demarcation of
their common border,
Emphasizing the obligation of both parties to find a peaceful resolution of their
dispute in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the commitment of all Member States to the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Eritrea and Ethiopia,
Expressing deep concern at the continued mobilization of the military forces of
the respective parties and the potential for renewed conflict between them,
Noting that the proximity talks, held in Algiers from 29 April to 5 May 2000,
were intended to assist the two parties to arrive at final agreement of consolidated
and detailed technical arrangements acceptable to both sides, which would lead to
the peaceful resolution of the conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia,
Noting also that the communiqué on the proximity talks issued by the Office of
the Chairman of OAU on 5 May 2000 (S/2000/394) sets out the areas of
convergence already recorded between the two parties,
Noting the unanimous conclusion of its special mission to Africa, after
extensive talks with the leaders of the Governments of Eritrea and Ethiopia, that
both Governments have confirmed their acceptance of, and are committed to, the
Framework Agreement and the Modalities of its implementation, as previously
communicated to OAU and to the Security Council,
Convinced of the need for further and immediate diplomatic efforts,
Stressing that the conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia constitutes a threat to
international peace and security and that renewed hostilities would constitute an
even greater threat to the stability, security and economic development of the
subregion,

3

S/2000/413

Endorses the Framework Agreement for a Peaceful Settlement of the
1.
Dispute between Eritrea and Ethiopia and the Modalities for its Implementation as
the basis for the peaceful resolution of the dispute between the two parties;
Also endorses the communiqué of 5 May 2000 issued by the current
2.
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity (S/2000/394);
Welcomes, and attaches high importance to, the acceptance by the
3.
Governments of Eritrea and Ethiopia, reaffirmed by their leaders directly to the
Security Council special mission to Africa on 9 and 10 May 2000, of the OAU
Framework Agreement and the Modalities for its Implementation;
Urges the earliest possible reconvening, without preconditions, of
4.
proximity talks involving substantive discussions on the basis of the Framework
Agreement and Modalities for its Implementation and of the work conducted by
OAU as recorded in its communiqué of 5 May, to arrive at consolidated technical
arrangements to give practical effect to the Framework Agreement and Modalities;
Welcomes the statements of both leaders, made directly to the Security
5.
Council special mission, that they will resume proximity talks without
preconditions, on the basis set out in paragraph 4 above, at the invitation of the
Chairman of OAU, under the auspices of OAU;
Reaffirms its full support for the continuing OAU peace process and the
6.
efforts of the Organization of African Unity, of Algeria, its current Chairman, and of
other interested parties to mediate a peaceful resolution of the dispute, and resolves
to assist the OAU process of proximity talks between the two Governments, as
requested by OAU;
Insists that both parties implement their commitment to refrain from the
7.
use of force, as is consistent with their acceptance of the provisions of the OAU
Framework Agreement and Modalities for its Implementation and with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
Also insists that both parties implement their commitment to return to
8.
positions held prior to 6 May 1998, consistent with the sequence laid out in the
Modalities for Implementation accepted by both parties;
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council on all aspects of
9.
the implementation of the present resolution within 30 days;
10.

4

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
