United Nations

S/PV.6547

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6547th meeting
Tuesday, 7 June 2011, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bongo Ondimba . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Juppé
Mr. Berger
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Jonathan
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Motlanthe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Impact of HIV/AIDS epidemic on international peace and security
Letter dated 6 June 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Gabon to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/340)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-36541 (E)

*1136541*

S/PV.6547

which had just ended a term on the Council, had
supported its preparation. Resolution 1308 (2000)
underscored the threat posed by the disease to the staff
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. Conflicts
expose the issue of sexual violence that some
combatants use as a weapon of war and that is a
compounding factor.

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Impact of HIV/AIDS epidemic on international
peace and security
Letter dated 6 June 2011 from the Permanent
Representative of Gabon to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/340)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Michel Sidibé, Executive
Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS, to participate in this meeting.
It is so decided.
I wish to welcome warmly the Secretary-General,
the President of Nigeria, the Deputy President of South
Africa and the other distinguished guests who are
participating in today’s meeting. Their presence is an
indication of the importance of the issue to be
discussed.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/341, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Bosnia and Herzegovina,
France, Gabon, Germany, Nigeria, Portugal, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
I also draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2011/340, which contains a letter dated
6 June 2011 from the Permanent Representative of
Gabon addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
a concept paper on the item under consideration.
The HIV/AIDS pandemic, which affects all
persons without discrimination, has deprived several
countries of the human resources crucial to their
development. The instability and armed conflicts that
are rife in Africa in particular have brought to light the
impact of HIV/AIDS on international security.
It will be recalled that on 17 July 2000, the
Security Council, at the initiative of the United States
of America, adopted resolution 1308 (2000). Gabon,

2

The debate that brings us together today is
intended to consider the progress made since the
adoption of resolution 1308 (2000). We must thus go
further by adopting measures to protect civilian
populations from such violence. The draft resolution
submitted by my delegation and co-sponsored by
Bosnia and Herzegovina, France, Germany, Nigeria,
Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America is
part of that approach, and I thank the Council and those
delegations for their support.
I will now make a statement in my national
capacity.
As we know, starting tomorrow, the General
Assembly
will
hold
a
high-level
meeting
commemorating the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS
(General Assembly resolution S-26/2). Also 10 years
ago, the Security Council took an historic step in
adopting resolution 1308 (2000), on the impact of
HIV/AIDS on international peace and security.
It seemed to us timely for the Council to
reconsider the issue in the light of the developing
dynamic of the current crises and conflicts and the
peacebuilding process. Here, we should commend the
commitment of the United States, which enabled the
Council to adopt resolution 1308 (2000).
Since then, thanks to the efforts made
individually or jointly by the troop-contributing
countries, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS, progress has been made in training the
civilian and military staff of United Nations missions
prior to their deployment to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions.
That concern is now fully taken into account in
those missions. That positive development is reflected
in the implementation of prevention programmes; joint
actions between mission staff and the security forces
and local communities in the countries involved; a

11-36541

S/PV.6547

greater awareness among mission personnel of their
individual and collective criminal accountability; and
the establishment of codes of good conduct for mission
staff and personnel on the ground.
Today’s meeting offers us the opportunity to take
stock of future challenges as the HIV/AIDS pandemic
remains an obstacle to the development of our
countries and a threat to collective security. New
factors continue to influence the dynamics of crises,
conflicts and peacebuilding processes. That is
particularly true in sub-Saharan Africa.
Our first concern arises from the borderline and
regional nature of conflicts. In almost all cases, crises
unleash population movements and thereby increase
the risk of spreading HIV/AIDS among displaced
persons and refugees, who frequently have no access to
health services during their migrations. Such risks are
particularly apparent in the post-conflict phase.
For some years now, Gabon has hosted numerous
refugees from conflict countries and can testify to the
effects of such migratory movements on the stability
and security of the host country. Indeed, sexual
violence is frequently used as a weapon of war, with
disastrous consequences. Given the established link
between sexual violence and HIV/AIDS in conflict and
post-conflict
situations,
civil
populations —
particularly women and girls — are the first to be
exposed.
I should like here to make certain
recommendations. In the light of the compounding
factors that I have enumerated, I invite the Council to
continue to consider the issue of the impact of
HIV/AIDS on international peace and security.
With respect to sexual violence, I stress the
importance of continuing to implement resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010), given that
the need to counter such violence, particularly towards
women and children, is an important aspect of the
processes involved in resolving conflicts and building
peace. Such action allows their full involvement in
these processes. To that end, it is desirable to create
synergy between policies to combat HIV/AIDS and
strategies to prevent sexual violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations. I take this opportunity to invite
the international financial institutions, in cooperation
with States, to mobilize further resources to build the
capacities of national health systems in order to ensure

11-36541

that persons who are infected with or affected by
HIV/AIDS enjoy adequate care and assistance.
On the ground, we must raise awareness of the
parties to conflict regarding conduct towards civilian
populations in armed conflicts that may exacerbate the
spread of HIV/AIDS. It is also important to ensure the
operationality of the HIV/AIDS prevention and
treatment component in security sector reform
activities and in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration mechanisms at the post-conflict stage.
Finally, we must also strengthen programmes to
combat HIV/AIDS in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
missions, and continue to ensure the effectiveness of
zero tolerance measures.
We hope that the draft resolution to be adopted
shortly will reflect the Council’s commitment to
making a complementary and decisive contribution to
global efforts to combat HIV/AIDS. The human
security of present and future generations will depend
on our collective ability permanently to remove the
threat inherent in the pandemic.
I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Gabon, Germany, India,
Lebanon, Nigeria, Portugal, Russian Federation,
South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and United States of
America.
The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1983 (2011).
I now invite the Secretary-General,
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.

His

The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
thank President Ali Bongo Ondimba for having
convened this important meeting. I greatly appreciate
Gabon’s leadership in submitting the vital resolution
1983 (2011), which has just been adopted. Now is the
time for bold action.

3

S/PV.6547

More than 10 years ago, then United States
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke pushed for the first
discussion of HIV and AIDS in the Council Chamber.
Ambassador Holbrooke was the consummate diplomat,
but he was determined to raise the issue of HIV and
AIDS even when it was undiplomatic. I commend the
initiative of President Ali Bongo Ondimba. I am glad,
that for the second time, the Security Council is
discussing this important issue in parallel with the
General Assembly.
We have come a long way since health issues
were first discussed in the Council. I have continued
with great regularity to bring AIDS to the Council’s
attention, particularly in my reports on sexual and
gender-based violence and in those that highlight the
important contributions of women to peace and
security.
Whenever AIDS is part of the equation, the
United Nations is working to be part of the solution.
That began in 2000, when resolution 1308 (2000) was
adopted. Today, the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and a number of Governments are
organizing training events for our Blue Helmets and
troops in different countries so that they can make a
difference.
(spoke in English)
Commitment starts at the top. I am raising this
issue directly with world leaders, and my senior aides
are equally passionate about our AIDS response. In
Timor-Leste, my former Special Representative
stepped up to test for HIV. The Deputy Special
Representative quickly followed. So did the United
Nations Police Commissioner, the Deputy Police
Commissioner and many others. They were getting
information on their health, setting an example and
countering fear, stigma and discrimination.
In Lebanon, our Force Commander organized an
event on prevention on World AIDS Day. Then and
there, a contingent commander decided to be tested.
Many of his troops were encouraged by his leadership.
They also volunteered. For our personnel,
predeployment HIV training is standard. We have
trained over 1,500 peacekeepers as peer counsellors. In
just five years, the number of Blue Helmets seeking
voluntary counselling and testing increased from fewer
than 2,000 to more than 14,000.

4

But we are not just helping our peacekeepers —
they work so that people recovering from war do not
also have to recover from disease. It is all part of the
broader mission that the Council entrusts to our troops:
to stop gender and sexual-based violence, to enhance
the role of women and to protect children. It is also
part of a broader international campaign, the Global
Strategy for Women’s and Children’s Health. In
conflict zones, refugee camps and anywhere people
fear for their lives, women, young people and children
are more vulnerable to contracting HIV.
Before resolution 1308 (2000) was adopted,
uniformed personnel were viewed in terms of the risk
they might pose to civilians. We now understand that
United Nations troops and police are part of
prevention, treatment and care. For example, we are
working in Côte d’Ivoire, which has the highest
prevalence of HIV in West Africa. The United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and United Nations cosponsors are training troops and police on HIV, human
rights and gender equality. They are also providing
technical support on HIV in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.
By making HIV prevention part of our DDR activities,
we can protect civilians from HIV. We can reduce
discrimination. And we can help former soldiers living
with HIV get the care and treatment they deserve.
We have to talk about sensitive issues when it
comes to HIV and AIDS. We must be frank about
where we are falling short. The Council has made
major strides in addressing sexual violence in conflict.
But rape is still a weapon of choice. This is an
atrocious human rights violation. It is a war crime. And
it is a public health threat. Women and girls are
extremely vulnerable as victims but, more than that,
they are agents of progress and change. I urge all
members to link efforts to combat HIV and AIDS with
our campaigns against sexual violence and for the
rights of women. That means addressing the dangerous
interaction between AIDS, the international drug trade,
sex trafficking and the abuse of women. This problem
is not getting the attention it deserves.
We also need action after the ink dries on
agreements and the guns fall silent. We need to help
shattered societies prevent the spread of HIV. And we
must provide treatment to everyone who needs it. We
can get the job done with our regional partners as long
as we involve civil society organizations — the

11-36541

S/PV.6547

activists, researchers and health workers who have
brought us so far.

repeatedly calling attention to AIDS in his reports to
the Security Council.

Today we are marking 30 years of our struggle
against AIDS. But let us focus on a different number:
zero. Let us get to no new infections, no discrimination
and no AIDS-related deaths. That is our goal.

Progress against HIV infection in people in
uniform has been positive, but it remains uneven and
insufficient. The risk that HIV poses to peace and
security is far more nuanced than we thought in 2000.
The nature of conflict and the epidemic itself have
evolved. We are convinced that the fresh political
commitments stemming from resolution 1983 (2011)
will enable the United Nations to effectively contribute
to the efforts of Member States to address the impact of
AIDS on peace and security. In so doing, Member
States will themselves be encouraged to strengthen
their response to AIDS in national strategic plans and
to put in place appropriate strategies, means and
resources.

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Michel Sidibé.
Mr. Sidibé (spoke in French): It is an honour and
privilege to be here today. I would like to thank the
Security Council for inviting me. I would especially
like to thank the President of the Republic of Gabon
and to commend him for his leadership in dramatically
scaling up the response to AIDS in his own country. On
behalf of the 30 million people who have died of
AIDS, I also wish to thank him for being here today.
His presence among us illustrates his personal
commitment to this cause and his ongoing efforts on
behalf of peace, security and stability throughout the
world.
I would also like to thank my friend Alain Le
Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for once again drawing the attention of the
Security Council to the critical relationship between
AIDS and international peace and security.
The global response to AIDS is at a crossroads.
The Security Council adopted resolution 1308 (2000)
more than 10 years ago, and the General Assembly
adopted the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS
in 2001. We have made significant progress since then,
providing HIV prevention, treatment, care and support
services to peacekeepers and other uniformed
personnel. But I remain deeply concerned by the ways
AIDS still intersects with conflict. AIDS affects not
only peacekeepers and others in uniform; it also has an
impact on the populations with whom they interact.
That is why resolution 1983 (2011), which has just
been adopted, is so important to us.
Resolution 1308 (2000) was a watershed moment
in the response to AIDS. We are indebted to the late
Richard Holbrooke for backing that resolution so
passionately. What he said then still holds true today,
namely, that it was not the end of the process, but just a
cornerstone for the future. Member States were right to
recognize AIDS as a potential threat to peace and
security. I want to thank the Secretary-General for

11-36541

Tragically, we have seen an increase in the use of
sexual violence as a weapon of war. This new
resolution is moving in the right direction in calling for
HIV prevention efforts among uniformed services to be
aligned with efforts to prevent sexual violence in
conflict.
The disproportionate burden of HIV on women is
a serious obstacle to their full participation in efforts to
prevent and resolve conflicts and in peacebuilding. It is
my hope that the new resolution will motivate all
parties concerned to better empower women and
strengthen the capacities of national health systems and
civil society networks in order to provide sustainable
assistance to women infected or affected by HIV in
conflict and post-conflict settings.
The response to AIDS has also changed
dramatically since the adoption of resolution 1308
(2000). Today we have the capacity to provide
treatment on a broad scale and to target prevention to
populations at highest risk of HIV infection. We have
seen that post-conflict and transition periods increase
the risk of HIV transmission and of sexual violence.
We know how to address both of those challenges. We
have made progress and must now scale up those
efforts. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
in close collaboration with UNAIDS, wishes to work
with Member States on disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and on security sector reform. That
will allow countries to benefit from peacekeepers who
are stronger, healthy and fit for even the most difficult
peacekeeping missions.

5

S/PV.6547

(spoke in English)
Since the adoption of resolution 1308 (2000), we
have come to understand that peacekeepers and the
millions of people in uniform can play a leading role in
HIV issues, as they secure peace around the world.
Their extensive contacts with populations in conflict,
post-conflict and other settings position them as agents
of positive change, particularly with respect to
preventing violence against women and girls in
conflict.
I hope this new resolution will reinvigorate
global and regional partnerships that are working to
prevent conflict, ensure security and build peace. These
partnerships can ensure that the United Nations
contributes to building government and civil society
capacities of Member States. There are symbiotic
actions in the General Assembly to ensure that this
happens. We are acutely aware that global, national and
personal insecurity will undermine our efforts to
achieve universal access to HIV/AIDS prevention,
treatment, care and support. This new resolution is key
to realizing exactly what the Secretary-General just
mentioned: zero new HIV infections, zero
discrimination and zero AIDS-related deaths.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Sidibé for his briefing. I now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
(spoke in English)
I would now like to invite His Excellency
Mr. Goodluck Ebele Jonathan, President of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria, to take the floor.
President Jonathan: I would like to express
Nigeria’s appreciation to you personally, Mr. President,
and to the Government of Gabon for this valuable and
timely initiative. The theme for today’s debate is well
conceived and should afford the Security Council the
opportunity to examine, within its mandate, the
inextricable linkage between international peace,
security and development. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
insightful briefing and commitment to fight the
HIV/AIDS epidemic. Let me also thank Mr. Michel
Sidibé for his comprehensive statement that we have
just heard.
Our deliberation here today is a declaration of
solidarity with the high-level meeting on HIV and
AIDS that will begin here in New York tomorrow. It is

6

also a demonstration of the Security Council’s
commitment to an issue that is pivotal to the
development and security of Africa in particular and of
the world since the adoption of resolution 1308 (2000)
by the Council in the year 2000.
As the largest contributor to peacekeeping in
Africa and the fourth largest in the world, Nigeria has a
major stake not only in ensuring that our armed forces
are protected against HIV and AIDS but that they are
also given adequate treatment. We remain fully
committed to ensuring that HIV and AIDS prevention,
treatment and care are integrated into the health
services of the country’s armed forces.
In our subregion we have taken stringent steps
towards that objective. For example, the Economic
Community of West African States subregional
Transport Corridor project — which encompasses
Benin, Togo, Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire — is designed
to halt and reverse the spread of HIV and AIDS among
various
populations,
including
military
and
paramilitary. We are committed to sustaining the
momentum and indeed ensuring that we increase our
level of engagement with the security services in these
countries to reduce the impact of HIV and AIDS in the
region.
We note with concern the consequences of
gender-based violence related to HIV and AIDS,
especially in conflict situations, as expounded by the
Secretary-General and Mr. Sidibé. Nigeria joins the
international community in ensuring that women and
girls in conflict situations are adequately protected. A
significant challenge, however, is the absence of
formal modes of operations in the many
unconventional military compositions, such as militias.
That makes it difficult to mainstream HIV programmes
into those operations and to evaluate progress. For that
reason, among others, we welcome the inclusion of an
awareness programme in the mandates of all United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
Thirty years since the beginning of the AIDS
pandemic, the time is ripe for a final solution. I
reiterate Nigeria’s unequivocal support for a global
response to this scourge. As the Secretary-General
recognized in his statement, the prevention imperative
is upon us. The human, social and economic costs of
inaction are too great to contemplate. As a
consequence, it is incumbent upon the Security Council
to set clear, decisive goals so that our efforts to

11-36541

S/PV.6547

maintain peace can add to the armoury of weapons
against HIV/AIDS. I pledge my nation’s full support in
this endeavour.
The President: I thank President Goodluck
Jonathan for his statement.
I would now like to invite His Excellency
Mr. Kgalema Motlanthe, Deputy President of South
Africa, to take the floor.
Mr. Motlanthe: At the outset, I must extend my
appreciation to His Excellency President Ali Bongo
Ondimba of Gabon for convening this meeting. I would
also like to express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, as
well as to Mr. Michel Sidibé, Executive Director of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS).
Through your leadership, Mr. President, you have
placed before us today an issue of critical global
concern — the impact of HIV and AIDS on the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Tomorrow, the collective United Nations membership
in the General Assembly will speak as one voice in
assessing progress made and chart a global response to
HIV and AIDS in general. Be assured, Mr. President, of
my delegation’s support and commitment to playing
our role in dealing with the critical matters before us.
Although we are faced with such a daunting
challenge, it is also fair to acknowledge the significant
progress that the global community has made in
addressing the HIV and AIDS epidemic. A substantial
level of resources has been contributed to the research
community on various fronts. Notable advances have
been made by the pharmaceutical industry in the
research and development of drugs, resulting in
millions of lives being saved or prolonged. Moreover,
Governments have committed themselves to addressing
the epidemic in earnest.
However, we must face the fact that all these
efforts have yet to turn the tide of this epidemic. Three
decades on, the rate of new infections still outpaces
treatment intervention, thereby compelling us to do
more. In this connection, the shortage of financial
resources remains a challenge for many developing
countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa. We would
therefore like to encourage our donor partners to
continue to fulfil their financial commitments made in
various international forums.

11-36541

We also share the view that no efforts should be
spared in arresting the massive loss of lives affecting
all sectors of society. It is imperative for the United
Nations system to continue to pursue this objective in
earnest. In this regard, the Security Council could also
play a role in an integrated manner within the ambit of
its mandate of maintaining international peace and
security.
We applaud all innovative and collaborative
efforts, such as those employed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and UNAIDS in addressing
the epidemic in conflict areas.
We are mindful of the Charter obligations of the
Security Council. In this context, my delegation views
vulnerability as a key concern in the relationship
between HIV and AIDS, and peace and security. The
infrastructure, health services and social structures that
traditionally provide support for communities are
invariably destroyed in areas of conflict, instability and
violence. These conditions increase exposure to illhealth and, consequently, the risk of acquisition and
transmission of HIV. These conditions disrupt access to
basic amenities and haemorrhage fragile public and
health systems. In general, women and children bear
the brunt of these vulnerabilities, and even more so in
the context of conflict and displacement.
The United Nations would be well placed to
assist countries affected by conflict through
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. In the short
term, qualitative United Nations peacekeeping
interventions should focus on achieving immediate
gains that would mitigate the harmful effects of the
epidemic. Decisive action to reduce and prevent
conflict-related sexual violence could be a critical
intervention in an integrated United Nations strategy.
In the medium to long term, such interventions could
take on a much more focused approach. An integrated
global response combined with resources and expertise
can help countries that require assistance to develop
strategies for preventing HIV infections, especially
among women and children.
Assistance for accessing universal health care by
improving the health sector, strengthening health
systems and devising roll-out strategies for antiretroviral therapies is an area to which United Nationsled global action can add value in reconstructing postconflict societies.

7

S/PV.6547

Joint outreach activities to conflict-affected
communities by peacekeeping missions, enhanced
political cooperation between the leadership of the host
country and local United Nations leadership, and closer
coordination with local law enforcement and health
agencies could contribute substantially towards critical
prevention measures at the local level to contain the
spread of HIV and AIDS.
Peacebuilding efforts need to incorporate
strategies that address the context-specific needs of
effected communities, which may include new and
prolonged conflicts, post-conflict situations, refugee
camps with people in transit, stable environments, the
needs of armed personnel, humanitarian workers and,
most important, women and children. These
interventions require a vision and commitment that are
supported by long-term investment by countries
emerging from conflict, with the support of the
international community. These must be based on the
principles we all embrace: respect for human rights, the
right to dignity, safety and respect.
Through your leadership, Mr. President, the
Council has added its voice to renew global efforts in
combating HIV and AIDS. The resolution that you
placed before us builds on previous efforts by the
Council. Such efforts highlight the specific
contribution that the Security Council can make in
containing the spread of HIV and AIDS within this
defined mandate. These mutually supportive and
complementary efforts by the United Nations system
are a further reaffirmation of our collective
responsibility to combat HIV and AIDS.
The President: I thank the Deputy President of
South Africa for his statement.
(spoke in French)
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Alain
Juppé, Minister for Foreign Affairs of France.
Mr. Juppé (France) (spoke in French): Just
before the high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on HIV and AIDS opens tomorrow, I would like to
thank President Bongo Ondimba for the initiative to
hold a debate on this topic, which is too often
overlooked or neglected.
In 30 years, AIDS has killed some 30 million
people and orphaned more than 16 million children.
The Second World War is the only conflict to have
claimed more victims and caused greater suffering. The

8

international community is fully mobilized to fight this
scourge. Eleven years ago, in resolution 1308 (2000),
the Security Council recognized the pandemic as a
threat to international peace and security for the first
time. Since then, every time we have addressed the
subject of AIDS, we have stressed the terrible
consequences of the illness, which are not only social
and human, but also economic. We have shed light on
the obstacles it poses to countries attempting to recover
from conflict, especially because it primarily affects
women and girls, who play a fundamental role in
rebuilding any society.
Given
this
threat,
several
international
instruments have been established, in particular in the
framework of the United Nations system. These
include the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV
and AIDS (UNAIDS), whose Executive Director,
Michel Sidibé, I welcome here today; the Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria; and the
International Drug Purchase Facility (UNITAID),
which is based on a French initiative and receives
innovative financing. I would like to commend the
work carried out by these different bodies on a daily
basis.
This joint commitment has not been in vain. The
numbers of deaths and new infections have been cut by
20 per cent in 10 years. Moreover, the increase in
funding for programmes to fight HIV and AIDS and for
the development of generic medications have allowed 6
million people in low- and middle-income countries to
begin treatment. Finally, mother-to-child transmission
prevention activities have opened the way for a
generation to be born free of HIV. These positive
results should encourage us to redouble our efforts.
Thirty-four million people are living with the
disease today; seven million are infected every day.
Every year, with almost 300,000 babies being born
with the virus and with two people infected for every
one that is placed under treatment, the epidemic
continues to be one length ahead of us. It is still the
most disadvantaged countries that pay the heaviest
price — I am thinking in particular of the African
continent, which represents 36 per cent of the people
who are infected and 72 per cent of deaths associated
with AIDS.
We must therefore do more. That is the meaning
of the resolution we have adopted today (resolution
1983 (2011)). It is the meaning of the campaign “Be

11-36541

S/PV.6547

Born without HIV” that was launched in Paris in May
2010 by Global Fund Ambassador Mrs. Carla Bruni
Sarkozy. It is in this spirit that France, the second
largest global contributor, increased by 20 per cent its
contributions to the Global Fund for 2011-2013, which
is a commitment of almost €1 billion. Over the same
period, we will devote almost €300 million to
UNITAID. That is also the reason that, during the last
summit in Deauville, the Group of Eight reiterated its
commitment to support the Global Fund and reaffirmed
its determination to improve maternal health to fight
against mother-to-child virus transmission.
In this context, the Security Council has a
particular responsibility — first of all, to act on the
factors of the spread of the disease, in particular, sex
abuse. Since the adoption of resolution 1308 (2000),
the Security Council has been fighting against all
forms of sexual violence against women and children,
which involves a zero-tolerance policy, and has made
every effort so that impeccable discipline is maintained
within the ranks of the Blue Helmets and the United
Nations civilian staff in peacekeeping missions.
There is also the responsibility to take into
account the challenges of HIV/AIDS during postconflict and reconstruction phases, including with
respect to the management of the displacement of
populations.
Finally, there is the responsibility to encourage
and assist in the development of national strategies to
fight AIDS on the basis of the values and commitments
propagated by the United Nations — respect for human
rights, the decriminalization of homosexuality,
attention to vulnerable populations and fighting against
stigmatization and discrimination against persons
living with HIV.
In spite of all of our efforts, the AIDS pandemic
is a growing human and social cost, particularly for the
poorest and weakest countries. Therefore, today more
than ever, AIDS is a threat to international peace and
security. Let us spare no efforts. Like the SecretaryGeneral, France shares the view of a world without
new infections, without discrimination and without
deaths associated with AIDS. That is an enormous
challenge, but it is a challenge in the service of peace.
It is a challenge for all of us.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France for his
statement.

11-36541

Ms. Rice (United States of America): We are
grateful for your personal leadership, Mr. President, in
the fight against HIV/AIDS. I also thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his laudable leadership and
Executive Director Sidibé of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS and his team for
coordinating the massive global response.
I want to acknowledge that we have with us, as
part of the United States delegation, President Obama’s
Global AIDS Coordinator, Ambassador Eric Goosby,
who is directing the United States global response to
the epidemic.
Just over a decade ago, thanks to the visionary
leadership of Vice-President Al Gore and of my
predecessor, the late Richard Holbrooke, the Security
Council took a monumental step. For the first time, it
addressed the threat that HIV/AIDS poses to
international peace and security. With this move, the
Council squarely joined the world’s fight against
HIV/AIDS and put the epidemic on the global security
agenda.
In the twenty-first century, in our interconnected
world, threats to peace and security stem not only from
traditional armed conflicts. They also derive from more
diffuse dangers that know no borders, including the
unchecked spread of lethal disease.
We are now entering the fourth decade of our
collective struggle against this global pandemic. But
the Security Council’s pledge to lessen the security
implications of HIV/AIDS must not lose any of its
urgency.
This scourge has spared no region or nation on
Earth, including my own. AIDS-related illnesses have
claimed more than 25 million lives, far more than the
death toll of any conflict during these past 30 years. In
all, more than 60 million people have been infected,
and 16 million children have been orphaned.
Two decades of often heroic international efforts
to extend the lives of those living with HIV/AIDS have
significantly alleviated the health effects of the disease,
but most people living with HIV still lack access to
treatment. For every person who starts treatment, two
more become infected.
Even beyond this unfathomable human toll, there
are very real security consequences of HIV/AIDS.
Consider first the toll on human security. It strains
communities, fractures families, reduces economic

9

S/PV.6547

productivity, drives people into poverty and pressures
health sectors that are often already struggling to cope.
But HIV/AIDS also has specific and complex
links to more traditional security threats. In the past 30
years, the patterns of HIV/AIDS transmission and
impact have evolved, and so has our knowledge about
the disease’s impact on security. We know that when
conflicts end, societies are more vulnerable to HIV, a
particularly cruel burden on vulnerable populations and
countries struggling to rebuild after conflicts. Such
States often find it especially difficult to ensure
continuity of HIV prevention and AIDS treatment
precisely when institutions are weak, capacities are low
and displaced populations are returning to their homes.
The toll may be especially pronounced at local
levels where the reach of public services is most
limited. So we need to be vigilant about the toll that
HIV/AIDS takes on capacity at all levels of
Government and redouble our efforts to provide
support.
Ten years ago we feared that AIDS incidence in
military forces would be higher than in the civilian
population and that peacekeepers would become a
vector of transmission of AIDS. One important reason
that such transmission has not occurred is the
widespread adoption of effective HIV policies by many
national uniformed services. For example, the military
in Senegal has conducted a programme of prevention,
care and treatment that has been embraced throughout
the ranks, from senior leaders to the junior-most
troops. The United States is proud to have partnered
with more than 70 militaries worldwide to develop
similar programmes, which have allowed nearly
3 million troops and family members to be tested and
counselled, and more than 80,000 family members to
participate in programmes to prevent mother-to-child
transmission of HIV/AIDS.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s
commitment to ensure that United Nations mission
commanders lead by example on HIV/AIDS awareness
and prevention among peacekeeping personnel,
including by promoting mandatory induction training,
peer education, voluntary and confidential counselling
and testing and providing male and female condoms
and post-exposure prophylaxis kits. We urge that these
efforts be robust and consistent across United Nations
missions and mission staff.

10

As the Secretary-General has rightly noted, “[t]he
HIV response faces a moment of truth” (A/65/797,
para. 4). On the one hand, we have witnessed
substantial progress. Global HIV/AIDS incidence has
been declining and treatment is expanding. In
sub-Saharan Africa, new anti-retroviral treatments have
saved hundreds of thousands of lives. We may also
stand at the cusp of a breakthrough, with the discovery
of a cutting-edge anti-retroviral treatment that could
help treat the disease in those living with HIV/AIDS
just as it serves to prevent them from transmitting the
virus. We can trace this progress to a surge in global
health financing and initiatives, a topic we will address
tomorrow in the General Assembly. The vast majority
of countries also explicitly acknowledge human rights
in their national AIDS strategies, and 92 per cent of
countries report that they have programmes to reduce
HIV-related stigma and discrimination.
Those are impressive achievements but far too
many people, especially the most vulnerable, still die
unnecessarily from a preventable disease. We still lack
resources globally to meet the worldwide demand for
prevention, treatment, care and support. The United
States remains a global leader in this area, through our
direct support for anti-retroviral treatments, our
increased support for mother-child health, our
capacity-building partnerships with other Member
States and our historic multi-year pledge of $4 billion
to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria. We are proud to have made the founding
pledge to the Global Fund and we remain today its
largest single donor.
In creating the President’ s Emergency Plan for
AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) in 2003, the United States took
another transformative step. PEPFAR is not just the
largest component of the United States Global Health
Initiative; it is the largest international response to a
single disease that any country has ever undertaken. In
conjunction with other efforts, it has transformed the
lives of millions of people living with HIV in the
developing world. But we cannot do it alone, and we
are not doing it alone. Other donor countries must step
up and do more. Affected countries must mobilize their
own resources to fight this scourge and ensure
treatment for their people.
In this regard, let me congratulate particularly the
Government of Gabon for the good news that it will
increase funding for HIV/AIDS programming by

11-36541

S/PV.6547

150 per cent. That generosity will help save lives, and
ultimately strengthen international peace and security.
We dare not be complacent. Our commitment to
fighting HIV is not just a moral imperative; it is also a
life-saving investment that bolsters security and
underpins prosperity. Today let us all honour the
commitments the Council made 11 years ago, not just
in our adoption today of resolution 1983 (2011) but by
redoubling our efforts to fight the global HIV/AIDS
pandemic. It is a challenge that can only be met by us
all together.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank and
congratulate you, Mr. President, for convening this
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) for their
participation in our discussion and for their
comprehensive briefings.
The impact of the HIV/AIDS epidemic on
international peace and security is an issue to which
Portugal attaches the utmost importance. Like others,
we believe that it is the responsibility of the Council to
increasingly address the new challenges that undermine
world peace, security and stability — be it the traffic in
drugs, people and guns; certain consequences of
climate change, from food security to loss of territory
and forced migration; development issues, as discussed
under the presidency of Brazil; or the subject we are
addressing today: enduring large scale epidemics as a
challenge to international security.
In this context, I wish also to mention
tuberculosis, which is so often associated with AIDS
and which kills hundreds of thousands every year. I
take this occasion to extend a warm welcome to the
Secretary-General’ s Special Envoy to Stop
Tuberculosis, President Jorge Sampaio, who has joined
us today. Allow me to commend UNAIDS and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) for
their progress report entitled “On the Front Line”, not
only for the clear picture it gives us of the progress
made in the implementation of resolution 1308 (2000)
but also for the recommendations it includes, which
provide us with a road map towards a more
comprehensive response to HIV and AIDS.
Over the past three decades, HIV and AIDS have
taken more than 25 million lives and infected
60 million people around the world. Not only has it
been a major threat to life and human health, but it has

11-36541

also seriously impacted the economic and social fabric
of many countries in different regions, putting at risk
their stability. Resolution 1308 (2000) was indeed a
milestone in the international response to the epidemic,
as it acknowledged its uniquely devastating impact on
all sectors and levels of society, and its threat, if
unchecked, to the stability and security of many
countries. Furthermore, it centred on the potential
damaging impact of HIV/AIDS on the health of
peacekeeping personnel, including support personnel,
and called for concrete measures and international
cooperation with the objective of better preparing them
for their participation in peacekeeping operations.
Unfortunately, we are still confronted today with
an increasing number of cases of sexual violence in the
context of conflict, at a time when conflicts are
themselves growing in number and intensity. When
combined with HIV/AIDS, such situations become
particularly explosive ones. Indeed, when those two
elements are brought together, they have the potential
to generate devastating consequences for whole regions
and States, striking the most vital elements of society:
their youth, and in particular women and children,
especially when rape is used as a weapon of war and
intimidation.
As we know, there is a high prevalence of HIV
among women who have been victims of sexual
violence. We cannot disregard this fact and its lasting
consequences when we address peacebuilding
strategies in post-conflict societies. Furthermore,
conflict normally fosters the displacement of civilians,
especially women and girls, increasing their exposure
to HIV. In this context, we believe there is a need to
implement effective integrated programmes that
address sexual violence, HIV prevention and AIDS
treatment in conflict and post-conflict settings.
Portugal commends the collaboration between
DPKO and UNAIDS in addressing HIV and AIDS
awareness among peacekeeping personnel, and
believes that the United Nations should take the lead in
setting the highest possible medical standards in
protecting both United Nations personnel and the local
population from this epidemic. In this regard, we
welcome the measures undertaken by DPKO aimed at
improving the awareness programmes for peacekeepers
and peacebuilders, and, in particular, having HIV and
AIDS advisers and focal points in United Nations
missions. We believe that DPKO and UNAIDS efforts
will have to be further complemented by ensuring that

11

S/PV.6547

the medical guidelines for operations are fully
implemented.
It is important that countries increasingly
harmonize predeployment and in-country awareness
programmes, as it is important to raise awareness of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding personnel of the
medical risks in the mission area, as well as their
capacity to deal with them. Likewise, the adoption of
the comprehensive strategy to eliminate sexual abuse
in the framework of United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations was a major step in the right
direction. I do not doubt that an effective response to
HIV and AIDS through the prevention of sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations will
greatly contribute to increasing the capacity of United
Nations missions in their tasks of protecting civilians
and furthering human rights.
(spoke in French)
World leaders will gather here in New York over
the next three days to evaluate the progress made since
the historic General Assembly special session on
HIV/AIDS held in 2001. In spite of all the positive
developments that we have seen in the global reduction
of the incidence of HIV and increased access to
treatment, we must recognize that the progress is still
rather fragile. It is up to the international community to
reflect on our experience and on the lessons that we
can and must learn, and to strengthen our efforts to
ensure that in 2015 universal access to prevention and
treatment are guaranteed. That will require a strong
political commitment, which is the way for us to
maintain the international response to HIV as a priority
and the only way for us to fulfil the Secretary-General’
s vision of a world free from new HIV infections, free
from discrimination and free from AIDS deaths.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Gabonese
delegation for bringing this issue to the Security
Council today. I also welcome the presence of the
President of Nigeria, the Deputy President of South
Africa and the Foreign Minister of France. I also want
to thank the Secretary-General and Michel Sidibé for
their informative briefings.
We warmly welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1983 (2011). This resolution and today’s
debate send a strong message that the HIV epidemic
still has a serious impact on international peace and
security. Taking action on HIV and AIDS remains a

12

key priority for the United Kingdom. We look forward
to agreeing on a strong statement of commitment at
this week’ s high-level meeting of the General
Assembly.
The United Kingdom welcomes the concerted
action taken across the United Nations system to
combat the HIV epidemic. We are committed to the
vision of a world with zero new HIV infections, zero
discrimination and zero AIDS-related deaths. In
support of our collective efforts to achieve targets set
out in the Millennium Development Goals, the United
Kingdom warmly welcomes the leadership and
guidance shown by the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS, including in its Outcome
Framework for 2009 to 2011.
In the past, the Security Council has focused on
minimizing the chances of transmission from United
Nations peacekeepers to local populations. We have
called for greater focus on implementing HIV and
AIDS awareness programmes within national
militaries. We have seen how Member States providing
troops to United Nations peacekeeping operations have
made concerted efforts in the past decade to provide
sufficient prevention, treatment, care and support to
their personnel. We should be proud of significant
improvements.
But we should also remain concerned at the high
number of fatalities and repatriations due to HIV and
AIDS-related illnesses among United Nations
peacekeepers deployed overseas. Today, United
Nations peacekeepers are more likely to die from
illness than from activities undertaken to fulfil their
mandate. We owe it to those men and women, who risk
their lives in the pursuit of international peace, to
understand why that should be the case, and then to do
something about it.
Tackling HIV and AIDS among peacekeeping
personnel is essential. But both peacekeepers and the
communities they are protecting are susceptible to HIV
and AIDS. As our understanding of the HIV epidemic
has developed, so we have together seen considerable
improvements in the methods we use to tackle it. We
used to fear that during the fog of war itself, the
unchecked spread of HIV and AIDS could have a
debilitating effect on peace and security. We now
understand that the risk of infection can be even
greater in communities emerging from violent conflict.

11-36541

S/PV.6547

United Nations peacekeeping operations, with
their military, police and civilian elements, are well
placed to engage with vulnerable communities that
have been affected by conflict in order to ensure that
the epidemic does not gain a foothold among them. We
believe that we should see United Nations
peacekeepers as positive agents for change in our
efforts to combat the spread of HIV and AIDS in postconflict societies.
We encourage peacekeeping operations to
incorporate HIV awareness in the execution of their
mandates. Such activities may involve awareness
training for demobilized combatants or HIV education
programmes pursued in tandem with initiatives to
combat sexual and gender-based violence. The United
Kingdom welcomes the outreach to local communities
already seen in a number of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Peacekeeping operations can
effect real change on the ground.
In recent months, we have discussed in this
Chamber ways to combat the disturbing incidence of
sexual violence used as a weapon against vulnerable
communities. We have heard how sexual exploitation
and abuse have the ability to prey on those parts of the
community that are most vital to longer-term peace and
stability. The risk of HIV infection and the burden that
the disease can place on the very fabric of local
communities are additional horrors from which those
communities require protection.
We have discussed at length whether the spread
of HIV and AIDS constitutes a threat to international
peace and security. The United Kingdom believes that
we have an obligation to such communities to consider,
from time to time, whether the Security Council has a
complementary contribution to make in our overall
efforts to combat the spread of HIV and AIDS. It is for
that reason that we thank you, Mr. President, for
bringing this important issue to the attention of the
Council today.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
having taken the initiative to hold today’ s very timely
meeting of the Security Council, on the eve of the
high-level meeting of the General Assembly, where
Member States will adopt a comprehensive political
declaration on the key areas for a global response to
the challenges of HIV/AIDS.

11-36541

Surmounting that complex threat requires
comprehensive and coordinated work by the entire
United Nations system. Of particular importance are
coherent actions and appropriate distribution of tasks
among the General Assembly, the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council, in accordance with
their prerogatives under the Charter. It is important that
the Security Council’ s actions in that area are
incorporated into system-wide efforts. The Council
should continue to focus on considering the issue of
fighting HIV/AIDS in the context of conflict and postconflict situations, including during United Nations
peacekeeping operations. That is where we see the real
added value of its contribution to the collective work
of the United Nations.
HIV/AIDS is not a source of conflicts, but
conflicts create conditions that contribute to the spread
of the epidemic and also complicate efforts to curb it.
Affected countries require appropriate and targeted
support from the United Nations. In that connection,
we welcome the coordination and cooperation between
the Secretariat’ s Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS. On the whole, we agree with their
approaches and assessments of priority areas for work.
Since the adoption of the milestone resolution
1308 (2000) of the Security Council, some progress
has been made. At the same time, the ongoing burden
of HIV/AIDS in countries where United Nations
peacekeeping operations are under way requires
continuous efforts to react to the challenges of the
epidemic.
Of particular importance is possible assistance
from peacekeepers in efforts by specialized
international bodies to prevent HIV/AIDS among the
civilian population, to overcome social alienation and
discrimination due to HIV/AIDS and to create and
build relevant national capacities, in cooperation with
national and local governmental bodies and the
population. We should look at ways to ensure the
continuity of measures begun in the framework of
peacekeeping
operations
during
longer-term
peacebuilding processes.
We favour additional efforts to reduce the risk of
HIV/AIDS for military and civilian staff of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. The idea of
introducing the posts of HIV/AIDS special advisers
and coordinators in peacekeeping operations deserves

13

S/PV.6547

to be studied. Also significant is working with troopand
police-contributing
countries
to
provide
appropriate preparation of personnel before the
deployment of missions and to improve relevant
national prevention policies and programmes targeting
uniformed personnel.
We must be aware that women and children
continue to be one of the most vulnerable categories in
the context of HIV, particularly in conflict and postconflict situations. They are frequently either
combatants or victims of sexual exploitation by parties
to conflict. The epidemic also negatively affects the
potential of women to participate in conflict prevention
and settlement. A whole range of Security Council
resolutions on women, peace and security have laid a
solid foundation for work in that area.
The United Nations Secretariat should take
appropriate steps to develop approaches and implement
measures for United Nations peacekeeping forces to
respond to HIV/AIDS. Moreover, the leadership of
United Nations missions should carry out practical
actions at the country level, in coordination with
United Nations funds, programmes and specialized
agencies, including the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Children’ s Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations
Population Fund.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that the
task of overcoming the global HIV/AIDS epidemic is a
priority for Russia. Our country actively participates in
international efforts in that area, including as a donor
to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria. We have contributed $317 million to the Fund.
In our view, the special role of the United Nations is to
mobilize, coordinate and implement a common
response to HIV/AIDS. Once again, we emphasize the
importance of coordinated actions by all parts of the
Organization in that area.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): We are deeply
honoured, Mr. President, by your presiding over the
Council at this debate. Please allow me to join other
delegations in welcoming you to New York. We would
also like express our appreciation for your delegation’s
efforts in organizing this debate and during the
negotiation of resolution 1983 (2011). My thanks are
also due to the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and to the Executive Director of the

14

Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), Mr. Michel Sidibé, for their statements.
HIV/AIDS is a scourge of our times. It has
caused untold misery affecting the lives of millions of
people across the globe, though some parts of the
world have been more adversely affected by HIV and
AIDS than others. It is a matter of some satisfaction
that since HIV became known, the efforts of the
international community and national Governments
have begun to show some positive progress in our
ability to tackle HIV and AIDS.
The need of the hour is to accelerate those efforts
and ensure that the international community is intense
in its support of national efforts. The lack of a firm
commitment to provide financial resources so that
developing countries may bolster their prevention and
treatment systems, including through capacitybuilding, and the high cost of medicines —
exacerbated by trade and intellectual property right
barriers for generics — require the international
community’s serious and immediate attention.
For our part, in India we have striven with all
determination to control and tackle the spread of HIV
and AIDS, with a massive national AIDS control
programme at the centre of our efforts. The targeted
intervention programme is buttressed with more broadbased awareness and educational programmes. In
addition, the involvement of communities and civil
society at all stages of policy has also provided a
necessary impetus in our success.
The latest statistics show an overall reduction in
adult HIV prevalence and new infections in India.
Adult HIV prevalence declined from 0.41 per cent in
2000 to 0.31 per cent in 2009. Moreover, the estimated
number of new HIV infections fell by more than 50 per
cent over the past decade, from 270,000 in 2000 to
120,000 in 2009. However, our disease burden in
absolute terms is high, at 2.27 million, and it is
estimated that nearly 172,000 people have died of
AIDS and related illnesses in India.
India’s contribution to the global fight against
HIV and AIDS has gone well beyond our national
boundaries. Dubbed “the pharmacy of the world”, our
pharmaceutical companies have been in the forefront in
ensuring a supply of and access to safe, effective,
affordable and good-quality generic antiretroviral
treatments for HIV and AIDS to other developing
countries in dire need of such medicines.

11-36541

S/PV.6547

The immense challenge posed by the spread of
HIV/AIDS has had across-the-board implications for
societies on the economic, social, legal and moral
fronts. It has weakened the ability of affected people
and societies to pursue progress in improving their
well-being.
With the highest prevalence rates and heaviest
disease burdens being in societies that have nothing to
do with conflict, HIV and AIDS have not created
conditions
of
instability
and
insecurity,
notwithstanding the apprehensions expressed in
resolution 1308 (2000). We must, however, recognize
the possibility that the epidemic may be fuelled in
situations of armed conflict and in post-conflict
situations, where there is also a lack of information and
credible data on the magnitude of HIV and AIDS. It is
critical that the United Nations response in the field in
such situations is cognizant of this fact. United Nations
mission leaders, be they civilian or military, should be
sensitive to this important global public health
challenge.
We welcome the incorporation of HIV-awareness
activities into the mandated activities of peacekeepers
and outreach projects for vulnerable communities.
Uniformed peacekeeping personnel can also be
effective agents of change in such missions. We also
strongly support the introduction of HIV and AIDS
preventive measures as part of the preparation and
discipline of peacekeeping forces. Well-informed
United Nations mission personnel in the field can make
a significant difference to the success of such
additional tasks assigned to them.
In that context, I would like to mention the
abhorrent and intolerable practice of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict, which can lead to the
spread of HIV and AIDS. We strongly support
orienting United Nations operational and peacekeeping
activities towards recognizing the plight of women and
children in conflict areas and working proactively
towards preventing violence against them.
The General Assembly is convening a high-level
meeting on HIV and AIDS tomorrow, in the presence
of a large number of heads of State and Government
and ministers. We should not allow the vision of a
world without HIV and AIDS to remain a dream. We
are hopeful that the new declaration, which the
Assembly will adopt on Friday, will demonstrate the
strong commitment of the international community to

11-36541

face this global challenge in a resolute and determined
manner.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Gabon for its initiative in
organizing today’s meeting, and to welcome President
Bongo Ondimba in coming to preside over it. I also
wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the
Executive Director of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), Mr. Michel
Sidibé, for their statements.
HIV/AIDS poses a serious threat to human life.
In recent years, thanks to the joint efforts of the
international community, great progress has been made
in the prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS.
However, there are still more than 60 million people
worldwide living with or infected with HIV/AIDS. The
situation is especially serious in sub-Saharan Africa. In
some countries in conflict or post-conflict situations,
poverty, lack of medical facilities and massive
population displacement are all factors likely to worsen
the spread of HIV/AIDS, which in turn affects the
economic development and social stability of the
countries concerned.
I would like to make four points.
First, it is important to strengthen international
cooperation and implement in earnest the relevant
declarations and resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly and the Security Council. In 2001 the
General Assembly held a special session on HIV/AIDS
and adopted a Declaration of Commitment (resolution
S-26/2). Tomorrow, the Assembly will once again hold
a high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS and will adopt a set
of outcome documents. Since 2000, the discussion of
HIV/AIDS in the Council has also raised the profile of
this issue on the international agenda. Now the
international community must translate commitments
into concrete action and make greater efforts in the
fight against HIV/AIDS.
Secondly, developed countries must honour their
commitments effectively and provide the necessary
financial and technical assistance to developing
countries. HIV/AIDS medicines, treatment and care are
costly, and developing countries face serious
difficulties with their HIV/AIDS response in terms of
financing and technology. The developed countries
should therefore extend a helping hand

15

S/PV.6547

to them. International organizations and funds,
including the United Nations, must strengthen their
cooperation and assist developing countries, especially
those in sub-Saharan Africa, in their fight against
HIV/AIDS.
Thirdly, it is important to give special attention to
the issue of AIDS in countries in conflict or postconflict situations. The Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission must give adequate
attention to the needs of the countries on their agenda
with regard to dealing with HIV/AIDS. In addition, the
consequences of HIV/AIDS must be fully taken into
account when drawing up plans for post-conflict
reconstruction, security sector reform and the
reintegration of former combatants.
Finally, it is important to strengthen the United
Nations HIV/AIDS response within its peacekeeping
operations. China welcomes the initiatives taken by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, as called for
by the Council in its resolutions, to enhance awareness
about HIV/AIDS among peacekeepers and to amend
the code of conduct for peacekeepers. We wish also to
see continued cooperation and coordination between
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UNAIDS.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, Brazil welcomes your initiative of
holding this important debate. We welcome also the
presence of the President of Nigeria, the Deputy
President of South Africa and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of France. I should like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement and to congratulate
Mr. Michel Sidibé for the outstanding work he has
done at the head of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).
(spoke in English)
The fight against the HIV/AIDS epidemic has
been a priority for Brazil at both the domestic and
international levels. We understand all too clearly the
menace posed by the epidemic, and we have dedicated
our political attention and resources to combating it
and supporting those living with it.
Internally, our public health system has
pioneering HIV/AIDS treatment policies that cover
more than 600,000 people living with the virus,
including through the provision of antiretroviral
treatment free of charge. As a result, the incidence of

16

HIV in Brazil has stabilized and is now starting to
decline.
Internationally, we have helped lead the charge in
favour of universal access to affordable medicine. In
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the World Health Organization, the World
Trade Organization and other relevant bodies, we have
been a firm voice in favour of a strong and coherent
international response to the challenge of HIV/AIDS.
We have sought to share our experience in
dealing with the virus with other developing countries
through technical cooperation. The setting up of a
factory for the production of antiretroviral drugs in
Mozambique and the provision to several nations of
training in dealing with HIV/AIDS are examples of this
cooperation.
In this light, we appreciate Gabon’s decision to
bring the issue of the HIV/AIDS epidemic back into
the debates of the Security Council.
The high-level meeting of the General Assembly,
which begins tomorrow, will be a unique opportunity
for the United Nations to make a strong political
statement and step up the fight against the pandemic.
Brazil is of the view that today’s debate is an
opportunity for the Council to show support for the
General Assembly meeting and to underline its
readiness to do its part by addressing HIV/AIDS in the
context of international peace and security. In dealing
with this issue, the Council should focus on the impact
of HIV/AIDS on aspects related to its agenda —
conflict and post-conflict situations, peacekeeping
operations, and sexual violence in situations of
conflict.
Over the past decade, our understanding of the
impact of HIV/AIDS on security and conflict has
evolved considerably. Some of the direst predictions of
the past, such as the collapse of entire States as a result
of the epidemic, fortunately have not come to pass.
Nevertheless, we have witnessed the many insidious
ways in which HIV can magnify conflict and aggravate
suffering.
As a cross-cutting issue with an important human
rights dimension, HIV/AIDS is a complex problem that
demands complex solutions. We must address how
HIV/AIDS hampers the emergence of sustainable
peace and how it affects peacebuilding. We must find
creative ways for peacekeeping missions to support

11-36541

S/PV.6547

local authorities in combating HIV/AIDS and to help in
the field of prevention and in providing treatment, care
and support to those living with the virus. The human
rights components of peacekeeping missions can play
an important role in that regard.
The issue of HIV/AIDS is also closely linked to
the Council’s consideration of the issue of women in
conflict and post-conflict situations. In particular, the
intersection between HIV/AIDS and conflict-related
sexual violence is real and troubling. We deplore the
grave harm caused to victims of sexual violence who
find themselves infected with the virus as a result of
such attacks, and we underline the need for the Council
to act to help provide assistance to the victims.
We are pleased that the resolution we have
adopted today touches on all of those issues and lays
the basis for a more systematic analysis of the impact
of the epidemic on situations of conflict.
In closing, I would like to underline that today’s
debate is part of a larger discussion about how social
and economic factors influence the dynamics of
conflict. This is an issue of particular interest to Brazil,
which we took up during our presidency of the
Council, in February. We remain convinced that
achieving sustainable peace after conflict requires a
broad approach that looks beyond security and takes
into account the need for peoples to fully enjoy
development and human rights. The discussion on
HIV/AIDS and conflict moves us closer to that goal.

Security conditions certainly influence the spread
of HIV, which has a negative impact on all sectors and
levels of society. It destabilizes the economy and
contributes to the instability of societies. The HIV
epidemic, exacerbated by conditions of violence and
instability, increases the risk of exposure to the disease
as a result of mass movements of people, widespread
uncertainty, reduced access to medical care, and
conflict-related sexual violence committed by members
of armed groups. Populations fleeing conflict areas,
displaced persons or refugees in camp settings are
more likely to be vulnerable.
Peacekeeping operations and their personnel, as
an indispensable tool of the United Nations, can play
an important role in raising HIV/AIDS awareness and
providing means of prevention in post-conflict settings,
because peacekeepers do not operate in isolation from
local communities.
We commend the efforts made by UNAIDS and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations with
regard to the education and training of peacekeepers.
There is a need to further strengthen the process of
voluntary counselling and testing in United Nationsmandated missions. Training peacekeepers in gender
awareness and child protection and the ability to
recognize and respond to sexual violence and
exploitation will not only influence their behaviour, but
also bring added value to the positive role of
peacekeepers as agents of change.

Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to commend you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting. We welcome the presence of
the President of Nigeria, the Deputy President of South
Africa and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France.
Our appreciation also goes to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and to Mr. Michel Sidibé, Executive Director
of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), for their insightful remarks.

Member States should be encouraged to
institutionalize the process of the voluntary and
confidential testing of all uniformed personnel and
staff sent to peacekeeping missions and to develop
means of tracking national policies. Given the
sensitivity of this issue, all members of the police and
armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina participating
in peacekeeping operations are tested for HIV/AIDS
and attend pre-deployment training on HIV/AIDS
awareness.

Eleven years after the adoption by the Security
Council of its landmark resolution 1308 (2000), and
following the adoption by the General Assembly of the
2001 Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and
the 2006 Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS, this
debate offers us the opportunity to update the
conceptual approach to this issue and take stock of the
progress achieved.

It must be emphasized that in some situations
HIV can negatively affect and be an obstacle to gender
empowerment and the full involvement of women in
peacebuilding efforts. Greater protection of women and
girls has been emphasized through the adoption of
Security Council resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009),
1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010).
We underline that UNAIDS, the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA), the Department of

11-36541

17

S/PV.6547

Peacekeeping Operations and other relevant actors
should work closely with local communities, targeting
vulnerable groups of persons. They can also be part of
broader activities for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform in
peacekeeping efforts. Addressing HIV/AIDS initiatives
in peacekeeping must be a joint effort involving
Member States, troop- and police-contributing
countries, United Nations agencies and host countries.
Fighting the spread of HIV requires combined
commitment, cooperation, creativity and resources.
An effective response to HIV/AIDS by Member
States requires clear and attainable national strategies
and goals. For that reason, although in the group of
countries with a low HIV/AIDS prevalence, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has developed a strategy to prevent and
combat HIV/AIDS in order to ensure our strategic
response to the growing HIV/AIDS problem in the
world. Post-conflict planning needs to include HIV
programming and to address specific gaps in civilian
capacities.
Complementarity and cooperation among all
United Nations bodies and agencies are necessary.
International actions, such as a response to conflictrelated sexual violence or national efforts to address
the problem of HIV and AIDS, must be better
coordinated and intensified. The responsiveness of
various actors within the United Nations system entails
optimal solutions in order to achieve meaningful and
concrete results. The Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and other
bodies, such as UNFPA, UNICEF or the World Health
Organization, need to harmonize their activities in that
complex undertaking.
Lastly, I would like to emphasize that HIV/AIDS,
a disease that knows no boundaries, no gender or race,
or even age difference, has become a global concern.
On the other hand, world peace depends not only on
securing borders, but also on securing people against
threats and risks to their security. Through its work, the
Council is undoubtedly committed to seeking solutions
and to addressing the challenges that may arise.
Resolution 1983 (2011) is a clear expression of our
collective will and continuous efforts to enhance the
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to join my colleagues, Mr. President, in

18

expressing appreciation for your presence here to
preside over the Security Council and lead this debate
on the most tragic pandemic that humankind has
experienced. I would also like to convey my respectful
greetings to the President of Nigeria, the Deputy
President of South Africa and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of France, who are here with us today. I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive and extensive report (A/65/797) and
Mr. Michel Sidibé, as well as his team, for his
commitment and dedication at the head of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).
The figures on the devastating consequences of
AIDS are alarming: 30 million dead and 34 million
living with HIV worldwide is a frightening thing.
Today, however, it is encouraging to hear that
prevention strategies are paying off and that, between
2001 and 2009, the global rate of new HIV infections
fell by almost 25 per cent.
However, the reduction in international
investments at a time when the AIDS response is
having results is of concern. The shortfall in resources
foreseen by UNAIDS for 2015 jeopardizes the
achievement of Millennium Development Goal 6, in
particular the target on reducing new infections.
We hope that the agreement to be reached in the
framework of the high-level meeting that the General
Assembly will begin tomorrow will reflect the urgency
of securing the necessary resources to maintain that
positive trend and to make the goal of achieving
universal access to HIV prevention, treatment, care and
support by 2015 a reality.
The opposite would be a setback to the
commitments of the heads of State and Government
reflected in the 2006 Political Declaration on
HIV/AIDS to ensure the availability of additional
funds for countries to have access to predictable and
sustainable financial resources; to ensure that
international funding is consistent with national plans
and strategies on HIV and AIDS; and to increase
investment in research and the development of safe and
affordable drugs, products and new technologies.
My country is convinced that the fight against
HIV and AIDS benefits from an approach based on
respect for human rights and the safeguarding of
human dignity. It is necessary to redouble efforts to
eradicate the stigma and discrimination that affected
populations still suffer, and that are an obstacle to

11-36541

S/PV.6547

controlling the epidemic. It is also necessary to
strengthen sexual education programmes that are based
on respect for human rights and to encourage the
exercise of sexual and reproductive rights with a clear
gender perspective and respect for differences.
That approach should be accompanied by the
adequate provision of quality and timely social
services. Given that the poorest communities are more
vulnerable, preventive strategies should be considered
not only as HIV and AIDS projects, but primarily as
development projects that have a lasting impact on the
epidemic. However, national efforts are not enough
without the technical and financial cooperation of the
international community. The joint work of States and
international cooperation agencies is essential to
overcome the gaps in access that still exist, to address
the most vulnerable populations, to implement
comprehensive preventive strategies, to ensure
adequate supplies for diagnosis and treatment and to
strengthen epidemiological studies.
The Secretary-General notes a reduction in the
number of countries that allow flexible rules in
intellectual property rights standards and an increase in
bilateral and regional agreements that can undermine
the capacities of countries to develop access to
essential medicines. In that regard, bearing in mind that
the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights does not prevent Member States from
taking measures to protect public health, the
international
community
should
reaffirm
its
commitment to interpreting and implementing the
Agreement in such a way as to support the right to
protect public health and, in particular, to promote
access to medicines, including the production of
generic anti-retrovirals and other essential drugs to
combat AIDS-related infections.
Colombia recognizes that the magnitude of the
HIV epidemic requires comprehensive and coordinated
action by the international community and that the
actions of the United Nations system to provide a
comprehensive response to the epidemic should
continue to be discussed and agreed within the General
Assembly as the Organization’s universal body.
However, in the context of the responsibilities under
the Charter, the Security Council can play an important
role in the promotion and integration of prevention
programmes, treatment, care and support during the
implementation of the tasks assigned to peacekeeping
operations and in ensuring the continuity of such

11-36541

strategies
during
post-conflict
peacebuilding processes.

transition

and

We appreciate the holding of this important
debate as an opportunity to review the progress made
on implementing previous mandates. We also endorse
resolution 1983 (2011) as a strong sign of renewed
political will to improve the global response to the HIV
epidemic, to reduce vulnerability and to strengthen
cooperation to achieve the goal of zero new infections,
zero discrimination and zero AIDS-related deaths.
Mr. Berger (Germany): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening and personally
presiding over today’s meeting. We appreciate Gabon’s
initiative to bring the issue of HIV/AIDS and
international security to the attention of the Security
Council again. Germany believes that resolution 1983
(2011), adopted today, is a significant step in tackling
this important issue. I would particularly like to thank
the Secretary-General and Mr. Sidibé, Executive
Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS, for their insights.
Eleven years after the adoption of the pioneering
resolution 1308 (2000), HIV/AIDS still constitutes a
threat to international stability. It impacts on whole
societies, and sometimes even regional and
international security. The risk of exposure to the
disease continues to be especially high in conflict and
post-conflict situations, as well as during transition
processes. On the one hand, the epidemic destroys
social structures and networks, thus creating more
misery in already shaken societies and increasing the
potential for social unrest. As a consequence, HIV and
AIDS can be considered as one of the causes of
political weakness, State fragility and conflict
aggravation.
On the other hand, conflict and tensions
exacerbate the problem of HIV and AIDS within
societies. International support, health education,
access to prevention, adequate medication, hospitals
and treatment for HIV patients prove to be difficult or
nearly impossible in some conflict situations, thus
causing more rapid spread of the disease. As a result,
populations are not only directly endangered by
conflict but also indirectly by the spread of diseases
such as HIV.
UNAIDS estimates that the prevalence of
HIV/AIDS is three to four times higher among armed
forces and armed groups than among the general

19

S/PV.6547

population. As we know, women and children are often
the main victims of conflict. Rape, which is all too
often used as a weapon of war, also adds to the spread
of HIV among civilians. HIV adds to the stigma and
discrimination that victims of sexual violence
oftentimes face.
In many conflicts, children are recruited and
misused as soldiers, sexually exploited and abused.
Under these conditions they are especially vulnerable
to infection, and are therefore not only traumatized but
often also stigmatized for life. Germany is convinced
that children deserve special protection in armed
conflict and, if needed, must be provided with special
HIV-related health care. We have set up a number of
projects to attend to former child soldiers and girls who
have been sexually exploited by armed groups,
including child mothers, to provide them with HIV
counselling and care — for example in Eastern Congo.
In the post-conflict transitional phase, the
transmission of HIV constitutes a particular danger.
There is high population mobility after conflict, when
displaced persons find refuge in camps, refugees return
home and combatants are demobilized. Infected
persons pose a high risk of contagion to their extended
families and communities. Germany considers it
essential that voluntary testing and counselling be
provided, and anti-retroviral drugs supplied, in order to
prevent the further spread of the disease.
During transition processes, when Government
structures are not yet established or functional, it may
be difficult to apply health programmes or to develop
and implement policies against HIV. An effective
international response in providing and ensuring HIVrelated assistance may have to rely on the
establishment of local health centres that provide direct
assistance to the population. Germany is actively
engaged in fighting HIV and AIDS at the local level
and has established health centres in several African
regions, including in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Resolution 1308 (2000) focused in particular on
the potential of HIV/AIDS to impact the health of
United Nations peacekeepers. Germany commends the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNAIDS
for all the progress they have achieved in addressing
HIV/AIDS among peacekeepers, and uniformed
personnel more generally. However, it is clear that
more needs to be done to reduce the number of

20

HIV/AIDS-related deaths among peacekeepers. There
has to be a continued emphasis on strengthening
national prevention, counselling and treatment
programmes. We would also encourage Member States
to develop more specific strategies for personnel
participating in peacekeeping operations, including
awareness-raising
and
voluntary
confidential
counselling and testing.
In conclusion, I would like once again to thank
Gabon for having organized this debate, which has
clearly underlined that threats to international peace
and security are multifaceted. We believe that in this,
as in other matters, the Security Council needs to adopt
a broad strategy of conflict prevention that addresses
the root causes of conflict in a comprehensive manner.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): First, I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s debate and for
honouring us with your presence. Allow me also to
welcome the President of Nigeria, the Deputy President
of South Africa and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
France. We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Mr. Michel Sidibé, Executive Director of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, for their
comprehensive briefings.
Globally, a significant proportion of people living
with HIV/AIDS — between 8 and 10 per cent — are
affected by conflict, humanitarian crises and
displacement. The relationship between the prevalence
of HIV and conflict is a complex and dynamic one that
varies from one conflict to another. A better
understanding of that relationship is crucial for the
development of effective and efficient strategies to
reduce the risk of infection in conflict and post-conflict
settings. Many factors in those settings may increase a
population’s vulnerability to HIV. Massive and
uncontrollable migration, the collapse of health
services, the decline of literacy and access to basic
prevention information increase a population’s
vulnerability to HIV in times of war. Conflict-related
sexual violence in particular accelerates HIV
transmission, and often becomes an automatic death
sentence for victims who too often have little or no
access to health care.
Through resolution 1308 (2000), the Security
Council expressed its commitment to addressing HIV
as a devastating public health threat. Other milestone
resolutions followed on the issues of sexual violence,
the protection of civilians and other cross-cutting

11-36541

S/PV.6547

matters, further enhancing our collective response to
this epidemic in the context of conflicts. However,
more than 10 years since the adoption of resolution
1308 (2000), many challenges persist. Allow me to
make a few brief comments in that regard.
First, in order to more fully understand the
complex factors that impact on HIV/AIDS in conflicts,
more data needs to be compiled within the United
Nations system, and programmatic experiences and
best practices need to be shared to help guide policy
decisions, advocacy and programming in conflict and
post-conflict societies. Close coordination with local
and national AIDS initiatives is essential in order to
avoid the duplication of efforts.
Secondly, it is essential to mainstream HIV/AIDS
prevention and care policies in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping operations and humanitarian responses to
conflicts. Peacekeepers can play a decisive role as
advocates for awareness and prevention of HIV
transmission, and need to be adequately equipped,
trained and mandated to fulfil that goal. Their practices
should be aligned with the ultimate goal of a universal
standard for HIV and AIDS prevention, treatment and
care.
Thirdly, the international community should
maintain sustained attention in conflict societies with

11-36541

high HIV prevalence, even beyond the life span of a
peacekeeping mission. Post-conflict transitions in
particular are a period of heightened vulnerability to
HIV transmission. The international community should
assist national Governments during this period to
strengthen State capacity in the health sector and the
delivery of basic service. Support should be provided
to national Governments in formulating their policies
to respond to HIV during post-conflict transitions,
especially
in
the
context
of
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform. It is also important during this period to foster
community resilience, engage civil society and base
the response to the epidemic on a framework of
participation and inclusiveness.
Finally, the health and lives of ordinary
individuals should be at the centre of our attention in
our endeavours to respond to HIV/AIDS in conflicts.
No efforts should be spared to preserve human lives
and dignity.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

21
