S/2010/113

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 March 2010
English
Original: French

Letter dated 23 February 2010 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolutions 1575 (2004), 1639
(2005), 1722 (2006), 1785 (2007), 1845 (2008) and 1895 (2009) requesting Member
States, acting through or in cooperation with the European Union, to report to the
Council, through the appropriate channels, and at least at three-monthly intervals,
on the activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR).
Pursuant to the above-mentioned resolutions, I have the honour to convey a
letter I have received from Ms. Catherine Ashton, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, transmitting the twentieth
report on the activities of EUFOR (see annex). This report covers the period from
1 September to 30 November 2009.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

10-26003 (E) 080310 100310

*1026003*

S/2010/113

Annex
Letter dated 18 January 2010 from the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy addressed
to the Secretary-General
[Original: English]
In accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolutions 1575 (2004),
1639 (2005), 1722 (2006), 1785 (2007), 1845 (2008) and 1895 (2009), I attach the
twentieth quarterly report on the activities of the European Union military mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (see enclosure). The report covers the period from
1 September to 30 November 2009. I should be grateful if you would transmit this
report to the President of the Security Council.
(Signed) Catherine Ashton

2

10-26003

S/2010/113

Enclosure
Report of the High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the activities of the
European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
I.

Introduction
1.

This report covers the period from 1 September to 30 November 2009.

2.
The Security Council in its resolutions 1575 (2004), 1639 (2005), 1722 (2006),
1785 (2007), 1845 (2008) and 1895 (2009) requested that Member States, acting
through or in cooperation with the European Union, report to the Council on the
activities of the military mission (EUFOR), through the appropriate channels and at
least at three-monthly intervals. This document is the twentieth such report.
II.

Political background
3.
Bosnia and Herzegovina made limited progress on its reform agenda during
the reporting period. Nationalist, anti-Dayton rhetoric continued. Ethnic and entity
agendas that prevail over the interests of the State also adversely affected the
performance of the Council of Ministers and the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly.
4.
The five-party coalition Government at State level and the Council of
Ministers faced a deadlock in appointing the directorships of three State agencies
that have long been vacant or occupied by incumbents whose terms have expired:
the Directorate for European Integration, the Indirect Taxation Authority and the
Communications Regulatory Agency. Despite these delays, a new Director of the
Directorate for European Integration was appointed by the Civil Service Agency in
September, and a new Minister of Security in November.
5.
As a result of the negative political climate, the European Commission
concluded in its progress report in mid-October that Bosnia and Herzegovina had
made only limited progress in addressing key reforms. On a more positive note,
progress was achieved on the visa liberalization road map with Bosnia and
Herzegovina completing most of the relevant conditions.
6.
Limited progress was also made on the fulfilment of the outstanding
requirements set by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council for the
transition from the Office of the High Representative to the European Union Special
Representative. The State property inventory conducted under the auspices of the
Office of the High Representative nears completion, and will serve as the basis for
negotiations between the political leaders. As a result of the lack of progress, the
Steering Board at its meeting on 18 and 19 November expressed serious concern
with the insufficient progress that the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities had made
in delivering the five objectives and two conditions that remain necessary for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative.
7.
The reporting period was marked by an increasing commitment on the part of
the international community to Bosnia and Herzegovina and its Euro-Atlantic
perspective. A joint European Union/United States initiative brought seven party
leaders together on 9, 20 and 21 October with a view to accelerating and facilitating
progress towards the country’s Euro-Atlantic perspective, by discussing the

10-26003

3

S/2010/113

outstanding issues for the transition from the Office of the High Representative to
the European Union Special Representative, and constitutional reform. By the end
of the reporting period no concrete progress had been made but negotiations
continue.
8.
Economic indicators continue to demonstrate the adverse impact that the
global economic crisis is having on Bosnia and Herzegovina, with rising
unemployment, and foreign direct investments dropping by more than 50 per cent in
the first six months compared to the same period last year. To mitigate the effects of
the crisis, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) agreed in May to a three-year
standby arrangement worth €1.2 billion. In November IMF reviewed the progress of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in meeting the agreed benchmarks, and made payment of
the second tranche conditional on progress made. A positive verdict will hinge, in
part, on the ability of the Federation Government to implement cuts in benefits to
war veterans and other politically sensitive social categories.
III.

Security situation and EUFOR activities
9.
The overall security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remained calm and
stable throughout the reporting period. Although nationalistic rhetoric continued, it
had no impact on the safe and secure environment. The economic downturn
continued to affect Bosnia and Herzegovina, and led to a number of strikes, mostly
conducted in Sarajevo, which continued to cause disruption to city transportation
routes. All of these were professionally and capably handled by Bosnia and
Herzegovina law enforcement agencies, and had no impact on the overall security
situation.
10. The force of some 2,000 troops is concentrated in Sarajevo, with liaison and
observation teams deployed throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. EUFOR continued
to conduct operations in line with its mandate, namely, providing deterrence;
ensuring continued compliance in relation to the responsibilities specified in the
General Framework Agreement for Peace, Annexes 1A and 2; and contributing to
the maintenance of the safe and secure environment. EUFOR also continued to
support the Bosnia and Herzegovina law enforcement agencies in fighting organized
crime in close cooperation with the European Union Police Mission; and
cooperation with the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in the search
for persons indicted for war crimes improved. In response to requests of the
Tribunal, and with the support of NATO and local police, EUFOR carried out search
operations against support networks of persons indicted for war crimes.
11. There has been further progress in the area of joint military affairs: on
19 November, EUFOR handed responsibility to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities for the last task in that area, civilian movement control (the control of
movement of weapons and military equipment). As with other joint military affairs
tasks already transferred to the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities, EUFOR will
continue to monitor, mentor and advise in order to enhance the self-sustainability of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina capabilities. In this context, EUFOR monitored more
than 1,300 different joint military affairs activities by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities during the reporting period in the areas of management of ammunition
and weapon storage sites; civilian and military movement of weapons and military
equipment; disposal of surplus weapons and ammunition; defence industry factories;
and demining activities of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

4

10-26003

S/2010/113

12. During the reporting period, EUFOR and the Armed Forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina continued to conduct combined training in line with the 2009 training
calendar by including specialized training elements in line with international
training requirements and standards. Senior officers of the Armed Forces of Bosnia
and Herzegovina participated in EUFOR map exercises; and units of the Armed
Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, up to company level, participated in EUFOR
tactical exercises.
13. On 17 November the Council of the European Union, in a joint session
involving foreign and defence ministers, assessed the political environment and
security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina; and agreed to continue reviewing
political developments. The Council also assessed Operation Althea and approved
the recommendations in the six-monthly report on the operation of the SecretaryGeneral/High Representative. It welcomed further progress with the preparatory
planning work for the possible future evolution of Operation Althea into a
non-executive capacity-building and training operation; and reiterated that a
decision on the possible evolution of the operation would need to take political
developments, including the future role of the European Union Special
Representative, into account.
IV.

Outlook
14. The security situation is expected to remain stable despite the prospects of
continuing political tension.

10-26003

5
