A /72/PV.55

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

55th plenary meeting

Friday, 17 November 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 65
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Draft resolution (A/72/L.4)
The President: I should like to inform members
of the Assembly that, in line with past practice, the
General Assembly will hold a debate on item 65 jointly
with agenda items 30, “Report of the Peacebuilding
Commission” and 111, “Report of the Secretary-General
on the Peacebuilding Fund”, during the resumed part of
the session next year.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Turkmenistan to introduce draft resolution A/72/L.4.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan): The delegation of
Turkmenistan has the honour to speak on behalf of the
cross-regional sponsors of draft resolution A/72/L.4,
entitled “Role of the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia”. The
draft resolution has been submitted on behalf of the
five countries of Central Asia, namely, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and my own country,
Turkmenistan, to celebrate the tenth anniversary of
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, and to emphasize its role
in the region.
Central Asian countries would like to underscore
the unwavering and broad interregional support for
the draft resolution, and we have the honour to express
deep gratitude to the sponsoring countries. We would

also like to underline the constructive atmosphere of
the entire deliberation process of the draft resolution.
Preventive diplomacy is one of the priorities of
the United Nations, whereby early warning and early
action can advance security and stability, save lives
and promote sustainable development. The United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia (UNRCCA) is a special political
mission of the United Nations, established in December
2007 in Ashgabat at the initiative of the five Central
Asian States.
The Centre promotes dialogue among the
Governments of the Central Asian countries on finding
solutions to emerging problems and on eliminating
potential threats so as to keep regular contacts with
regional and international organizations operating in
the region, to stimulate their peacemaking efforts and
initiatives and to cooperate with other United Nations
agencies working in the field of sustainable development
and conflict prevention.
In its 10 years of existence, the Centre has provided
Governments with a platform for dialogue on the
most challenging regional issues, ranging from the
management of common resources to transnational
threats, such as terrorism, violent extremism, organized
crime and drug and other forms of trafficking. In
doing so, UNRCCA has closely cooperated with all
Governments of the region and has built capacities to
use preventive diplomacy methods and instruments to
address existing and emerging challenges.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-38805 (E)

*1738805*

A/72/PV.55

17/11/2017

Regular multilateral meetings, attended by
delegations of all five Central Asian countries, enable
attention to be focused on common concerns, including
the most important, such as preventive diplomacy as a
key instrument for positive results in ensuring global
security and stability, cross-border crime control
and others.
In June this year, Secretary-General António
Guterres visited all five countries of the region. He
presented an opportunity to renew United Nations
support to the ongoing efforts of regional cooperation
and underlined the relevance of preventive diplomacy
to Central Asia.
The draft resolution generalizes the experience
of the Regional Centre for use by other countries
of the world and emphasizes once again the role of
preventive diplomacy.
In conclusion, on behalf of all sponsors, may I
express our hope that this important draft resolution will
receive unanimous support and the wider sponsorship
of Member States.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/72/L.4, entitled “Role
of the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/72/L.4: Afghanistan,
Albania, Angola, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Canada, Chile, China,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia,
France, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Japan, Jordan,
Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mongolia,
the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Panama, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania, the Russian
Federation, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, the
Sudan, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the United Kingdom, the United States of
America and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.4?
2/4

Draft resolution A/72/L.4 was adopted (resolution
72/7).
Agenda item 115
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/566)
The President: In paragraph 6 of its report, the Fifth
Committee recommends that the General Assembly
appoint the following persons as members of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions for a three-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2018: Mr. Bachar Bong Abdallah (Chad),
Mr. Pavel Chernikov (Russian Federation), Ms. Julia
Maciel (Paraguay), Mr. Cihan Terzi (Turkey) and
Mr. David Traystman (United States of America).
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint those persons as members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions for a three-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2018?
It was so decided.
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/567)
The President: In paragraph 4 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint the following persons as members of
the Committee on Contributions for a three-year term
of office beginning on 1 January 2018: Mr. Michael
Holtsch (Germany), Mr. Evgeny Kalugin (Russian
Federation), Mr. Henrique da Silveira Sardinha Pinto
(Brazil), Mr. Steve Townley (United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland), Ms. Yoon Seongmee
(Republic of Korea) and Ms. Zhang Wei (China).
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
appoint those persons as members of the Committee on
Contributions for a three-year term of office beginning
on 1 January 2018?
It was so decided.
17-38805

17/11/2017

A/72/PV.55

(c) Appointment of a member of the Board of
Auditors

(e) Appointment of members of the Independent
Audit Advisory Committee

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/571)

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/569)

The President: The Fifth Committee recommends,
in paragraph 5 of its report, that the General Assembly
appoint the Comptroller General of the Republic of
Chile as a member of the Board of Auditors for a sixyear term of office beginning on 1 July 2018.

The President: In paragraph 4 of the report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint Mr. Richard Quartei Quartey
(Ghana) and Ms. Janet St. Laurent (United States
of America) as members of the Independent Audit
Advisory Committee for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2018.

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint that person as a member of the Board of
Auditors for a six-year term of office beginning on
1 July 2018
It was so decided.
(d) Appointment of members of the International
Civil Service Commission
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/568)
The President: In paragraph 5 (a) of the report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint the following persons as members
of the International Civil Service Commission for
a four-year term of office beginning on 1 January
2018: Mr. Yuji Kumamaru (Japan), Mr. Luis Mariano
Hermosillo Sosa (Mexico), Mr. Aldo Mantovani (Italy),
Mr. Jeffrey Mounts (United States of America) and
Mr. Wolfgang Stöckl (Germany).
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Mr. Yuji Kumamaru, Mr. Luis Mariano
Hermosillo Sosa, Mr. Aldo Mantovani, Mr. Jeffrey
Mounts and Mr. Wolfgang Stöckl as members of the
International Civil Service Commission for a four-year
term of office beginning on 1 January 2018?
It was so decided.
The President: In paragraph 5 (b) of the same
report, the Fifth Committee also recommends that
the General Assembly designate Mr. Aldo Mantovani
(Italy) as Vice-Chair of the International Civil Service
Commission for a four-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2018.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to designate Mr. Aldo Mantovani as Vice-Chair of the
International Civil Service Commission for a four-year
term of office beginning on 1 January 2018?
It was so decided.

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
appoint Mr. Richard Quartei Quartey and Ms. Janet St.
Laurent as members of the Independent Audit Advisory
Committee for a three-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2018?
It was so decided.
(j) Confirmation of the appointment of members of
the Investments Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/570)
The President: The Fifth Committee recommends
in paragraph 4 of its report that the General Assembly
confirm the appointment by the Secretary-General
of Ms. Kemi Adeosun (Nigeria) and Ms. Keiko
Honda (Japan) as ad hoc members of the Investments
Committee for a one-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2018.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
confirm the appointment by the Secretary-General of
Ms. Kemi Adeosun and Ms. Keiko Honda as ad hoc
members of the Investments Committee for a one-year
term of office beginning on 1 January 2018?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-items (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (j) of agenda item 115?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendations of the Fifth Committee
have been made clear in the Committee and are
reflected in the relevant official records. If there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss

17-388053/4

A/72/PV.55

the reports of the Fifth Committee which are before the
Assembly today. Statements will therefore be limited to
explanations of vote.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in the plenary meeting,
a delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in the plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in the plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.
Agenda item 133
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/572)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without

4/4

17/11/2017

a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/8).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 133.
Agenda item 137
Programme planning
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/524)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/9).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 137.
Programme of work
The President: Before adjourning the meeting,
I would like to inform members that, as announced
in today’s Journal, the consideration of agenda item
126, entitled “Interaction between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union”, originally scheduled for this morning, has been
postponed to a later date to be announced.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

17-38805
