S/PV.8974

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8974th meeting

Wednesday, 23 February 2022, 9.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-26715 (E)
*2226715*

Ukraine

S/PV.8974

Ms. DiCarlo: Earlier today, the so-called authorities
of the Donetsk and Luhansk Peoples Republics requested
military assistance from the Russian Federation.

The meeting was called to order at 9.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Germany and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I want to reaffirm what
I expressed this morning in the meeting of the General
Assembly (see A/76/PV.58), but of course it would not
make any sense to bother members reading again the
same text that I am sure they are all aware of.
In between, during the day, a number of events took
place, and with your permission, Mr. President, I would
like to ask Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo to be able to brief the
Council on those events.
But simultaneously, today was full of rumours
and indications that an offensive against Ukraine
was imminent. In the recent past, there were several
situations with similar indications, similar rumours,
and I never believed in them, convinced that nothing
serious would happen. I was wrong, and I would like
not to be wrong again today.
So, if indeed an operation is being prepared,
I have only one thing to say from the bottom of my
heart: President Putin, stop your troops from attacking
Ukraine. Give peace a chance. Too many people have
already died.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his introductory remarks.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
2/15

23/02/2022

Also today, the Ukrainian authorities declared a
nationwide state of emergency and announced other
related defence and security measures, including the
mobilization of reservists.
Throughout the day, we have seen disturbing reports
of continued heavy shelling across the contact line and
civilian and military casualties. There are also reports
of the repeated targeting of civilian infrastructure.
This evening, different media are carrying reports of
an ongoing large-scale military build-up and military
columns moving towards Ukraine. The Russian
Federation has also reportedly shut airspace to civilian
aircraft near the border with Ukraine.
The United Nations cannot verify any of these
reports. But if these developments were confirmed,
they would greatly aggravate an already extremely
dangerous situation.
The Ukrainian authorities are also reporting a new
large-scale cyberattack targeting several State and
financial institutions.
President Zelenskyy earlier this evening called
for continued diplomacy. Separately, President Putin
also spoke about his continued readiness to engage
in dialogue.
We encourage such efforts even at this late hour.
United Nations staff remain on the ground to provide
humanitarian assistance to the people of Ukraine.
We are committed to staying and delivering. All
parties must ensure their safety and security. Respect
for international humanitarian law and international
human rights law is also paramount.
We cannot predict exactly what will happen in
the coming hours and days in Ukraine. What is clear
is the unacceptably high cost in human suffering and
destruction of an escalation. The people of Ukraine
want peace, and I am certain that the people of Russia
want peace. We must do everything in our power to
ensure that peace prevails.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
22-26715

23/02/2022

Ukraine

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): This is the fourth time
that the Security Council is meeting on Ukraine in a
matter of weeks. Every time we meet, the reality on
the ground confirms bit by bit what some of us have
been anticipating. Russia has been saying one thing
and doing the opposite. We were told that troops were
retreating when their number has only increased. We
were told to stop the hysteria since troops were in
Russian territory. That is no longer the case. They are
invading a neighbour, unprovoked with false pretexts,
false narratives and fabricated news.
Every development that has unfolded in the past 48
hours confirms to us and the world that Russia’s concerns
have nothing to do with its security, that its anxieties
are not linked to NATO expansion and that this issue is
not a confrontation between Russia and the West. This
is a confrontation between Russia and international law
and the Charter of the United Nations that it deliberately
has chosen to ignore — a confrontation between a
hegemonistic vision and a rules-based world order.
It is not about Russia’s concerns; it is about Russia’s
appetite. The Ukrainians are facing another aggression
just because they dare to exist, because they have
chosen to be independent and because they have opted
for democracy.
This is a dark hour not only for Ukraine, but for
the entire international community, as we witness with
trepidation the progression of a pure act of aggression,
carefully planned and cold-bloodedly executed.
We called and hoped for a backdown of the Russian
Federation from this senseless destructive and selfdestructive action. We repeat the same call on Russia
to stop, to reflect, to reverse its illegal decisions, to
withdraw from this senseless madness, to de-escalate
and not to push on towards the precipice. Several
mechanisms are in place and various proposals have
been made, including by President Zelensky, whose
calls remain unanswered. Diplomacy is like hope. It
dies last, but, if it is to work, it must be seized, not
ignored, as the Secretary-General said earlier.
We call on our fellow members of the Security
Council to rally in support of Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Russia has been warned repeatedly
that it will be alone in this foolishness and that it will
be responsible for the innocent lives lost, including
possibly Russian lives, and for the destruction caused
in the heart of Europe in the twenty-first century.
If they choose to continue to execute their plans, as
every indication points to, they will bear not only the

S/PV. 8974

consequences of the war, but also the historical blame
and shame of invading a neighbouring country, when
its responsibility as a big country and a permanent
member of the Security Council calls for it to work and
help preserve peace and security, not torpedo it.
We reiterate our support for Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, within its internationally
recognized borders and territorial waters.
In conclusion, I welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine at this meeting.
I would like to convey to him and the Ukrainian
Government and people that, at this most critical
moment of their history, they are not alone, and we
stand firm and in full solidarity with them for their
right to be free and chose who they want to be.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank the Secretary-General for his strong
stance and powerful remarks today before the General
Assembly (see A/76/PV.58) and for his remarks tonight.
A few moments ago, I spoke to President Biden,
who asked me to convey in the strongest possible terms
his and our steadfast support for Ukraine and for the
urgent meeting the Security Council has convened
tonight. Furthermore, he asked me to share that the
United States and its allies and partners will continue
to respond to Russia’s actions with unity, clarity
and conviction.
We are here tonight because we believe, along
with Ukraine, that a full-scale, further invasion into
Ukraine by Russia is imminent. Tonight, we are seeing
the Russians close airspace, move troops into Donbas
and move forces into combat-ready positions. This is a
perilous moment. And we are here for one reason and
one reason only — to ask Russia to stop, return to its
borders, send its troops, tanks and planes back to their
barracks and hangars, and send its diplomats to the
negotiating table. It should back away from the brink
before it is too late.
Last week, the United States informed the Security
Council and the world (see S/PV.8968) about what we
expected to see unfold. We said that Russia would
manufacture a pretext for an attack. We have since seen
numerous false-flag events staged along the lines of
contact in Donbas. We said Russia would theatrically
convene emergency meetings at the highest levels of
the Russian Government. We all saw that on Monday,
with the State-televised Russian Security Council
meeting held by President Putin — an orchestrated

22-267153/15

S/PV.8974

Ukraine

moment in which the Russian Government decided to
recognize as “independent States” sovereign territory
of Ukraine controlled by Russia’s proxies since 2014.
Russia literally violated Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity on live television before the world.
We said that false proclamations would come
declaring that Russia would need to defend Russianspeakers in Ukraine. We got that and much more from
President Putin’s speech on Monday and during the
speech of the Russian Ambassador before the General
Assembly today. No one could have predicted just how
dangerous, inciting and far-reaching President Putin’s
speech would be, with Putin arguing for taking the
world back in time to an era of empires and colonies.
Finally, we said the attack would come next and
that we could expect communications to be jammed and
cyberattacks to shut down key Ukrainian institutions.
Last week, we attributed to Russia denial-of-service
attacks against Ukrainian banks, and we saw similar
activity this morning, targeting Government sites as
well. And, in the last few hours, we have received very
concerning reports of destructive malware placed on
hundreds of computers and executed on at least some.
After that, we said, would come the bombs, the missiles,
the soldiers and the tanks. Already, soldiers have been
deployed to the occupied region of Ukraine.
We are here tonight because we believe the rest is
imminent. Now, over the past few weeks, Russia has
called our predictions hysterical. Russia has said that
we were lying. Russia has said that we were supplying
the world with misinformation. Russia’s diplomats have
even laughed in the face of the human suffering that we
were sounding the alarm about, but what we said would
happen has come to pass for all the world to see.
Let us therefore be clear. Not all parties are
culpable here. Calling for both sides to de-escalate
only gives Russia a pass. Russia is the aggressor here.
Russia’s attack on Ukraine is tantamount to an attack
on the United Nations and every Member State in the
Chamber tonight.
The Security Council is charged with adjudicating
threats to peace and security. Russia is bypassing
it entirely and taking matters into its own hands.
That undermines the institution and everyone who
participates in it. The United States, Ukraine, its allies
and partners across Europe, United Nations officials
and every other member of the Security Council
have all repeatedly implored Russia to engage at the
diplomatic table. Instead, tonight Russia has brought
4/15

23/02/2022

its people, the Ukrainian people and the world to the
brink of a conflict that will produce an untold amount
of human suffering.
I said it in the General Assembly this morning (see
A/76/PV.58), and I will say it again tonight — every
day, Russians should be asking themselves right now
how many Russian lives Putin will sacrifice for his
cynical ambitions. Responsible members of the Security
Council will stand together, and we will stand with
Ukraine. We will do so despite a reckless, irresponsible
permanent member of the Security Council abusing its
powers to attack its neighbour and subvert the United
Nations and our international system.
This morning, in the General Assembly, we saw
dozens of leaders from across the globe stand up to
defend the Charter of the United Nations and Ukraine
against Russia’s brazen attacks. We were proud to stand
with them. Today I had the opportunity to meet with
Ukrainian Foreign Minister Kuleba. Many of those
gathered here now were in the General Assembly Hall
this morning when Foreign Minister Kuleba received
enthusiastic and overwhelming applause after his
remarks. Since he could not be here this evening,
I would like to conclude by echoing his words. This
morning he warned us all that:
“no one will be able to sit out this crisis if Putin
decides that he can move forward with his
aggression against Ukraine. Your Governments
and your people will face painful consequences
together with our Government and our people.”
(A/76/PV.58)
He is right. History tells us that, and we must
confront this threat head on — in the Council, in the
United Nations and in our capitals. The people of
Ukraine are counting on us. Let us not let them down.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank the Secretary-General and Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for their remarks.
We are here tonight to call on Russia to avert war.
For months, Russia has been holding a gun to Ukraine’s
head. Now, President Putin’s finger is on the trigger. A
full-scale conflict in a country of 44 million people will
bring immense suffering, casualties on both sides and
devastating humanitarian consequences. The members
of the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Secretary-General have all called this week for
respect for the principles of the Charter of the United
22-26715

23/02/2022

Ukraine

Nations. The world is calling for peace, but Russia is
not listening.
Make no mistake, the United Kingdom will not
compromise. We will not compromise our commitment
to Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity or
our support for peace, prosperity, and the democratic
freedom of the people of Ukraine. We will not
compromise our commitment to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter — above
all the founding principle of the United Nations, that
we “live together in peace with one another as good
neighbours”. Russia’s actions are an assault on the
Charter. And we will not compromise our commitment
to a search for peace.
We are here for the second time this week in the
Council. My Prime Minister and Foreign and Defence
Secretaries have been unsparing in their diplomatic
efforts. But we have also announced a significant
further sanction step against Russia, with our allies — a
package targeted against some of the Russian oligarchs,
banks, and politicians supporting President Putin. And
we will ratchet up economic consequences should
Russia continue its aggression.
There is still time for restraint, reason and
de-escalation. But that time is now.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary General for his engagement and for his
appeal, which France fully supports.
As we speak, Russia is on the verge of causing
chaos in Ukraine and dealing an unjustifiable blow to
peace and security in the heart of Europe. For several
months, the President of the Russian Federation
has been patiently preparing the ground for a major
offensive against Ukraine. He has amassed soldiers
and weapons on a scale not seen since the end of the
Second World War. He has incited violence through
lies and disinformation. He has even denied the very
legitimacy of the Ukrainian State. He has undermined
the sovereignty and integrity of Ukraine by recognizing
the independence of parts of Ukrainian territory.
In the face of that strategy of threats and
destabilization, Ukraine has shown admirable restraint.
It did not give in to violence despite Russian incitement.
I want to reiterate our solidarity with the Ukrainian
people, which President Macron confirmed to his
Ukrainian counterpart a few hours ago.
In the face of that strategy of disorder and
confrontation, the leaders of Europe and the United

S/PV. 8974

States have demonstrated their unity and redoubled
their efforts to propose a diplomatic solution.
President Macron, together with Chancellor Scholz
and many partners, have done their utmost. They have
expressed their willingness to build a renewed security
architecture for Europe with Russia.
France strongly condemns the Russian President’s
strategy of provocation to war. We hear the appeal of
the Ukrainian people, made by President Zelenskyy
in his address to the Russian nation a few hours
ago: the Ukrainians want peace. They want a good
neighbourly relationship with Russia, like the familial
and personal relationships that unite so many Russians
and Ukrainians.
The international community came together to
make its voice heard today in the General Assembly.
It is the voice of respect for the Charter of the United
Nations, the voice of peaceful conflict resolution and
the voice of diplomacy. It echoes the clear statements of
the Secretary-General.
We call once again on the Russian Federation to
follow that path, to reverse its decision to recognize
the separatist entities in eastern Ukraine and to recall
its troops.
We call on each member of the Council to act
responsibly and to demonstrate resolute support for all
initiatives aimed at preventing and putting an end to
violations of the Charter of the United Nations.
If Russia confirms its choice of war, it will have to
take full responsibility and pay the price for that choice.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for their very sobering remarks at the beginning
of the meeting.
Tonight, as we gather at this table, we are staring
into the abyss of a major conflict in Europe — a conflict
that would have major global implications. Tonight,
the core principles of the United Nations in which we
believe are under attack.
In Ireland, we know the importance of the rulesbased international order. We know the importance of
respecting the voice and integrity of all countries, big
or small. Most fundamentally, we know the value of
peace. We believe that one State threatening and using
lethal force against another to get its way or to expand
its territory is no solution.

22-267155/15

S/PV.8974

Ukraine

Ireland has a deep understanding, informed by
our history, that dialogue and respect resolve disputes.
Tonight, that drives our solidarity with Ukraine.
It is our collective responsibility — indeed, our
obligation — here at this table to maintain international
peace and security, nothing less. That means we stand
up for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of every
State Member of the United Nations.
Let us be clear — the internationally recognized
borders of Ukraine have not changed. The decision
of Russia to recognize as independent entities the
non-Government-controlled areas of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions of Ukraine does not change those
borders one iota. They did not change in 2014 and
they have not changed this week. We urge the Russian
Federation to reverse that decision immediately.
We urge the Russian Federation to refrain from
further escalatory, unilateral actions that can serve
only to further deepen the crisis. Tonight, the path of
diplomacy and dialogue that we have called for for so
long is perilously narrow. The principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, which we hold dear, have
already been breached. Those principles now risk being
further violated.
Now is the time to show courage, to pull back from
the precipice and to return to dialogue and diplomacy.
The use of military aggression has no place in our
modern world. Have we learned nothing from our
history? The United Nations rose from the ashes of two
World Wars. The senseless destruction of that era was
born of the belief that military might makes right. That
philosophy, applied with modern weaponry, would
unleash devastation and human suffering, affecting
millions of innocent people.
Tonight, we stand with the people of Ukraine.
Tonight, we stand with the Charter of the United
Nations. We stand with those who, even in this dark
hour, still have the courage and hope to bring us back
from the precipice. A resort to military conquest — for
one State to impose its will unilaterally against another
and to annex parts of its territory — has absolutely no
place in the twenty-first century.
There is still a choice — a choice to turn from the
path of war to the path of diplomacy and dialogue. It is
never too late to make the right choice.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General for his briefing on the evolving
situation in the eastern regions of Ukraine.
6/15

23/02/2022

The Security Council met two days ago and
discussed the situation (see S/PV.8970). We called for
the urgent de-escalation of tensions and emphasized the
need for sustained and focused diplomacy to address all
issues concerning the situation.
However, we note with regret that the calls of the
international community to give time to the recent
initiatives undertaken by the parties to diffuse tensions
were not heeded. The situation is in danger of spiralling
into a major crisis. We express our deep concern over
the developments, which, if not handled carefully, may
well undermine the peace and security of the region.
We call for immediate de-escalation and for
refraining from any further action that could contribute
to the worsening of the situation. We call on all parties
to exert greater efforts to bridge divergent interests.
I would like to underline that the legitimate security
interests of all parties should be fully taken into account.
India has consistently advocated at the United
Nations the need for the peaceful settlement of
disputes in accordance with international law and with
agreements entered into by the parties concerned.
I underline once again that more than 20,000 Indian
nationals, including students, are located in different
parts of Ukraine, including in its border areas. We are
facilitating the return of all Indian nationals, including
students, as may be required.
We believe that the solution lies in sustained
diplomatic dialogue between the concerned parties. In
the meantime, we strongly emphasize the vital need for
all sides to maintain international peace and security by
exercising the utmost restraint.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General and the Under Secretary-General for
their briefings.
This is the fourth Security Council meeting to be
held on the situation in Ukraine in less than a month. In
light of the recent worrying tensions, my country has
taken a position calling for de-escalation and for efforts
to find a peaceful solution to the current crisis.
In that context, we would like to highlight the
following points.
First, we reaffirm the need to engage in dialogue
in good faith, while intensifying diplomatic efforts
at all levels to support opportunities for peace on the
basis of international law. We reiterate that the Minsk
22-26715

23/02/2022

Ukraine

agreements still constitute a good basis for reaching a
peaceful solution to the crisis and maintaining regional
and international security and stability.
Secondly, we stress the importance of adhering to
the principles of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations, particularly in settling international
disputes through peaceful means and respecting
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of States. Adherence to those principles and
compliance with the Charter of the United Nations
constitute a central pillar in finding a sustainable and
peaceful solution to the current crisis
Thirdly, we reiterate that the tense situation in
eastern Ukraine could exacerbate the critical conditions
for civilians. Furthermore, there are still obstacles to
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to some of those
in need, which existed even before the recent tensions
arose, particularly in the areas near the contact line in
eastern Ukraine.
Any further escalation could worsen the
humanitarian situation for a larger number of civilians.
We therefore emphasize the importance of de-escalation
and a ceasefire. In that regard, we urge all parties not
to obstruct access to humanitarian aid or the movement
of civilians in conflict areas, in accordance with their
obligations under international law.
In conclusion, my country reiterates the
importance of de-escalation, constructive dialogue and
continued efforts to reach peaceful solutions that are
consistent with international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank the Secretary-General
and Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for
their important statements.
We are facing the dire prospect of a major war in
Europe. Norway strongly condemns the decision by
President Putin to send Russian troops into the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions and the latest announcement
of a special military operation. Those decisions are
unjustified, unprovoked and irresponsible. We call on
Russia to reverse those decisions and to immediately,
completely and unconditionally withdraw all its
military forces from the territory of Ukraine and the
vicinity of its internationally recognized borders.
Our thoughts are with those who have already
suffered too much owing to this conflict and with all
those who are afraid that tomorrow will be a lot worse.

S/PV. 8974

We call upon all parties to strictly respect the
relevant provisions of international humanitarian law,
which call for the protection of civilians, including
humanitarian personnel, and civilian infrastructure,
and for the facilitation of safe, rapid and unhindered
humanitarian access to those in need in Ukraine.
As the Secretary-General clearly stated, the
decision of the Russian Federation to recognize the
so-called independence of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions are violations of the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine and are inconsistent with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Let me recall the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, which are now under threat.
The Charter applies to all nations, including Russia.
Today in the General Assembly (see A/76/PV.58),
Member States from all over the world strongly urged
the parties to pursue negotiations towards a peaceful
resolution of the conflict, with respect for international
law and Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Norway urges Russia, as a party to the Minsk
agreements and to the conflict, to fulfil its commitments,
to abide by international law and to return to the path
of diplomacy. Russia has taken on a clear commitment
to seek a peaceful settlement to this conflict and must
honour it.
We commend Ukraine’s posture of restraint
in the face of continued provocations and
destabilization efforts.
Let me conclude by once again reiterating Norway’s
unwavering support for Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity within its internationally
recognized borders.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
situation in Ukraine is at a critical juncture. China
has been paying close attention to the situation. In the
current context, all parties concerned should exercise
restraint and refrain from any further escalation of
tensions. We believe that the door to a peaceful solution
to the Ukraine issue is not fully shut, and neither should
it be.
China has repeatedly pointed out that the Ukraine
issue is set against a complex historical backdrop and
that the current situation is the result of the interplay
of many factors. China’s position on safeguarding the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States has
been consistent. The purposes and principles of the

22-267157/15

S/PV.8974

Ukraine

Charter of the United Nations should be jointly upheld.
We hope that all parties concerned will remain coolheaded and rational and commit themselves to enhancing
dialogue and consultation to resolve the relevant issues
properly through negotiations and address each other’s
legitimate security concerns, in line with the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
It is especially important at the moment to refrain
from fuelling tensions. China will continue to promote
peace talks in its own way and welcomes and encourages
all efforts aimed at a diplomatic solution.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General and the Under-Secretary-General,
Rosemary DiCarlo, for the information they have
provided to the Security Council and the remarks they
have made tonight.
The reports received about the movement of troops
into certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk in Ukraine
are cause for extreme concern. The threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
political independence of a State Member of the United
Nations is unacceptable.
In the present circumstances, the Security Council
must act according to its main purpose as holder of the
primary responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace
and security. In the exercise of that responsibility, its
actions must be geared towards a reduction in tensions
and towards assisting parties in their negotiations. That
is our primary role.

23/02/2022

Furthermore, the parties must allow the rapid, safe
and unhindered access of humanitarian assistance to
those in need. The protection of civilians, including
humanitarian personnel and persons in vulnerable
situations, must be respected unconditionally.
We redouble our calls for the parties to work
constructively in all relevant instances, such as the
Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group.
Negotiations must be mindful of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, including the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of its
Member States.
Negotiations must also, on the one hand, take
into account the security concerns of all parties to
the conflict and, on the other, aim to create adequate
conditions for an inclusive political dialogue that must
reflect the diversity of and include representation from
all the peoples of the region.
Brazil does not underestimate the complexity of the
current situation, but we insist on dialogue as key to
achieving a lasting settlement to this conflict. Too much
is at stake here, above all the lives of many civilians.
We owe them all our efforts to bring this crisis to a
peaceful solution.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by first of all
thanking the Secretary-General and Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for their significant briefings.

The recourse to arms and confrontation cannot lead
to lasting peace. In that regard, we call on all parties
to exercise maximum restraint and to refrain from any
action that may further increase tensions on the ground.
The time is not for belligerent rhetoric or military
threats but to engage truly in a diplomatic process. The
means of negotiation have not been exhausted.

Ghana is grateful to the Secretary-General for
his clear statements on the situation in Ukraine in
defence of the Charter of the United Nations, the rulesbased international order and our collective security
mechanism. The developments that are taking place
in Ukraine are indeed troubling. The situation has
implications not only for Ukraine and its immediate
neighbours but also for all our countries. Security is
indivisible and the insecurity of one is the insecurity
of all.

Immediate de-escalation is of a high order. It means,
among other things, the complete and unconditional
withdrawal of all military forces as an effective
measure for the prevention and removal of threats to
peace. The parties must abide by the terms of the Minsk
agreements, above all by their call for a comprehensive
ceasefire. The Special Monitoring Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
can assist if granted unrestrained access in order to
verify, identify and report accordingly any violation of
the ceasefire.

As we indicated in our statement to the Security
Council on Monday night (see S/PV.8970), Ghana
deeply regrets the decision of the Russian Federation
to naturally recognize the non-Government-controlled
regions of Ukraine and to send troops into those regions.
We are also deeply concerned by the implications of
those decisions. We suggest that the Russian Federation
has turned its back on the Minsk agreements and the
path of dialogue required to address any concerns that
we have over the implementation of the agreements and
related security concerns.

8/15

22-26715

23/02/2022

Ukraine

S/PV. 8974

However, we read a report this morning — the
statement attributed to the President of the Russian
Federation — that his country was always open to
diplomacy. We urge that that avowed commitment to
diplomacy to which the Russian Federation alluded be
backed by present actions that de-escalate the situation
on the ground and permit an atmosphere for dialogue.
We note with concern the risk that an escalation of the
situation in Ukraine holds for global peace, and we
stress that those that choose the path of conflict rather
than peace bear the consequences of their actions.

dialogue. As called for by the Preamble of the Charter
of the United Nations, we remind all parties to practice
tolerance and live together in peace with one another as
good neighbours,

We are concerned by reports of the commencement
of hybrid warfare against Ukraine, especially
attempts of cyberattacks against some of its critical
infrastructure. To de-escalate the situation, we urge
the Russian Federation to reconsider any intentions
to move troops into the eastern regions of Ukraine in
response to the purported request by the leaders of the
separatist regions for an intervention.

Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his urgent plea for peace and UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.

By its nature, peacekeeping requires the consent
of the parties and the impartiality of the peacekeeping
force. The presence of the Russian troops in eastern
Ukraine at this time would not fulfil those requirements.
If there is a real need, the Security Council should be
seized of the matter.
We urge calm and call upon all parties to maintain
the ceasefire in eastern Ukraine. We are particularly
concerned by the high intensity of violations of the
ceasefire in recent days and their consequences for the
civilian populations in the Donbas region. We remind
all parties of the need to respect international law and
international humanitarian law and urge the parties
to guarantee unimpeded access for humanitarian
assistance in both Government- and non-Governmentcontrolled areas. We condemn any military activity
that would deliberately target civilians and civilian
infrastructure and remind all parties of their personal
responsibility that exists in international law.
It may be begging the question but, nonetheless,
worth repeating: Ghana unreservedly stands by the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, a bona
fide Member of the United Nations, whose membership
of the Organization provides for its guarantees over its
internationally recognized borders — the same borders
with which it joined the Organization. We are aware
that the current developments in the eastern regions of
Ukraine would not lead to a strategic gain for any party,
and we encourage efforts to address both immediate
and long-term interests through diplomacy and

Finally, we take this opportunity to urge all
Member States to exercise restraint with regard to the
respective unsettled but accepted situations across the
globe and to uphold the collective security mechanism
established through the Charter of the United Nations.
Any differences that exist in international relations
must be adjusted by peaceful and legal means.

In this grave moment, Kenya continues to call for
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Ukraine, in line with the core
tenets of the Charter of the United Nations. Kenya is
deeply concerned by the rapid escalation of the conflict
risks following the recognition of Donetsk and Luhansk
as independent States by the Russian Federation and
the continued military escalation. We are concerned
that there is a serious risk that a conflict enveloping
the whole of the Donbas region will occur, present
trends holding. Such a development would instantly
lead to significant loss of life, a humanitarian crisis
and a large-scale population movement of refugees and
internally displaced people.
Kenya urgently calls for calm by all parties and for
their commitment to protecting civilians and civilian
objects from any actions contrary to international law
and international humanitarian law. We continue to
believe that there is still an opportunity for diplomacy
to produce a solution to this dangerous crisis. The
required diplomatic steps should seek, in the short term,
for a de-escalation of the situation and the limiting of
all military manoeuvres to prevent sparking a wider
conflict. For that to happen, there must also be a stated
commitment to negotiations between NATO and the
Russian Federation in the middle and long terms.
Such a commitment will need the vision to design a
viable security architecture for Europe that protects
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Ukraine and other States, while being
sensitive to the concerns of all the relevant parties.
We want to believe that this Chamber, in the light of
its storied past, retains the wisdom and wherewithal to
prevent a catastrophic war. We have confidence that the
United Nations Charter, embraced as a whole, protects

22-267159/15

S/PV.8974

Ukraine

Ukraine and all countries, not only those with modest
military means, but also the world’s nuclear Powers.
When we consider the recent past of wars undertaken
by choice and when the Charter and international law
were breached, eventually the safety and security of all
parties were tragically undermined.
The membership of this Chamber was fundamentally
shaped by the States that emerged victorious from the
Second World War. In doing so, the Charter bestowed
on them a special responsibility that reflected the
sacrifices that they had made to defeat a unique evil to
humankind. We believe that the leaders who designed
today’s multilateral system were profoundly humbled
by the catastrophic war that they had survived, so
much so that they were inspired to erect the sovereign
equality of States as a central pillar of our United
Nations. As such, we urge all Members to recall the
ruin from war that has been experienced by most States
sitting around this table. It is in this moment of peril
that we can powerfully pivot to recommit to the Charter
that our predecessors bequeathed us. A large part of
that recommitment would be aided by our listening to
the Secretary-General and utilizing his good offices to
deliver according to their intended design.
In the coming days, we hope that we will observe
a de-escalation in Donbas and that every effort will be
made to protect the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of Ukraine. We further
hope that we will benefit from the visionary leadership
that the world needs today in committing to negotiating
a lasting European security architecture that lowers
perceptions of threat and promotes cooperation.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement, as well as UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
This is the fourth time in three weeks that the
Council is meeting to discuss the situation in Ukraine.
We meet tonight, 48 hours after our last meeting (see
S/PV.8970) on the subject, because the territorial
integrity and national sovereignty of Ukraine have
been violated. We meet tonight because the lives of
countless men, women and children are at the mercy of
the murderous violence and clashes in eastern Ukraine.
That has resulted in a mass exodus that imperils their
dignity and safety. We meet tonight because, once
again, the spectre of a war with dire consequences
hangs over an entire region and we fear an imminent
invasion of Ukraine.
10/15

23/02/2022

As we reject this attack on the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, we
must be compelled to go further and ensure respect for
all provisions of the Charter and that the international
community focuses its attention, with the same
commitment and fervour, on all situations in all regions
of the world where the security and dignity of peoples
are under threat.
Russia’s decision to recognize the sovereignty
of the self-proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk People’s
Republics is heavy with consequence for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. It jeopardizes the
relevance and implementation of the Minsk agreements
and heightens the recurring fears of imminent military
action in Ukraine.
My country remains firmly attached to respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of each State.
Strict respect for those cardinal principles, enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations and the Constitutive
Act of the African Union, is the glue of our social
contract, as members of the international community.
We remain convinced that the intense diplomatic
activity and the various political measures adopted in
recent weeks will allow for dialogue to be prioritized
over confrontation and help prevent irreparable damage.
Eight years ago, in a construct similar to that
which brings us together today, 52 States Members
of the United Nations abstained in the voting on
General Assembly resolution 68/262, while the same
fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter
that bring us together today and on which we rely were
violated. Their refusal to join the consensus, above and
beyond the pressure to which their delegations were
subjected in New York, as well as in capitals at the time,
not too long ago, translates to a lack of understanding
and, perhaps, apathy on the part of several members of
the international community concerning the persistence
of zones of influence we thought had ended in the postcolonization era and following the fall of the Berlin
Wall. Regrettably, that harsh reality stubbornly persists
in several regions of the world, in particular in Africa,
Asia, America and, today, in Europe.
The Council must ensure respect for the basic
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular the peaceful settlement of disputes, respect
for the territorial integrity of States and national
sovereignty. My country calls for an immediate
ceasefire and de-escalation, as well as a sense of
responsibility, by prioritizing the peaceful settlement
22-26715

23/02/2022

Ukraine

of conflicts, in line with the United Nations Charter.
We urge the parties to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure and refrain from all actions that could
hinder the delivery of humanitarian assistance to those
in need.
In conclusion, I reaffirm my country’s attachment
to an international order based on rules and not on the
law of survival of the fittest. We call on all parties not
to break the dialogue and to take every opportunity
available to restore peace in Ukraine.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My country thanks the Secretary-General for
attending tonight’s meeting and for his appeal in the
Chamber. We support that appeal.
We also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for her briefing.
Mexico deplores the fact that, despite the widespread
call from the international community, tensions around
Ukraine, instead of having diminished, have increased.
That is why we are forced to meet here again tonight.
Having ratified the Charter of the United Nations,
all States have committed to respecting the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of
States. As members of the Security Council, we have
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. That creates the
obligation to ensure that the Security Council can
discharge its mandate and ensure respect for the Charter
of the United Nations.
Mexico supports all statements of the SecretaryGeneral and urges the parties to make use of the good
offices that the Secretary-General has offered.
The President of Mexico declared this morning
that we cannot accept the invasion of one country
by another, as it is contrary to international law. We
recall once again that, some days ago, Russia made a
forceful statement right here, before the international
community, stressing that it would not invade Ukraine
(see S/PV.8970). The recent announcement of a special
military operation is at variance with that statement.
An invasion would constitute an act of aggression,
in line with General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX).
We will not waver in our call for détente, diplomacy
and dialogue. A diplomatic solution is the only way to
avoid falling off the precipice, which would lead to a
war in Europe.

S/PV. 8974

The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We have had a very intense day as we discuss the
crisis in Ukraine. I will not repeat what I said earlier
today in the General Assembly (see A/76/PV.58). I can
state with regret only that, ultimately, Ukraine did not
heed our message to Kyiv concerning the need to stop
provocations against the Luhansk People’s Republic
and the Donetsk People’s Republic.
It appears that our Ukrainian colleagues, whom
certain States have supported and egged on recently,
remain under the illusion that, with the blessing of
Western sponsors, they can secure a military solution
to the problem of Donbas. It is otherwise difficult to
explain the increase in shelling and acts of sabotage on
the territory of the Republics.
Over the past 24 hours, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine has recorded nearly 2,000 ceasefire
violations, including almost 1,500 explosions. The
residents of Donetsk and Luhansk continue to shelter
in basements. Refugees continue to flow into Russia.
In a word, the nature of provocations by Ukraine’s
armed forces has not changed. Members would prefer
to ignore that fact and repeat Ukraine’s fairy tales that
those living in Donetsk are bombing themselves.
It is no surprise that the ever-increasing suffering
of those living in Donbas does not appear to affect
our Western colleagues. At today’s General Assembly
debate, they were unable to find one word of compassion
or sympathy for the residents of Donbas. It is as if, for
them, those 4 million people do not exist.
I would like to recall that the principles of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, of which
we are accused of violating in Ukraine, as stipulated in
the 1970 Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among
States, must be strictly observed with regard to
“States conducting themselves in compliance with
the principle of equal rights and self-determination
of peoples … and thus possessed of a government
representing the whole people belonging to the
territory without distinction as to race, creed
or colour.”
That does not describe the current Government
in Ukraine.

22-2671511/15

S/PV.8974

Ukraine

The tragedy in Ukraine began just after the illegal
Maidan coup in 2014, when instead of engaging in
dialogue with the Russian-speaking people of Ukraine,
the new Government unleashed guns and aviation
on them. There is an abundance of information and
evidence to that effect, but our Western colleagues
choose to ignore it.
We tried yesterday, today and the day before
yesterday to explain to members the logic behind
the decisions taken by the Russian leadership on the
recognition of the Luhansk People’s Republic and
Donetsk People’s Republic, and emphasized the need to
ensure peace and security in those territories. However,
they did not want to listen then or today. For our Western
colleagues, the people living in the Donbas are nothing
but a bargaining chip in a geopolitical game aimed at
weakening Russia and moving the NATO bloc closer
to its borders. For us, they are women, children and
elderly people who have had to hide from Ukrainian
bombardments and provocations for eight years now.
For us, they are Ukrainians who suffer under the
oppression of the Maidan Government.
That is the difference in our approaches. Without
seeing our geopolitical perspective, one will never
understand us. But those for whom the decisions that
I mentioned earlier were made have been forgotten and
disregarded during the past eight years and labelled as
mere pro-Russian separatists and terrorists, and they
are eternally grateful to us. And this is what really
matters to us.

23/02/2022

support in accordance with the bilateral cooperation
agreements concluded at the time as their recognition.
That is a logical step and a consequence of the actions
of the Ukrainian regime.
During the course of this meeting, Russian
President Vladimir Putin made an address in which he
said that he had decided to launch a special military
operation in Donbas. We do not know all the details
today, but I want to briefly inform the Council of his
rationale — what clearly follows from his message is
that the occupation of Ukraine is not part of our plans.
The purpose of the special operation is to protect
people who have been subjected to abuse and genocide
by the Kyiv regime for eight years. To that end, we will
work towards the demilitarization and denazification
of Ukraine and bring to justice the perpetrators of
numerous bloody crimes against civilians, including
citizens of the Russian Federation.
That decision was made in accordance with Article
51 of the Charter of the Charter of the United Nations,
the approval of the Federation Council of the Russian
Federation and pursuant to the Treaty of Friendship
and Mutual Assistance signed with the Donetsk and
Luhansk People’s Republics. We are receiving a great
deal of information on the matter, which has yet to be
analysed. We will keep the Council updated.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to representative of Ukraine.

I would like to reiterate that the cause of today’s
crisis surrounding Ukraine is rooted in the actions
of Ukraine itself, which has been sabotaging its
commitments under the Minsk package of measures
for years. As recently as last week, there was hope that
Kyiv would come to its senses and actually implement
what it promised to do in 2015. To that end, first and
foremost, direct dialogue with Donetsk and Luhansk
was needed. However, yet another confirmation of
Ukraine’s unwillingness to engage in such dialogue and
take steps to grant Donbas the special status stipulated
in the Minsk agreements, and the support of Western
sponsors for that position, ultimately convinced us that
we simply did not have the right to allow the continued
suffering of the residents of Donbas.

Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Before I try to deliver
parts of the statement that I brought here tonight — most
of which has already become useless since 10 p.m. New
York time — I would like to cite Article 4, paragraph 1,
of the Charter of the United Nations, which states:

As I said, Ukrainian provocations against the
people of Donbas have not only continued, but have
intensified. The leadership of the Luhansk and Donetsk
People’s Republics have asked us to provide military

Therefore, before I read out parts of my statement,
I would like to avail myself of the presence of the
Secretary-General and request that he distribute among
the members of the Security Council and the General

12/15

“Membership in the United Nations is open
to all other peace-loving states which accept the
obligations contained in the present Charter and,
in the judgment of the Organization, are able and
willing to carry out these obligations.”
Russia is not able to carry out any of those
obligations. Three minutes ago, the Ambassador of the
Russian Federation confirmed that his President has
declared war on my country.

22-26715

23/02/2022

S/PV. 8974

Ukraine

Assembly the legal memos by the United Nations Legal
Counsel, dated December 1991, and in particular the
legal memo dated 19 December 1991, which we had
been trying to get from the Secretariat for a very long
time and were denied.
Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Charter states,
“The admission of any such state to membership
in the United Nations will be effected by a decision
of the General Assembly upon the recommendation
of the Security Council.”
I ask the Secretary-General to kindly instruct
the Secretariat to distribute among the members of
the Security Council and the General Assembly the
decision of the Security Council, dated December 1991,
recommending membership of the Russian Federation
to the Organization, as well as the decision of the
General Assembly, dated December 1991, in which the
General Assembly welcomes the Russian Federation to
the United Nations.
It would be a miracle if the Secretariat were able to
produce such decisions. There is nothing in the Charter
of the United Nations about continuity as a sneaky way
to get into the Organization.
As I was on my way here about an hour ago, my
intention was to ask the Russian Ambassador to
confirm, on the record, that the Russian troops would
not start firing on Ukrainians today or go ahead with the
offensive. That became useless 48 minutes ago because,
about 48 minutes ago, his President declared war on
Ukraine. I would therefore like to ask the Ambassador
of the Russian Federation to say on the record that,
at this very moment, his troops are not shelling and
bombing Ukrainian cities and are not moving into the
territory of Ukraine. He has a smartphone; he can call
Mr. Lavrov right now. We can pause to let him go out
and call him.
If he is not in a position to give an affirmative
answer, the Russian Federation should relinquish its
responsibilities as President of the Security Council
and pass those responsibilities to a legitimate member
of Security Council that respects the Charter. I ask
the members of the Security Council to convene
an emergency meeting immediately to consider all
necessary draft decisions to stop the war. It is too late
to speak about the escalation — too late. The Russian
President has officially declared war. Should I play the
video of President Putin?

Shall I do that right now so that you can confirm it,
Mr. President?
Do not interrupt me, please.
The President: Then do not ask me questions when
speaking. Please proceed.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Russia declared war.
It is the responsibility of this organ to stop the war.
I therefore call on everyone here to do everything
possible to stop the war. Or should I play the video with
the President of Russia declaring war?
The President (spoke in Russian): Speaking in my
capacity as the representative of the Russian Federation,
I was not planning to answer the questions posed
because I have already said all I know at this point.
Waking Minister Lavrov at this time is not something
I intend to do.
The representative of Ukraine referenced the
information that we have, which we will provide. In
addition, this is not called a war; it is called a special
military operation in Donbas.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): We meet at the very
moment of a military escalation the likes of which we
have not experienced in Europe for over a generation.
The President of the Russian Federation announced a
military operation on Ukrainian territory. We condemn
it in the strongest terms, and we call upon all members
of the Security Council and the United Nations to now
stand up for Ukraine and against a shameless breach of
international law.
Two days ago, Russia’s decision to recognize the
self-proclaimed People’s Republics of Donetsk and
Luhansk was harshly rejected in the Council (see
S/PV.8970). It had already dealt a devastating blow
to the principles of international order that the United
Nations stands for.
Russia has not listened and, it turns out, was not
prepared to listen. It has continued its massive military
build-up, and we have been observing cyberattacks
against Ukraine. Now the Russian military is moving
into Ukrainian territory. Through those actions and this
unprovoked military operation, Russia is violating the
core principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

22-2671513/15

S/PV.8974

Ukraine

We condemn the use of force against innocent
people and the violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine in the strongest possible
terms. We urge Russia to terminate its military action
against Ukraine immediately and withdraw its troops.
Our thoughts are with the Ukrainian people.
We will be steadfast in our support for Ukraine and
our support for the United Nations Charter. This
Russian aggression will have an unprecedented
cost — politically, economically and morally.
France, Ukraine and my country stood ready for
diplomacy via another meeting in the Normandy format
or a summit proposed by Ukraine. With our allies and
partners, we called on Russia — in vain — to seek a
diplomatic way forward. Now is the moment to jointly
and decisively speak up and defend the international
order of the United Nations Charter against unilateral
aggression. Tonight we stand with Ukraine, unwavering
and determined.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of the United States has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): In my remarks tonight, I said that we predicted
Russia’s false flag attacks — the misinformation, the
theatrical emergency meetings and the cyberattacks.
But one piece had not come to pass. Unfortunately,
while we have been meeting in the Security Council
tonight, it appears that President Putin has ordered that
last step.
At the exact time that we are gathered in the Council
seeking peace, Putin delivered a message of war, in
total disdain for the responsibility of the Council. This
is a grave emergency. The Council will need to act, and
we will put a draft resolution on the table tomorrow. As
President Biden said tonight,
“Russia alone is responsible for the death and
destruction this attack will bring, and the United
States and its allies and partners will respond in
a united and decisive way. The world will hold
Russia accountable.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of the United Kingdom has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): As
we sat in the Security Council Chamber urging Russia
to step back, President Putin announced special military
14/15

23/02/2022

operations on Ukrainian territory. This is unprovoked
and unjustified.
This is a grave day for Ukraine and for the
principles of the United Nations. We and our partners
have been clear that there will be consequences for
Russia’s actions. We fully support the call of the United
States for a Security Council resolution. The Council
must do all it can to stop the war and uphold the Charter
of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of Albania has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We could not end this meeting
without noting that we had feared and anticipated for
days is happening. Explosions are reported in Kyiv and
several other cities in Ukraine. The masks have finally
been taken off and tanks are in. As we speak, Russia
is implementing its plan and attacking a neighbour, to
whom it has decided to deny existence, freedom, land,
dignity and life.
We call on all the Members of the United Nations to
rally in support of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, to stand with Ukraine and its people, to
condemn firmly and unequivocally this aggression, to
stand for peace, rules and international law and to take
whatever measures they deem necessary to show the
aggressor that its actions will bear consequences.
Let me reiterate — Russia will be held responsible
for the consequences of an unprovoked war entailing
the loss of human rights, for causing unbearable
human pain and for opting for destruction when we
need development, for bringing death where we are
in desperate need for hope, for choosing to become an
outlaw when we need cooperation. Russia will bear
historical shame and blame and the consequences of
invading a neighbouring country and attempting to
destroy European security.
Let us unite and make sure that it will not succeed.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of France has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): As
we convene in an emergency meeting in order to try
to avert the worst and to prevent the start of a war,
we have learned, alongside all gathered here, that
the President of the Russian Federation has ordered a
22-26715

23/02/2022

S/PV. 8974

Ukraine

special military operation in Donbas and that Russia
will try to demilitarize Ukraine.
Russia has opted for war. France condemns in the
strongest terms the start of those operations. Those
decisions, announced precisely during this Security
Council meeting, show the contempt Russia has for
international law and the United Nations. Russia must
be held accountable before the Security Council. That
is why, over the next few hours, France will join its
partners on the Council in the preparation of a draft
resolution to condemn the war waged by Russia.
We call on all members of the Council to support
us in these tragic circumstances. We call on the Russian
Federation to fully respect international humanitarian
law. We call for the protection of, and respect for, all
civilians, especially the vulnerable — women, children
and humanitarian personnel.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of Ireland has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): When I spoke earlier, I
said that the path towards diplomacy and dialogue was
perilously narrow. I did not realize, in fact, how narrow
and how close to the precipice we really were just over
an hour ago. We now see that that path has been closed
by the announcement of a military aggression on the
part of the Russian Federation against Ukraine. That is
something we roundly condemn.
We stand with the people of Ukraine tonight; with
every man, woman and child seeing this news — as we
did, sat here in the Chamber — whose lives are at risk.

We believe that it is now time indeed for the
Council to stand up, to assume its responsibility and to
speak out in the strongest possible terms about that act
of aggression.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of Ukraine has asked for the floor to
make a further statement; I give him the floor.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): As I said, Sir, relinquish
your duties as President of the Council; call President
Putin and call Foreign Minister Lavrov to stop
the aggression.
I welcome the decision of some members of the
Council to meet as soon as possible to consider the
necessary decision that would condemn the aggression
that the Russian Federation has launched against
my people.
There is no purgatory for war criminals; they go
straight to hell.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a further statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.
I wanted to say, by way of conclusion, that we did
not launch an aggression against the Ukrainian people,
but against the junta that is in power in Kyiv.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11 p.m.

22-2671515/15
