UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/983
16 September 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 10 SEPTEMBER 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
I have the honour to inform you that Chinmaya R. Gharekhan will relinquish
his post as my Special Representative to the multilateral talks on Middle East
peace and United Nations Special Coordinator in the Occupied Territories as at
30 September 1999.
I wish to inform the Security Council of my intention to appoint
Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen of Norway as the United Nations Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process and my Personal Representative to the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Palestinian Authority as at 1 October 1999.
Mr. Roed-Larsen served as the first United Nations Special Coordinator in the
Occupied Territories from June 1994 to October 1996.
The functions assigned to the new United Nations Special Coordinator take
into account recent encouraging developments in the Middle East peace process,
in particular the resumption of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations and the
prospects for renewed talks in other bilateral tracks. In the Middle East, as
elsewhere, socio-economic development is an essential underpinning of peace.
The new Special Coordinator will be charged with making appropriate preparations
within the United Nations for enhancing United Nations development assistance in
support of the peace process.
The new Special Coordinator will represent me in discussions with the
parties and the international community in all matters related to continuing
United Nations support to the peace process. I believe that a United Nations
focal point on the ground will enable the United Nations to respond more
effectively to requests for assistance, drawing on the expertise and advice of
the entire United Nations family. This will help to ensure that United Nations
support to the peace process is fully integrated and coordinated. The new post
will encompass the present functions and responsibilities of the Special
Coordinator, which will continue unchanged. The base of operations will remain
in Gaza.
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed)
----99-26666 (E)

160999

Kofi A. ANNAN
