78

General Assembly-Twenty-fifth Session

law applicable to armed conflicts, to be attended by
government experts,
Believing that one or more plenipotentiary diplomatic
conferences of States parties to the Geneva Conventions
and other interested States might be convened at an
appropriate time, after due preparation, in order to
adopt international legal instruments for the reaffirmation and development of humanitarian law applicable
to armed conflicts,
Considering that the effective implementation of
humanitarian rules relating to armed conflicts can best
be attained if those rules are laid down in widely accepted agreements,
Emphasizing the importance of continued close collaboration between the United Nations and the International Committee of the Red Cross,
1. Calls upon all parties to any armed conflict to
observe the rules laid down in the Hague Conventions
of 1899 and 1907, the Geneva Protocol of 1925, the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and other humanitarian
rules applicable in armed conflicts, and invites those
States which have not yet done so to adhere to those
instruments;
2. EEesses the hope that the conference of government xperts to be convened in 1971 by the International
'ttee of the Red Cross will consider
further what development is required in existing
humanitarian laws applicable to armed conflicts, and
that it will make specific recommendations in this respect for consideration by Governments;
3. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To invite early comments by Governments on
his reports;
(b) To transmit his reports and the comments of
Governments thereon, together with the records of
relevant discussions and resolutions of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Commission on Human Rights, to the International
Committee of the Red Cross for consideration, as appropriate, by the conference of government experts;
(c) To present the comments received to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session and to report
at that session on the results of the conference of government experts to be convened by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and on any other relevant
developments;
4. Decides to consider this question again, in all its
aspects, at the twenty-sixth session.
1922nd plenary meeting,
9 December 1970.
2712 (XXV). Question of the punishment of war
criminals and of persons who have committed crimes against humanity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2583 (XXIV) of 15 December 1969 on the punishment of war criminals and
~f persons who have committed crimes against humanity,
Welcoming with satisfaction the fact that the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity
entered into force on 11 November 1970,
Noting with regret that the numerous decisions
adopted by the United Nations on the question of the

punishment of war criminals and of persons who have
committed crimes against humanity are still not being
fully complied with,
Expressing deep concern at the fact that in presentday conditions, as a result of aggressive wars and the
policies and practices of racism, apartheid and coloniaEsm and other similar ideologies and practices, war
crimes and crimes against humanity are being committed in various parts of the world,
Convinced that a thorough investigation of war
crimes and crimes against humanity, as well as the
arrest, extradition and punishment of persons guilty
of_ such crimes-wherever they may have been comJD1tted-and the establishment of criteria for determin~g compensation to the victims of such crimes, are
unportant elements in the prevention of similar crimes
now and in the future, and also in the protection of
~um.an rights and fundamental freedoms, the strengthenmg of confidence and the development of co-operation
between peoples and the safeguarding of international
peace and security,
1. Draws attention to the fact that many war
criminals and persons who have committed crimes
against humanity are continuing to take refuge in the
t~rritories of certain States and are enjoying protection;
2. Calls upon all States to take measures, in accordance with recognized principles of international
law, to arrest such persons and extradite them to the
countries where they have committed war crimes and
crimes against humanity, so that they can be brought
to trial and punished in accordance with the laws of
those countries;
3. Condemns the war crimes and crimes against
humanity at present being committed as a result of
aggressive wars and the policies of racism, apartheid
and colonialism and calls upon the States concerned
to bring to trial persons guilty of such crimes;
4. Also calls upon all the States concerned to intensify their co-operation in the collection and exchange
of information which will contribute to the detection
arrest, extradition, trial and punishment of person~
guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity;
5. Once again requests the States concerned, if they
have not already done so, to take the necessary measures
for the thorough investigation of war crimes and crimes
against humanity, as defined in article I of the Con".ention on the ~on-Applic~bility o! Statutory Limitations to War Cnmes and Crunes agamst Humanity, and
for the detection, arrest, extradition and punishment of
all war criminals and persons guilty of crimes aJainst
humanity who have not yet been brought to tnal or
punished;
6: Requests States. which have not yet become
parties to ~e. C~nvention on ~e Non-Applicability of
Statutory Lmutations to War Crimes and Crimes against
Humanity ~o do so as soon as possible;
1. Appeals to Governments to provide the Secretary-General with information on the measures which
they have taken or are taking to become parties to the
q>nyen_tion on the _Non-Applic!lbility of Statutory
~mutations to War Crimes and Cnmes against Humanity;
8. Als~ appeals to States. which have not yet become parties to the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and
Crimes against Humanity strictly to observe the provisions of General Assembly resolution 2583 (XXIV)

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

---------to the effect that they should refrain from action running

counter to the main purposes of that Convention;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, in
the light of the comments and observations submitted
by Governments, the study of the question of the
punishment of war crimes and crimes against humanity
and the criteria for determining compensation to the
victims of such crimes, in order to submit a report on
this question to the General Assembly at its twentysixth session.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
2713 (XXV). Measures to be taken against nazism
and racial intolerance
The General Assembly,

Reaffirming its faith in the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and abiding by
them,
Recalling its resolutions 2331 (XXII) of 18 December 1967, 2438 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 and
2545 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969,
Noting that nazism, racism, apartheid and other
similar ideologies and practices have in the past repeatedly led to barbarous acts that trouble the (conscience of mankind, and ultimately to war, and still
have the power to threaten universal peace and the
security of nations,
Deeply concerned by the fact that, twenty-five years
after the foundation of the United Nations, the activities
of groups and organizations which are proponents of
the ideologies and practices of nazism, racism and
apartheid are still continuing,
Expressing its deep concern at the fact that not all
the States concerned have taken the measures specified
in the aforementioned resolutions for the complete
prohibition of Nazi and racist organizations and groups
and for their prosecution in the courts,
Welcoming the contribution which the relevant specialized agencies can make to the fight against naZism
and racial intolerance and the measures already taken
by many of them in this respect,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution
4 (XXVI) of 4 March 1970,86 in which the Commission noted the tentative nature of the findings on this
subject in the study on racial discrimination prepared
by the Special Rapporteur3 7 and requested the SubCommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to continue its study, placing
special emphasis on measures to be taken to detect and
effectively to prevent contemporary activities that might
be inspired by nazism or any other totalitarian ideology
based on incitement to hatred and racial intolerance,
1. Again resolutely condemns nazism, racism,
apartheid and other totalitarian and colonial ideologies
and practices which are based on terror and racial intolerance;
2. Urges the States concerned to implement without
delay the resolutions of the General Assembly and,
in particular, to take legislative and other effective
me¥ures with a view to the speedy and final eradication of nazism, including its contemporary forms, of
86 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 5 (E/4816), chapter

xxm.

BT E/CN.4/Sub.2/301.

79

racism and of other similar ideologies and practices
based on terror and racial intolerance;
3. Calls upon States during 1971, the International
Year for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, to take all effective measures to combat
s:ontemporary manifestations of nazism and other forms
of racial intolerance;
4. Decides to retain on its agenda the item concerning measures to be taken against nazism and other
totalitarian ideologies and practices based on incitement to hatred and racial intolerance.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
2714 (XXV). Question of the violation of human
rights and fundamental freedom.8, including
policies of racial discrimination and eegre.
gation and of apartheid, in all countries, with
particular reference to colonial and other
dependent countries and Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2440 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 in which, inter alia, it condemned any and
every practice of torture, inhuman and degrading treatment of detainees and prisoners in South African
prisons and in South African police custody duimg
mterrogation and detention,
Recalling its resolution 2505 (XXIV) of 20 November 1969 in which it expressed the firm intention of
the United Nations, acting in co-operation with the
Organization of African Unity, to intensify its efforts
to find a solution to the present grave situation in
southern Africa,
Also recalling Security Council resolutions 264
( 1969) of 20 March 1969 and 269 (1969) of n
August 1969 on Namibia,
Further recalling General Assembly resolution 2547
A (XXIV) of 11 December 1969 relating, inter alia,
to the inhuman and degrading treatment and torture of
political prisoners, detainees and captured freedom
fighters in the Territories ruled by Governments and
rlgimes wedded to the policies of apartheid, radal discrimination and colonialism in southern Africa,
Determined to promote immediate and urgent actiou
with a view to restoring the human rights and fundamental freedoms of the oppressed peoples of southern
Africa,
1. Commends the Ad Hoe Working Group of Experts on the treatment of political prisoners in South
Africii 88 for its valuable report; 39
2. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggles of the
peoples of southern Africa to oppose the policies of
apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism and to
assert their right to self-determination;
3. Condemns any and every practice of torture and
ill-treatment of prisoners, detainees and captured freedom fighters in Namibia, Southern Rhodesia and the
African Territories under Portuguese domination, as
well as of persons in police custody in these Territories;
88 Established under Commission on Hrlman Rights resolution 2 (XXIII) of 6 March 1967.
89 E/CN.4/984 and Add.1, Add.2/Rev.1, Add.3/Rev.1,
Add.4 and S, Add.6/Rev.1, Add.7/Rev.1, Add.8 and 9, Add.10/
Rev.I, Add.11/Rev.1, Add.12-14, Add.lS/Rev.1, Add.16/Rev.1
and Add. 17-19.
