S/2019/805

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 October 2019
Original: English

United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2466
(2019), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) until 15 October 2019 and requested me
to report to the Council on the implementation of the resolution, including any
instances of mandate implementation failures and measures taken to address them,
every 90 days starting from 12 April 2019. T he document covers significant
developments that have occurred since the issuance of my previous report
(S/2019/563), an assessment of progress made on the benchmarked exit strategy,
elements of the peacekeeping legacy, including lessons learned, and continued
priorities to be carried over to the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH).
The report also contains an update on the transition, the drawdown of MINUJUSTH,
the start-up of BINUH and the preparations for stronger integration of the United
Nations country team with BINUH, including a set of strategic benchmarks, as
stipulated in resolution 2476 (2019).

II. Significant developments
A.

Political situation and related security developments
2.
The reporting period was characterized by protracted, and to date unsuccessful,
negotiations on the confirmation of a new government, a failed attempt to impeach
the President of Haiti, Jovenel Moïse, in the Lower Chamber of Parliament, and a
looming constitutional crisis caused by the failure to organize elections in time to
renew the current legislature, whose term expires on 13 January 2020. Against this
backdrop of political crisis, the security situation remained volatile, as the opposition
organized several violent actions during the month of September and armed criminal
gangs continued to pose a threat to public order.
3.
Haiti has remained without a functional government since the res ignation on
21 March 2019 of Mr. Moïse’s second Prime Minister, Jean-Henry Céant, following
his censure by the Lower Chamber of Parliament. On 22 July, after three failed
attempts by the Senate to hold the vote on the general policy statement of the propos ed
government to be led by his third appointed Prime Minister, Jean -Michel Lapin,
Mr. Moïse announced the nomination of a fourth Prime Minister, Fritz William

19-16958 (E)

111019

*1916958*

S/2019/805

Michel. On 24 July, a 22-member cabinet, with full gender parity among ministers,
was announced in the official gazette, Le Moniteur. Its composition was slightly
amended on 29 August. Whereas the Lower Chamber endorsed the general policy
statement of Prime Minister-designate, Mr. Michel, on 3 September, consultations
between the Executive and the Senate on the confirmation of this fourth government
have yet to conclude. On 11 and 23 September, attempts by the Senate to consider the
proposed government degenerated into mayhem as opposition militants, some of them
armed and abetted by a small number of senators, entered the Senate chamber,
preventing the session from taking place. On the latter occasion, two civilians were
injured after a senator from the leading Parti Haïtien Tèt Kale discharged his personal
weapon in front of Parliament. Subsequent allegations of corruption levied against
Mr. Michel appeared to have lessened the prospects of his confirmation, and on
25 September, in an address to the nation, Mr. Moïse proposed the formation of a
government of national unity to overcome the current impasse. Several opposition
leaders rejected the President’s proposal and continued to call for protests, almost on
a daily basis, to demand his resignation. On 4 October, thousands of protesters
marched in the streets of Port-au-Prince, at least 2,000 of whom – including a number
of opposition parliamentarians – gathered in front of MINUJUSTH headquarters in
Tabarre (West Department). A delegation of officials among the protesters delivered
a letter, addressed to the Secretary-General, to draw his attention to what they
described as an explosive situation unfolding in the country.
4.
Honouring a procedural agreement made on 26 June in order to placate the
parliamentary opposition and accelerate the process through which a new government
would be approved, the Speaker of the Lower Chamber, Gary Bodeau, allowed the
body to hold a debate on the motion to impeach Mr. Moïse for “having violated at
least 25 articles of the Constitution”, and on the basis of allegations of corruption and
fraud. In a report issued in May, the Superior Court of Audit identified Agritrans, a
company led by Mr. Moïse prior to his election, as having been implicated in the
alleged mismanagement of PetroCaribe funds. Following two prior sessions dedicated
to the debate, on 22 August, the impeachment motion was defeated by a vote of
53 against, 3 in favour, and 5 abstentions. Opposition parliamentarians considered the
vote to have been held illegally, given the turnout of Lower Chamber parliamentarians
below the two-thirds quorum (80 parliamentarians), which is required by the
Constitution to hold a vote on the impeachment of a sitting President.
5.
In August, one year after the emergence of the “PetroChallengers” movement
and its call for accountability concerning the alleged mismanagement of funds
received by the Haitian State through the PetroCaribe agreement, demonstrations
were organized to encourage the Superior Court of Audit to issue a third report on the
23 per cent of authorized projects not covered in its reports of 31 January and 31 May,
and to call for a public trial to be held to shed light on the allegations. The movement
is also increasingly vocal in demanding the resignation of Mr. Moïse, perceived by
many to be an obstacle to the holding of a trial.
6.
Elections to renew the entire Lower Chamber and one third of the Senate were
constitutionally mandated to take place by the end of October 2019. Parliament ’s
failure to approve a new electoral law and budget prior to the end of the legislative
year on 9 September, together with the absence of political agreement on a new
composition of the Provisional Electoral Council, made it materially impossible to
hold elections in 2019, as the electoral body would need between five and six months
to organize them. With the term of all Lower Chamber parliamentarians and at least
a third of Senators ending on 13 January 2020, the likelihood of a constitutional crisis
has significantly increased. In the event of its occurrence, it will be paramount to
ensure that the parameters within which Mr. Moïse will be allowed to rule by decree
until a new parliament is elected and seated are well defined and transparent.
2/33

19-16958

S/2019/805

7.
The arrest on 22 July of a notorious gang leader by the Haitian National Police
had a positive but limited impact on the reduction of criminality in the Artibonite and
West Departments. The continued rise in crime trends highlights the urgent need for
national authorities to develop and implement a national strategy to address the root
causes of gang violence. On 27 August, Mr. Moïse appointed the Inspector General,
Normil Rameau, as Director General ad interim of the Haitian National Police, to
replace Michel Ange Gédéon, who completed his three-year term on 25 August.
Rameau awaits the confirmation of his nomination by the Senate, in ac cordance with
the Haitian Constitution. An organized movement of protest against the recurring
problem of fuel scarcity partially paralysed economic and social activity in Port -auPrince and other major cities between 14 and 20 September.
8.
The protracted political crisis and tense security environment continued to have
an adverse impact on the country’s economy. The national currency (gourde) has lost
37.6 per cent of its value against the United States dollar over the past 12 months,
inflation is now estimated at 19.1 per cent, and gross domestic product is projected to
have contracted by over 1 per cent during the recently concluded fiscal year. In the
agricultural sector, the effect of localized droughts and low rainfall on aggregate crop
production was exacerbated by gang members driving farmers away from their
productive land. This has added strain on households, which is reflected by an
increase in the index of severe food insecurity in rural areas, from 17 per cent in 2018
to 49.5 per cent since the end of April 2019. Moreover, the ongoing impasse in the
effort to confirm a new government continues to impede the passing of important
legislative texts, including the 2018–19 and 2019–20 budget laws, as well as the
electoral law. In the absence of a fully functioning government and with no budget
approved, several bilateral and multilateral donors, including the International
Monetary Fund and the Inter-American Development Bank, continue to withhold
budgetary support from Haiti.
9.
Even though the challenges Haiti faces are understood by all actors, there has
been no progress towards the holding of an inclusive and comprehensive national
dialogue to lead the country out of the current multidimensional crisis. Since the
expiration of the mandate of the committee to facilitate an inter-Haitian dialogue in
May, no new serious initiatives towards dialogue have been undertaken.

B.

Humanitarian situation
10. The significant decline in agricultural output linked to prolonged periods of
drought in the Artibonite and North-East Departments and the continued rise in the
price of basic food staples (19 per cent over the past 12 months) have contributed to
further worsening of the food security situation in Haiti, including the nutritional
status of Haitian children. Some 39,000 children under 5 years of age are projected
to suffer from acute malnutrition in 2019. In August, the Central Emergency Relief
Fund allocated $5 million from its rapid response window to enable humanitarian
actors to respond to the country’s urgent food security and nutrition needs. Through
the 2019 Humanitarian Response Plan, which, as of 18 September was 21 per cent
funded ($26.2 million received of $126.2 million required), humanitarian
organizations seek to aid the 1.3 million most vulnerable people.
11. Humanitarian partners and development organizations worked closely with the
Directorate for Civil Protection to ensure it is prepared and mobilized for the hurricane
season, which extends from 1 June to 30 November. While the Directorate has well established structures and communication procedures at all levels, including an early
warning system, United Nations system entities are helping i t to address a number of
operational challenges. Hence, with the support of the humanitarian community, the
Directorate organized a national simulation exercise on 12 and 13 August, in order for

19-16958

3/33

S/2019/805

all partners to better understand their respective roles and responsibilities in the
management of a hazardous hydro-meteorological event and to test the protocols and
procedures in place at the National Emergency Operations Centre.
12. As of 28 August, no laboratory-confirmed cholera case had been recorded in
Haiti since the first week of February 2019. Surveillance and laboratory testing
continue unabated. Since 1 January, 584 suspected cases of cholera have been
registered at the national level, a decrease of 80 per cent compared with the same
period in 2018 (2,986 suspected cases). In the light of the positive evolution of the
epidemic, the United Nations strategy in support of the government -owned national
plan for the elimination of cholera in Haiti, 2013–2022, is being reviewed in
coordination with all partners in order to: (a) strengthen the surveillance system at the
community level; (b) further develop laboratory capacity to detect possible cases with
the shortest delay; (c) carry out awareness-raising and prevention activities at the
community level; and (d) maintain and reinforce all water, sanitation and hygiene
activities, as a preventive measure, so as to further reduce the possible transmission
of cholera and other waterborne diseases. The number of rapid response teams, which
have played a significant role in the elimination of transmission, is being gradually
reduced as the number of suspected cases continues to decrease. Nevertheless, the
United Nations continues to work on the preparedness and response capacities of the
Ministry of Health and the National Directorate for Water Supply and Sanitation in
order to further reinforce the surveillance, prevention and response system.
13. The United Nations also expanded its support to victims of cholera, under
track 2 of the new United Nations approach to cholera in Haiti. Its community-led
consultative process has now taken root in 25 communities throughout Haiti, where
victims are forming groups to work with local officials, civil society groups and the
wider community of cholera victims to identify priorities and develop projects to
address them. Each community is receiving $150,000 to fund such projects. Work on
track 2 will continue beyond the closure of MINUJUSTH, with the aim of reaching
upwards of 134 communities.

III. Mandate implementation
A.

Community violence reduction (benchmark 6)
14. Since October 2017, a total of 50 community violence reduction projects have
been implemented by over 26 partners, to the benefit of 23,051 women and girls and
20,788 men and boys from marginalized and at-risk communities. The projects
supported MINUJUSTH objectives concerning the rule of law, police and human
rights at the community level. As part of the transition process, MINUJUSTH worked
closely with its implementing partners to ensure that all projects wi ll be completed
before 15 October. In addition to imparting skills to beneficiaries, the projects, under
both MINUSTAH and MINUJUSTH, have been valuable in raising the awareness of
national authorities of the multisectoral nature of the gang issue and the importance
of working directly with communities to reduce gang violence.
15. The Mission collaborated with the National Commission for Disarmament,
Dismantlement and Reintegration on a weapons and ammunition management
programme, community violence reduction activities and the development of a
national strategy to address gang violence. In order to contribute to the building of
national capacity, MINUJUSTH facilitated the participation of one member of the
Commission and one representative of the national police in the Caribbean
subregional seminar on conventional ammunition management, organized by the
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin

4/33

19-16958

S/2019/805

America and the Caribbean, in Kingston, on 10 and 11 September. In addition, two
members of the Commission participated in the seventh South -South technical
cooperation tour, held in Bogota from 16 to 20 September. Furthermore, a project
aiming to reinforce the capacity of the Commission in community violence reduction
is being implemented by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
16. The Commission also pursued outreach with local authorities, civil society and,
in particular, with gang leaders to encourage the latter to surrender illicit firearms. On
12 August, a Cité Soleil (West Department) gang leader handed over 4 handguns and
50 rounds of ammunitions, following the symbolic handover, on 28 May, of 8 firearms
by another gang leader from Cité Soleil. Concurrently, on 18 July, the national police
held a ceremony, with the assistance of MINUJUSTH, to destroy 374 obsolete or
seized weapons. Following the recommendations made by the technical assessment
mission on weapons and ammunition management conducted from 26 August to
6 September, discussions resumed on the amendment to the draft legislation on arms
control adopted on 10 July by the Senate and pending adoption by the Lower Chamber.
17. Over the course of its mandate, MINUJUSTH supported 96 countrywide
conferences and town hall meetings on the rule of law, attracting 22,335 participants,
including 9,963 women. Those activities aimed to further efforts to de -escalate
existing conflicts and open spaces for dialogue in communities prone to electoral
violence and gang activity. Recurrent themes discussed included the circ ulation of
illegal weapons; the reasons that lead communities to arm themselves; interactions
between the police, civil society and the justice system; informal frameworks to
address community conflicts; the interrelation between youth, drugs and gang
activity; and electoral violence. Along with local authorities, civil society and
academia, parliamentarians also participated in the events, thereby strengthening
political engagement in the most violence-prone communes across Haiti. All forums
concluded with the adoption of recommendations for action, and, in six communes,
civil society entities created follow-up committees, endorsed by the local authorities.
18. Four outreach projects were implemented during the reporting period. Two of
those, as highlighted in my previous report (S/2019/198), continued to enhance
dialogue between parliamentarians and their constituencies across the country, on
ways to improve the rule of law, including through the adoption of the draft criminal
code and the draft code of criminal procedure. The two other projects are gender focused, as one aims to promote the leadership of women through dialogue with
Haitian women leaders, while the second mobilizes communities around the
parliamentary vote on the draft law on the prevention, punishment and elimination of
violence against women.

B.

Security and police development (benchmarks 1, 4, 5 and 6)
19. Street demonstrations, which had largely subsided during the reporting period,
increased in frequency and violence during the month of September, with
confrontations occurring between protesters and the national police on 20 and
23 September in Port-au-Prince. The past months have also been marked by a
continued increase in major crime trends and gang-related incidents. The number of
reported homicides for 2019 has increased by 17 per cent compared with 2018, with
698 cases between 1 January and 8 October, against 594 for the same period last year.
Two thirds of the homicides were recorded in the West Department, where gangrelated criminality is most prevalent. In addition, 34 police officers were killed
between 1 January and 24 September 2019, compared with 17 during the entirety of
2018. The rise in criminality is creating danger zones in areas such as the Port-auPrince neighbourhood of Martissant, where the population has begun to protest the
free rein of armed criminals who act with complete impunity, in defiance of State

19-16958

5/33

S/2019/805

authority. The negative crime trends place an additional burden on a national police
force already struggling to honour payments to service providers and meet the basic
needs of officers, thereby limiting its operational capacities and forcing its leadership
to make difficult operational choices.
20. Despite such challenges, the national police pursued anti-gang operations. The
arrest on 22 July of an infamous gang leader increased public confidence in the
institution and had a positive impact on the perception of security by the population.
This intelligence-led investigation, for which MINUJUSTH provided limited support
by deploying a drone unit, showcased the capacity of the national police to plan and
execute operations. With the impending closure of MINUJUSTH, this was one of the
final instances of the United Nations providing operational support to the national
police.
21. The recruitment of new police officers, with MINUJUSTH support, further
strengthened national police capacity. Since the adoption of the strategic development
plan for the national police, 2017–2021, three promotions, comprising 2,370 cadets,
including 453 women, have been incorporated into the force, most recently on
8 August, when the thirtieth promotion graduated. These recruits have raised the
number of police officers to 15,404 nationwide, 10.5 per cent of whom are women.
In addition, 67 national police officers were promoted to the rank of Police
Commissioner on 1 August after having successfully completed a seven -month
training course. While the national police appears on track to reach the target of
18,000 officers by December 2021, it will need to redouble efforts to achieve the
objectives of 1.51 officer per 1,000 inhabitants (currently 1.33) and 12 per cent of
women, as set out in its five-year plan.
22. Funding has been secured through UNDP for the construction of the first
regional office of the General Inspectorate in Cap-Haïtien (North Department), where
a site has been identified, denoting progress in decentralizing the accountability body
of the national police. Proposals from potential contractors are being assessed, and
the general directive on the organization and functioning of the four future regional
offices is pending signature by the Director General.
23. The Mission’s sexual and gender-based violence prevention team continued to
strengthen the national police unit to combat sexual violence, along with its partners,
notably through four workshops on investigation techniques for police and judges,
organized with technical and financial support from UNDP. The works hops helped to
generate awareness regarding sex crime cases, develop a common understanding
regarding the provision of care to victims and disseminate best practices on
prevention of such crimes. The fifth international seminar on the fight against sexual
and gender-based violence, held from 10 to 12 September, was attended by 149
participants, including 91 women, from the senior leadership of the Haitian National
Police, the legal sector and United Nations and civil society partners in Haiti.
24. The results of the second evaluation of the strategic development plan for the
national police, 2017–2021, conducted with support from MINUJUSTH, showed
continued progress. Such progress notwithstanding, the persistent political crisis, the
lack of government engagement and donor fatigue contributed to an overall low
implementation rate of 34.5 per cent. Of the 133 priority actions contained in the plan,
2 have been completed, 103 are ongoing and 28 have yet to begin.
25. Whereas progress in national police develop ment over the past 15 years of
peacekeeping presence is evident, maintaining the momentum of continued growth
and professionalization will require greater attention by national authorities and the
international community to resourcing the police. Addressing the acute equipment
needs of the police, which lacks both ammunition and armoured vehicles, is urgent.
The expansion of territorial coverage, the strengthening of operational capacities –
6/33

19-16958

S/2019/805

specifically with regard to crime prevention, crowd control, crimi nal intelligence and
investigation – and increasing the representation of women in the national police,
should remain the focus of the next mission.

C.

Justice and anti-corruption (benchmarks 1, 2, 5, 6 and 10)
26. In spite of the negative impact that the security situation has had on the
functioning of the Port-au-Prince court of first instance, significant progress was
made in reducing the rate of prolonged pretrial detention in the jurisdiction, in large
part as a result of stronger leadership and more effective collaboration among judicial
actors, through the penal chain committee, in handling penal cases. During the month
of July, all 76 cases transferred to the Court were processed in real time by the
prosecutor’s office, investigating judges closed 79 cases, and the Court held 29
judgment sessions, closing 23 cases. During the reporting period, the legal aid offices
supported by MINUJUSTH contributed to the release of 34 adults and 18 minors.
Overall, the number of pretrial detainees in the Port-au-Prince jurisdiction has
decreased by 14 per cent since October 2017.
27. Delays continued in the installation of the National Council on Legal Aid, the
body tasked with providing legal assistance to the most vulnerabl e, following the
promulgation of the Legal Aid law on 26 October 2018. The State has yet to define
its national legal assistance strategy, draft a related action plan and allocate funding
to implement it. MINUJUSTH and UNDP supported the Ministry of Justic e and
Public Security through the recruitment of a consultant to draft the strategic plan,
which will provide the National Council with the tools to establish 18 legal aid offices
nationwide. With the support of UNDP, the Mission also facilitated the recru itment
of a consultant to help the Superior Council of the Judiciary draft an annual report on
its activities and the overall functioning of the judiciary, the third such report since
the establishment of the Council in 2012.
28. On 19 August, the Minister of Justice and Public Security informed the President
of the Superior Council of the Judiciary of the appointment by Mr. Moïse of 23 judges,
including 2 women, to various jurisdictions across the country. According to the
Council, 40 judicial appointments were still pending.
29. Important progress has been made with regard to the administration of justice,
the functioning of judicial institutions and legislative reform since October 2017.
Through the joint rule of law programme, MINUJUSTH and UNDP supported the
Superior Council of the Judiciary in developing a five-year strategic plan for 2018–2023
and elaborating a report on the state of the judiciary. Internal oversight and
accountability mechanisms have been strengthened both within the Ministry and th e
Council. The former conducted a nationwide inspection of 18 offices of prosecutors,
five appellate courts, over 100 tribunaux de paix and 18 offices of prison clerks
between December 2018 and June 2019. The latter published the first results of the
vetting of magistrates. Furthermore, all seats on the Supreme Court and the Council
have been filled.
30. With respect to legislative reform, the adoption and promulgation of the Legal
Aid law will, gradually, allow access to justice for the most vulnerable. D espite the
efforts by MINUJUSTH and its partners, the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal
Procedure, as well as the draft organic law of the Ministry of Justice and Public
Security, have yet to be debated in Parliament. Their passing and promulgation wi ll
constitute key priorities for the new Office. Furthermore, the Mission forged a
partnership with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the State ’s
anti-corruption unit to build the capacities of judicial actors in the fight against

19-16958

7/33

S/2019/805

corruption. The partnership will enable the assessment of the current 10 -year national
anti-corruption strategy, and the drafting of a new one.
31. Nonetheless, the full achievement of justice and rule of law benchmarks will
require a long-term effort and sustained engagement by both the national authorities
and the international community. Such long-term institution-building would benefit
from the adoption of a nationally owned rule of law reform road map, so as to be
effective and sustainable. Delays in judicial appointments and appointments not based
on merit continue to hinder the smooth functioning of the justice system. As part of
such reforms, key oversight and accountability institutions need to be adequately
staffed, namely, the Inspectorate of the Superior Council of the Judiciary, starting
with the appointment of its director.
32. The past two years have shown that prolonged pretrial detention is not an
intractable phenomenon. Strategies supported by MINUJUSTH have been successful
in reversing the negative trend in the jurisdiction of Port-au-Prince. From October
2017 to August 2019, the number of inmates in pretrial detention at the national
penitentiary decreased from 3,750 to 2,864. During the same period, the number of
minors detained at the Rehabilitation Centre for Minors in Conflict with the Law
decreased from 114 to 39. Such efforts need to be amplified and replicated nationwide.

D.

Corrections (benchmarks 1, 3 and 5)
33. As of 4 September, Haitian prisons held a total of 10,884 detainees, including
355 women, 204 boys and 8 girls, with a 337 per cent occupancy rate. Of those
detainees, 73 per cent were awaiting trial. While important steps have been taken
towards enhancing the administrative, managerial and operational capacities ,
overcrowding, low staffing levels and a lack of resources caused by budgetary
constraints, continue to negatively affect the functioning of the prison administration
directorate, which remains subsumed under the national police, with no financial or
administrative autonomy to undertake basic prison reforms and recruit personnel.
Recurrent challenges in ensuring the regular provision of food, medicine and other
supplies to detention centres hinder its ability to improve conditions of detention.
34. During the reporting period, the directorate, in collaboration with the Port -auPrince court of first instance, organized a one-day forum for 84 court clerks, legal
assistants, lawyers from the MINUJUSTH-supported legal aid offices, prison registry
clerks and other stakeholders from the Port-au-Prince jurisdiction, in order to
reinforce the management of inmate records. Through its community violence
reduction programme, MINUJUSTH implemented three projects in three prisons for
the reinsertion of inmates. A total of 135 inmates, including 14 women, acquired a
variety of vocational skills. Moreover, five quick-impact security, energy, water and
sanitation infrastructure and rehabilitation projects were completed at the prison in
Jérémie (Grand’Anse Department), the national penitentiary (West Department), and
the women’s prison in Cabaret (West Department), and all 18 Haitian correctional
facilities received a supply of security equipment. Furthermore, the Mission
facilitated two workshops on performance appraisal techniques for operations chiefs,
including one woman, so as to enhance the supervision and evaluation of staff.
35. Between October 2017 and September 2019, 218 deaths were recorded in the
Haitian prison system, resulting in an annual mortality rate of 10. 44 per 1,000
detainees – a decrease from 16 per 1,000 in 2017, despite perennial shortages of food
and medication. Through concerted efforts by the directorate, the World Health
Organization, the International Organization for Migration, the Bureau of Inte rnational
Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs, and non-governmental organization partners,
measures were adopted, such as early screening and feeding programmes for

8/33

19-16958

S/2019/805

malnourished, anaemic and tubercular patients in detention, and an outbreak of
scabies, which affected 2,520 detainees in four prisons, was contained and treated in
a holistic manner. In addition, a training on health care in correctional environments
was delivered to 82 corrections officers, including 46 women; and emergency health care directives were developed by the directorate and MINUJUSTH.
36. The penitentiary system now counts 1,207 corrections officers, 159 of whom are
women. A gender-sensitive recruitment needs analysis is awaiting implementation.
Moreover, in collaboration with MINUJUSTH, UNDP and the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the directorate
organized two gender awareness workshops for 286 officers, including 37 women, in
eight prisons across the country.
37. In line with the strategic development plan for the national police, 2017–2021,
MINUJUSTH and UNDP, through the joint rule of law programme, continued to
strengthen the capacity of the prison administration to autonomously manage its
financial and administrative resources. A total of 529 staff, including 164 women, has
received relevant training. Draft penitentiary legislation, including the organic law
elevating the prison administration to a central directorate within the national police,
with autonomy over its own resources, was validated by the Director General of the
national police during the reporting period and must now be tabled before Parliament
through the Ministry of Justice and Public Security. With technical and financial
support from the Mission, the Automated Fingerprint Identification System and the
automated inmate records management system have been rolled out in five prisons,
and 8,533 files have been processed.
38. After the conclusion of the third round of evaluations in September, the
Rehabilitation Centre for Minors in Conflict with the Law, the Cabaret women ’s
prison, Croix-des-Bouquets Prison in the West Department, and Fort Liberté II in the
North-East Department were certified as having met international standards.
MINUJUSTH and UNDP supported this certification process, for which the final
report was presented to the Director General of the Haitian National Police and the
Director of the Prison Administration on 24 September.

E.

Human rights (benchmarks 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9)
39. The appointment of a Minister Delegate for human rights and the fight against
extreme poverty in September 2018 reinvigorated the work of the Inter -Ministerial
Committee on Human Rights and enhanced State compliance with reporting
obligations to international human rights mechanisms. During the reporting period,
the Inter-Ministerial Committee finalized Haiti’s midterm report as part of the
universal periodic review, detailing progress made in the implementation of the
recommendations accepted by Haiti during the second cycle of the universal periodic
review, in 2016. On 30 July, the Office of the Prime Minister discussed the report
with representatives of ministries, public institutions, including the Office of the
National Human Rights Ombudsperson, and civil society organizations. In addition,
a first draft of the national action plan on human rights was finalized in July, and is
pending endorsement by the Executive, following consultations with representatives
of public institutions and civil society organizations.
40. During the two-year mandate of MINUJUSTH, the capacity of the national
human rights institution to function independently and protect citizens significantly
improved. It released its first public annual report since 2013, which included
20 recommendations to State authorities on a broad range of human rights issues. The
confirmation of the A status of the national human rights institution by the Global
Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions, in May 2019, further showed

19-16958

9/33

S/2019/805

international recognition for its efforts to comply with the principles relating to the
status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the
Paris Principles). The human rights institution also increased its public advocacy on
critical human rights issues, and progress was observed in the implementation of its
recommendations by national authorities, notably in relation to the reduction of
prolonged pretrial detention. Finally, as a result of capacity-building support provided
through the joint rule of law programme, the human rights institution is finalizing the
drafting of its 2019–2024 internal strategy, as well as a manual on internal rules and
regulations.
41. The Mission continued to strengthen the capacities of civil society
organizations, notably by facilitating trainings on human rights monitoring and
reporting, as well as on partnerships between remote communities and local
authorities in promoting human rights, and by conducting advocacy sessions on the
implementation of the recommendations accepted by Haiti during the second cycle of
the universal periodic review, in 2016, and the preparation of the civil society report
for the next cycle of the universal periodic review, in 2021. Special emphasis was put
on the role of civil society in advocating the ratification by Parliament of the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment and in combating the discrimination faced by women electoral
contenders. Between 2017 and 2019, civil society organizations significantly
increased their reporting and advocacy capacity, collectively producing 48 public
reports, 6 of which were submitted to international human rights mechanisms.
42. Significant challenges persist regarding the ability of national authorities to hold
agents of the State accountable for current and past serious human rights violations.
The publication of the joint report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and MINUJUSTH on the events of November 2018
in La Saline attracted public, diplomatic and media interest. Despite the spotlight on
the events, no criminal proceedings have been launched in connection with the alleged
implication of national police officers and public officials in the events. The national
human rights institution released a statement on 25 August urging the judge
investigating the case to act promptly and professionally to ensure that those
suspected of having been involved are heard, tried and judged.
43. Throughout its two-year mandate, MINUJUSTH has monitored the authorities’
response to four other major instances of serious human rights violations: the killing,
arbitrary arrests and forced disappearance of civilians during police operations in
October and November 2017, in Lilavois and Grand Ravine, respectively; the beating
to death of a disabled 25-year-old man by a police officer in La Victoire, in December
2017; and numerous abuses allegedly committed by the national police during
anti-government protests in July, October and November 201 8 and February 2019. In
the light of the absence of concrete judicial developments to establish accountability
and bring justice to the victims of these high-profile cases, advocacy for stronger
accountability mechanisms and justice for all victims will re main a key feature of the
mandate of BINUH.

F.

Election preparations (benchmark 11)
44. The United Nations country team’s integrated project on support for the Haitian
electoral cycle, 2019–2020, was finalized and signed by UNDP and the Provisional
Electoral Council on 2 August. The umbrella project, which features UNDP as the
lead agency for technical assistance and institutional strengthening, the United
Nations Office for Project Services as the provider of logistical support, UN -Women
focusing on women’s participation and gender and the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, on media support, advances a One United

10/33

19-16958

S/2019/805

Nations approach to electoral assistance, exemplifying the integrated nature of future
United Nations work in Haiti, following the closure of MINUJUSTH.
45. The joint electoral security cell, comprised of officers from the national police
and MINUJUSTH, continued to work on the planning process to ensure the security
of upcoming electoral contests. The team completed a risk assessment template for
voting centres nationwide. A two-day training on the electoral process and the
prevention of violence against women has been planned for the benefit of the national
police, for its regional directors, electoral focal points, members of the national office
for the coordination of women’s affairs and trainers from the Police Academy.
Members of the cell also established a partnership with the International Foundation
for Electoral Systems and the Provisional Electoral Counc il to provide training for
the civilian electoral security officers.

IV. Transition planning
46. The United Nations system in Haiti has continued to prepare for the transition
to a non-peacekeeping presence, guided by the commitments made in the framework
of my Action for Peacekeeping initiative, including stronger integrated analysis and
planning. United Nations system entities from the peace, security and development
pillars in Haiti and New York held a strategic workshop in Port -au-Prince from 3 to
5 September. The discussions helped develop a common understanding of the
respective roles and responsibilities of BINUH and the United Nations country team
after 15 October, when the agencies, funds and programmes will take on the
programmatic and technical assistance role previously filled by MINUJUSTH. The
workshop also helped identify common United Nations priorities in Haiti and a set of
strategic benchmarks for BINUH. It advanced the development of collaboration and
coordination mechanisms that will integrate the activities of the new mission and the
country team. The Departments of Peace Operations and of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and UN-Women worked jointly to ensure that the reconfigured
presence in Haiti fully enables women’s participation and leadership in its structures,
expertise and coordination frameworks to safeguard and strengthen the gains made in
gender equality and in respect of women and peace and security.
47. Following the decision to grant Haiti eligibility to the Peace building Fund for a
period of five years, the country team developed four project proposals, with technical
advice from relevant Mission components and in consultation with national
counterparts and partners. The projects are designed to support and accele rate the
transition to a non-peacekeeping presence and foster greater national leadership and
ownership in areas that are critical to the promotion of stability and security in the
short and medium term, namely, the rule of law and access to justice, weapo ns and
ammunition management, community violence reduction, and electoral security (with
a specific focus on women), as well as to enable progress in achieving sustainable
development. A fifth project proposal, aimed at establishing a Peacebuilding Fund
secretariat within the Resident Coordinator’s Office to oversee the effective
implementation of the Fund’s portfolio in Haiti, was also submitted.
48. Planning for the start-up of BINUH is proceeding in three phases, beginning
with the adoption of Security Council resolution 2476 (2019) on 25 June, establishing
the mission, to the start of its first regular budget, on 1 January 2020. During the first
phase, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, in close coordination
with the Department of Operational Support, assumed the overall leadership for the
planning deliverables, such as the mission concept, as required by the planning
directive on Haiti issued by the Secretary-General in July. That phase ended in late
August with the establishment of an advance team for BINUH, bas ed in Port-au-

19-16958

11/33

S/2019/805

Prince, to assume all mission planning and start-up responsibilities. In order to
maximize the use of in-country resources, more than half of the advance team
members were drawn from MINUJUSTH, with the rest deployed from Headquarters
and other missions on temporary assignments. The second start-up phase, ending on
16 October, will achieve initial operational readiness of BINUH from the first day of
its mandate. In the third and final phase of the start -up, BINUH will assume
responsibility for planning and operations and will establish joint planning and
operational mechanisms for the integration of activities and coordination with the
country team. The core elements will be an integrated strategic framework and joint
teams on electoral and judicial reforms, community violence reduction, as well as
disarmament and dismantlement, co-located in shared premises.

V. New benchmarks
49. The Security Council requested, in its resolution 2476 (2019), that I provide in
this report, in partnership with the Government of Haiti, MINUJUSTH and the United
Nations country team, strategic benchmarks with indicators for achieving the tasks
mandated to BINUH. After a process of consultation that inclu ded the strategic
workshop held in Port-au-Prince in September, six new benchmarks and 25 indicators
have been identified to measure progress towards sustainable stability after the
deployment of BINUH (see annex II). Four of the benchmarks are directly re lated to
the areas of the BINUH mandate, pursuant to paragraph 1 of the resolution. The other
two function as contextual benchmarks, reflecting minimum conditions for
socioeconomic progress to sustain stability in the country, address the root causes of
violence and conflict and enable progress towards sustainable development. The
benchmarks and indicators are grounded in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the realization of which would put Haiti on a definite path of peace and
prosperity. BINUH and the country team may identify further benchmarks and
indicators, and, together with the Government, will establish targets for all of them,
as they develop an innovative integrated strategic framework within the context of
the review of the United Nations cooperation framework in Haiti in the fourth quarter
of 2019.
50. The new approach to the benchmarks, a result of thorough consultations within
the United Nations system, reflects the mutually supportive relationship between the
humanitarian, peace and security and development strands, and an acknowledgement
of the preventive role of the latter, which are particularly critical in the context of
Haiti and underpin the Organization’s reform efforts. While progress on the contextual
benchmarks may not determine the timeframe for the eventual disengagement of
BINUH from Haiti, it should be used as an additional barometer of the country ’s
stability and capacity to remain on a positive path towards sustainable development.
51. The benchmarks represent objectives for the Haitian people and their national
institutions to pursue over the horizon of the next two to three years so as to improve
the structural foundations of stability and social cohesion. The benchmarks have been
informed by national priorities set by the Government of Haiti, the preliminary results
of national dialogue processes and the most recent national development strategies.
While they incorporate key elements of the MINUJUSTH benchmarks and indicators,
the new benchmarks set national accountability and the Sustainable Development
Goals at the centre of the relationship of the United Nations with Haiti.
52. Given the current fluid political environment and the pending formation of a
new government, continued, multisectoral consultations, led by BINUH leadership,
will ensure that the objectives behind these benchmarks enjoy as broad a national
understanding and ownership as possible. BINUH and the Government of Haiti will

12/33

19-16958

S/2019/805

agree on the specific targets for each indicator in 2020 and 2021. In doing so, some
of the indicators may be adjusted as the mission and the country team develop, in
consultation with national partners, a fully-fledged integrated strategic framework to
ensure an effective transition process. BINUH will also seek to establish a mo nitoring
and data collection mechanism on progress against the benchmarks, in partnership
with the government and the country team and drawing on existing data collection
mechanisms for the Goals.
53. While the benchmarks are not a tool for assessing the performance of the United
Nations in the country, they reflect the initial foundation for the establishment of
system-wide critical priorities that the United Nations presence in the country will
work towards over the next years. Support for their achievement will be delivered to
national actors in an integrated manner by BINUH and the country team, taking into
account their distinct capacities and comparative advantages, namely the mission ’s
political and advisory role and the programmatic role of agencies, funds and
programmes.

VI. Drawdown and closure
54. In accordance with Security Council resolutions 2410 (2018) and 2466 (2019),
MINUJUSTH continued to gradually drawdown its presence in advance of closure on
15 October. All seven formed police units have been repatriated, except the rear party
of the last unit, which ceased operations on 9 September. Of the 295 authorized
individual police officers, 10 remain in the mission area as the police and corrections
transition team for BINUH.
55. The Mission has implemented a phased drawdown of its civilian staffing
articulated around four dates: 30 June, 31 August, 15 September and 15 October. A
small liquidation team has been assembled to carry out residual tasks prior to the end
of the liquidation period on 31 December 2019. The Mission has sought to secure
placement for staff members. For national staff, two job fairs have been held with the
United Nations country team, the diplomatic community and the private sector, which
has resulted in a number of offers. For international staff, the Mission, supported by
Headquarters, has succeeded in securing transfers for many staff members to other
peace operations, and those efforts continue. Largely as a result of these actions, the
drawdown has proceeded in a smooth fashion, with no major incidents to report.
56. The Mission has progressively closed or handed over the 25 sites it was
managing throughout the country. As of the publication of the present report, it retains
responsibility for the logistics base in Port-au-Prince. During the reporting period,
seven police co-locations were closed and handed over to the national police.
Mitigation measures were implemented to prevent the creation of security vacuums in
the zones where they were located. The Miragoâne and Gonaïves formed police unit
camps were closed and handed over on 31 August and 30 September, respectively.
57. As of 28 August, write-off had been initiated for 47 per cent of MINUJUSTH
assets and equipment. In line with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United
Nations, some assets have been transferred to Headquarters, the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations Support Office in Somalia and the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, and additional assets will be transferred to
the Global Service Centre and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali in October. Other equipment or property that is no
longer required by the United Nations, or for which a transfer is not feasible, are being
disposed of through commercial sales.

19-16958

13/33

S/2019/805

58. Archiving teams securely disposed of more than 4,000 boxes of obsolete
MINUSTAH and MINUJUSTH papers. MINUJUSTH and residual MINUSTAH
records identified for transfer to Headquarters are being prepared for shipment in
accordance with archives and records management standards. In coordination with
the Office of Information and Communications Technology, MINUJUSTH digital
content will be migrated for access by BINUH.

VII. Conduct and discipline
59. The Mission continued to conduct prevention activities, including training,
public information and outreach, in order to raise awareness of the United Nations
standards of conduct, in particular the zero-tolerance policy with respect to sexual
exploitation and abuse. The Mission also maintained communication with, and
provided assistance to, the victims of past acts of sexual exploitation and abuse
involving former United Nations personnel, some of whom have pending paternity
and child support claims.
60. Continued support to victims and the resolution of pending paternity and chi ld
support claims will remain priorities for the United Nations in Haiti. The development
of a victim-centred plan under BINUH, led by a victims’ rights advocate as envisaged
in resolution 2476 (2019), is vital to ensure that victims of, and children born of,
sexual exploitation and abuse receive appropriate and adequate support in accordance
with the United Nations Comprehensive Strategy on Assistance and Support to
Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United Nations Staff and Related
Personnel (General Assembly resolution 62/214, annex).

VIII. Financial aspects
61. The General Assembly, in its resolution 73/317 and decision 73/555 of 3 July
2019, authorized the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in an amount not
exceeding $49.5 million gross for the maintenance of United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2019.
62. The reimbursement of police costs and the reimbursement of the costs of
contingent-owned equipment have been made for the period up to 31 December 2018.

IX. Observations
63. The upcoming cessation of MINUJUSTH activities and the departure of its
personnel will mark the first time since 2004 that Haiti will not have the presence of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation on its soil. Over the past 15 years, the
women and men of MINUSTAH and MINUJUSTH have worked closely with national
authorities, civil society, national and international partners and the rest of the United
Nations system to help solidify political and stability gains, as well as develop and
professionalize the national police, in order to foster an environment conducive to the
development of the country. Backed by the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the
Organization’s ongoing peace and security and development reforms, the transition
to a non-peacekeeping United Nations presence in Haiti is taking place through very
close cooperation between the Department of Peace Operations, the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and the agencies, funds and programmes of the
United Nations.
64. As the United Nations prepares to embark upon a new partnership with Haiti,
the country stands at a delicate moment. The protracted multidimensional crisis with
14/33

19-16958

S/2019/805

which it has been contending since July 2018 shows little sign of abatement or
resolution. The increasingly fraught and violent nature of Haiti’s political context has
led to the virtual paralysis of most State institutions, including Parliament. The
continued decline of its economy, exacerbated by the activities of criminal gangs
operating at strategic points between ports and agricultural lands and urban centres,
has contributed to a general increase in food insecurity and a marked deterioration in
the living conditions of an ever-growing swathe of the population.
65. The need for a broad-based and comprehensive inter-Haitian dialogue to remove
political blockages, revitalize the economy and recast the terms of the Haitian social
contract has never been more acute. I urge all actors to set aside their differences and
particular interests to work together to overcome the increasingly preoccupying
situation, as only then will Haiti be able to resume its progress towards sustainable
development and the achievement of the 2030 Agenda. The articulation and conduct
of such a process would likely require a degree of external facilitation, to which the
United Nations, through my Special Representative, stands ready to contribute. The
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, the United Nations country team and other
international partners are poised to support a range of political and economic reform
initiatives which might derive from such a dialogue.
66. Impunity continues to hamper progress towards improved governance and
genuine accountability. Despite the investigations by police and judicial authoritie s,
11 months after the extreme violence in La Saline, which resulted in at least
26 killings, the alleged disappearance of 12 persons, and a number of cases of gang
rape, negligible progress has been made to ensure justice for the victims. No judicial
proceedings have been initiated against those police officers and State officials who
are alleged to have been complicit in the violence. I deplore that no legal proceedings
have been initiated in relation to the Grand Ravine killings and other serious
violations committed in the past two years.
67. The pervasive sense of impunity, whether with regard to corruption or human
rights violations, perpetuates a lack of trust in judicial institutions and State
authorities, reinforcing a widespread sense of insecurit y. The scenes of violence and
the allegations of corruption that have affected Parliament over the past months, as
political actors struggled to obtain confirmation of not one, but two, governments, are
regrettable. Outcomes in the fight against corruption continue to lag. Judicial
proceedings on the ongoing embezzlement cases have produced little in the way of
prosecutions. It is time that the debate on corruption and reform give rise to concrete
measures to tackle the iniquities that are eroding Haiti ’s institutions and detracting
from its domestic and international image.
68. Addressing the question of impunity, through the continued reform of the justice
system, the uprooting of corruption and the unfailing prosecution of the perpetrators
of human rights violations, will be paramount to restoring Haitian citizens’ confidence
in their political and economic elites and persuading them to reengage through
democratic and peaceful means in the building of their collective future. I encourage
the government to adopt a road map for rule of law and justice reforms so as to outline
national priorities and ensure sustainable long-term development of the sector. I also
encourage the Executive and the Superior Council of the Judiciary to ensure the strict
upholding of the legal requirements controlling the integrity and credentials of judges
and thus provide for the appointment and confirmation of a greater number of
qualified magistrates who deliver effective justice services to the population. In
addition, BINUH, the United Nations country team and international partners will
continue to provide technical and financial support to the work undertaken by the
legal aid offices, as well as to the implementation of the State -provided legal aid
programme.

19-16958

15/33

S/2019/805

69. As national authorities have fully assumed sole responsibility for the provision
of security across the country, and as the Haitian National Police now relies
exclusively on its own capacities to conduct operations, it is imperative that the
national police be well resourced and equipped in order to fulfil its mandate. Even
though BINUH will continue to support the development of its technical capacities,
without adequate specialized assets such as armoured vehicles and airlift and aerial
reconnaissance capabilities, the task of the national police will remain arduous. It is
imperative that the investments made by so many international partners in developing
the police force not be squandered, so that it can continue to develop as an exemplary,
apolitical, professional force.
70. As the work of the new United Nations presence in Haiti is set to begin, I express
my continued commitment to the Haitian people for an effective, impactful and
consequential engagement of the United Nations system on the ground. This requires
the integration of the political and advisory capacities of BINUH and the
programmatic and technical assistance capacities of the country team in the service of
a common priority objective that cuts across the peace and security, human rights and
development pillars. Together, these capacities, along with full national ownership and
accountability, will support the country’s vision for stability and prosperity.
71. In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my Special
Representative for Haiti, Helen La Lime, and the women and men of MINUJUSTH
and the United Nations country team for their tireless work and dedication to
contributing to the stabilization of Haiti and supporting the country on its path to
sustainable development. I would also like to thank those Member States that over
the course of 15 years have contributed military, police and civilian personnel to the
two peacekeeping missions that were deployed in the country.

16/33

19-16958

S/2019/805

Annex I
Benchmark indicators, targets and baselines
Symbol

Equivalent

Symbol

Equivalent

On track to achieve target by the timeline
(15 indicators, 33 per cent)

Challenges expected to achieve target by
the timeline but with a descending trend
(0 indicators, 0 per cent)

Challenges expected to achieve target by
the timeline but with a positive trend
(13 indicators, 28 per cent)

No progress/not on track to achieve target
by timeline (17 indicators, 37 per cent)

Challenges expected to achieve target by
the timeline but with a stagnating trend
(0 indicators, 0 per cent)

No update on progress was expected during
the reporting period (1 indicator, 2 per cent)

Target
timeline

Indicator

1. The executive and
legislative branches
have promulgated
legislation that
improves access to
justice, enhances the
development of the
national police and
addresses prolonged
pretrial detention,
which is a cause of
prison overcrowding;
all branches have
initiated
implementation of the
new legislation,
including through
sustainable budget
allocations

1.1 Existence of the new April
Criminal Code (1 – draft
2019
law initiated; 2 – draft law
voted by each chamber;
3 – law promulgated by
the President)

3 – New Criminal
Code is
promulgated

1.2 Existence of the
Code of Criminal
Procedure (1 – draft law
initiated; 2 – draft law
voted by each chamber;
3 – law promulgated by
the President)

3 – Code of
1 – No session in the
Criminal Procedure Parliament dedicated to
is promulgated
discussions of the Code
owing to the current
political situation

19-16958

April
2019

Target

Update as at 15 September
(or otherwise specified)

Benchmark

Trend

1 – No session in the
Parliament dedicated to
discussions of the Code
owing to the current
political situation

1.3 Existence of the
April
Legal Aid Law (1 – draft
2019
law initiated; 2 – draft law
voted by each chamber;
3 – law promulgated by
the President)

3 – Legal Aid Law
is promulgated

3 – Target already
achieved

1.4 Existence of the
April
organic law on the Haitian 2019
National Police elevating
the Directorate of Prison
Administration to a
central directorate
(1 – draft law initiated;
2 – draft law voted by
each chamber; 3 – law
promulgated by the
President)

3 – Organic law on
national police is
promulgated

1 – Draft organic law
submitted to the Ministry
of Justice and Public
Security, but progress on
its adoption stalled owing
to the current political
situation

17/33

S/2019/805

Benchmark

Target
timeline

Target

1.5 Existence of the
Prison Law (1 – draft law
initiated; 2 – draft law
voted by each chamber;
3 – law promulgated by
the President)

April
2019

3 – Prison Law is
promulgated

1.6 Identification of the
implementation
requirements by the
relevant institutions,
including budgetary
allocations, for the new
legislation (disaggregated
by law)

October Implementation
2019
requirements,
including budgetary
allocations, are
determined for the
new legislation

Indicator

Update as at 15 September
(or otherwise specified)

Trend

1 – Draft prison law
submitted to the Ministry
of Justice and Public
Security, but progress on
its adoption stalled owing
to the current political
situation
Identification of
implementation
requirements for:
(a) Criminal Code: not
yet adopted
(b) Code of Criminal
Procedure: not yet
adopted
(c) Legal Aid Law: the
Ministry of Justice and
Public Security hired a
consultant to draft a
strategic plan to
operationalize the state
legal aid programme, in
accordance with the law;
however, the
establishment of the legal
aid system is pending
confirmation of the
proposed government by
Parliament
(d) Organic law on
national police: not yet
adopted
(e) Prison Law: not yet
adopted

1.7 Number of new case October 800 new case files
files processed in real
2019
processed in real
time by the prosecutors in
time by the
the jurisdiction of Port-auprosecutors in the
Prince
jurisdiction of Portau-Prince
1.8 Proportion of
detainees in pretrial
detention in excess of two
years at the civil prison of
Port-au-Prince

18/33

October 2017–August
2019: 1,382 new cases
processed in real time by
the prosecutors in the
Port-au-Prince
jurisdiction

October 50.4 per cent of
As at 31 July 2019:
2019
detainees in pretrial 63.7 per cent (2,078 out
detention at the
of 3,261 detainees)
civil prison of Portau-Prince

19-16958

S/2019/805

Benchmark

2. The Haitian
authorities make
timely, genderbalanced and meritbased appointments in
the justice sector,
including in the
Superior Council of the
Judiciary, the Court of
Cassation and the
Superior Court of
Auditors and
Administrative
Disputes

3. The Directorate of
Prison Administration
performs key
management functions
providing basic
services to all
detainees and ensures
respect for their rights

19-16958

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 September
(or otherwise specified)

1.9 Number of cases
closed by investigative
judges in the jurisdiction
of Port-au-Prince

October 750 orders issued
2019

October 2017–August
2019: 771 orders issued

1.10 Number of penal
cases adjudicated by the
court of first instance of
Port-au-Prince

October 800 penal cases
2019
adjudicated by the
court of first
instance of Port-auPrince

October 2017–August
2019: the court of first
instance of Port-auPrince adjudicated 611
penal cases

2.1 Existence of the
April
annual report of the
2019
Superior Council of the
Judiciary, to include:
judiciary staffing by
gender; judiciary
inspection results; number
of certified judges; and
implementation of judge
evaluation process

Annual report of
the Superior
Council of the
Judiciary available,
including: judiciary
staffing by gender;
judiciary inspection
results; number of
certified judges;
and implementation
of judge evaluation
process

2.2 Number of seats
April
filled at the Superior
2019
Council of the Judiciary,
the Court of Cassation and
the Superior Court of
Auditors and
Administrative Disputes,
disaggregated by gender

Superior Council of No changes from
the Judiciary: 9/9
previous report
(3 women)

3.1 Number of deaths
per 1,000 inmates

Trend

The Superior Council of
the Judiciary appointed a
consultant whose main
tasks are to: (a) conduct
an internal diagnosis of
the impediments to the
elaboration of the annual
reports, with clear
recommendations for the
devising of a definitive
solution to the problem;
and (b) prepare a
standardized template in
order to facilitate the
elaboration of the annual
reports

Court of Cassation:
12/12 (4 women)
Superior Court of
Auditors and
Administrative
Disputes: 9/9
(3 women)

October Ratio equal to or
2019
below 10/1,000
inmates

17 October 2017–
18 September 2019:
10.44/1,000 inmates (218
deaths registered). There
has been a very sharp
decrease in registered
deaths in the past months.
If the decrease is partly a
consequence of improved
health services, there
have also been changes in
data collection
methodology that could
have had an impact.
19/33

S/2019/805

Benchmark

4. The national police
responds to public
disorder and manages
security threats
throughout Haiti,

20/33

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 September
(or otherwise specified)

3.2 Number of prisons
supported by functioning
health services for
inmates, disaggregated by
gender

October Nine out of 18
2019
prisons and four
largest national
police holding
facilities supported
by adequate healthcare facilities for
inmates

Seven out of 18 prisons
are supported by
functioning health
services for inmates

3.3 Number of
Directorate of Prison
Administration officers
recruited through a
dedicated process,
disaggregated by gender,
out of the 941 new
officers required by 2021
to meet the Directorate’s
needs

October 300 Directorate of
2019
Prison
Administration
officers recruited,
of whom 30 per
cent are women,
out of the total 941
new officers to
meet the
Directorate’s needs
by 2021

No change from previous
report. Since 1 January
2018, a total of 148
cadets, including 22
women, have been
recruited, trained and
deployed to the
Directorate of Prison
Administration. There are
now 1,207 corrections
officers, 159 of whom are
women. A gendersensitive recruitment
needs analysis, developed
by the Directorate of
Prison Administration
and approved by the
Director of the Haitian
National Police, is
awaiting implementation.

3.4 Number of prisons
certified by the
Directorate of Prison
Administration as being
able to operate without
full-time support from
international actors
(MINUJUSTH or others)

October Nine prisons
2019
certified out of 18

Following the conclusion
of the third and final
round of prison
evaluations, from 19 July
to 2 August, four prisons
in the Haitian
correctional system will
be certified as having met
international standards:
the Rehabilitation Centre
for Minors in Conflict
with the Law, the Cabaret
women’s prison and the
Croix-des-Bouquets and
Fort Liberté II prisons.

4.1 Implementation
October 43 per cent
rate of the strategic
2019
implemented (57 of
development plan of the
133 priorities in the
national police for 2017–
strategic
2021
development plan)

Trend

The overall
implementation rate is
estimated at 34.5 per
cent.

19-16958

S/2019/805

Benchmark

Indicator

Target
timeline

demonstrating elevated
levels of
professionalism,
human rights
awareness and gender
sensitivity, without
requiring international
support, as a result of
the implementation of
the relevant priorities
of the strategic
development plan of
the national police for
2017–2021

4.2 Number of police
officers per 1,000 citizens

October 1.45
2019

1.33

4.3 Percentage of
women police officers

October 11 per cent
2019

10.5 per cent (1,611
women out of 15,404
police officers)

19-16958

Target

Update as at 15 September
(or otherwise specified)

4.4 Percentage of
October 40 per cent
national police capacity
2019
statically deployed outside
the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area

37.92 per cent

4.5 Number of
October All 13 units are
specialized public order
2019
capable of
units out of the 13 existing
responding to
units of the national police
security threats
(12 Unités
with no
départementales de
MINUJUSTH
maintien d’ordre and 1
support
Compagnie d’intervention
et de maintien de l’ordre)
capable of responding to
security threats without
MINUJUSTH support

All 13 units are now
operating without
MINUJUSTH support,
even though some are
facing logistical
challenges or are
understaffed

4.6 Percentage of public October 100 per cent of
order/security operations
2019
operations without
planned and executed by
MINUJUSTH
national police without
support
MINUJUSTH support

For the period from
1 March to 15 September
2019, 339 operations
(265 public order
operations and 74
operations against
criminal gangs) were
conducted, of which 237
public order operations
and 63 operations against
criminal gangs (88.5 per
cent) were conducted
without MINUJUSTH
support.

4.7 Percentage of
national budget allocated
to national police

Currently, 6.6 per cent of
the national budget is
allocated to the national
police, which is
consistent with the trend
observed over the past
five years. The current
political situation has not
allowed for the adoption
of a new budget.

October 8 per cent of
2019
national budget
allocated to
national police

Trend

21/33

S/2019/805

Benchmark

Indicator

5. Strengthened
internal oversight and
accountability
mechanisms in the
justice, corrections and
police sectors address
misconduct and ensure
increased effectiveness
and compliance with
human rights

5.1 Number of courts of
first instance inspected
(out of 18)

22/33

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 September
(or otherwise specified)

April
2019

All 18 courts of
first instance and 5
appeal courts
inspected by the
Ministry of Justice
and Public Security

Target achieved during
the previous reporting
period

April
2019

80 per cent of all
allegations
investigated by the
General
Inspectorate of the
national police

1 January 2018–
31 August 2019: 87 per
cent of allegations
against national police
officers, including agents
of the Directorate of
Prison Administration,
investigated (299 cases
investigated out of 344
cases reported). The lack
of disaggregated data on
the number of allegations
of human rights
violations remains a
challenge.

5.3 Percentage of cases April
of confirmed misconduct 2019
by national police and
Directorate of Prison
Administration officers
disciplined by the national
police

60 per cent of cases
investigated have
sanctions
implemented

1 January 2018–
15 September 2019: 26
per cent (163 cases have
been sanctioned out of
622 cases of allegations
of misconduct against
national police officers,
including officials of the
Directorate of Prison
Administration)

5.4 Percentage of
confirmed crimes or
human rights violations
committed by national
police and Directorate of
Prison Administration
officers prosecuted by
judicial authorities

April
2019

100 per cent of
confirmed crimes
or human rights
violations
committed by
national police
officers prosecuted
by judicial
authorities

1 January 2018–
31 August 2019: police
officers were prosecuted
in 15.7 per cent of cases
of alleged human rights
violations (47 officers out
of 299 investigated cases)

5.5 Percentage of staff
of the General
Inspectorate of the
national police deployed
outside the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area,
disaggregated by gender

April
2019

30 per cent of
projected 340 staff
of the General
Inspectorate of the
national police
deployed outside
the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area

As at 15 September 2019,
none of the 175 personnel
(including 18 women)
assigned to the General
Inspectorate of the
national police were
deployed outside the
Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area.

Number of appeal courts
inspected (out of 5)
5.2 Percentage of
allegations of human
rights violations against
public officials (national
police officers,
Directorate of Prison
Administration officials)
investigated by the
General Inspectorate of
the national police

Trend

19-16958

S/2019/805

Benchmark

Indicator

6. Haitian women and
men, in particular those
from the most
vulnerable and
marginalized
communities,
demonstrate increased
trust in the capability
and willingness of the
justice system to
address crime and of
the national police to
provide security

6.1 Proportion of the
population expressing
satisfaction on how the
national police performs
at reducing crime

19-16958

Target
timeline

April
2019

Target

Update as at 15 September
(or otherwise specified)

88 per cent

The process of recruiting
a consultant to conduct
training on a survey of
the quality of the services
provided by the police to
the population has been
launched.

6.2 Number of youth at April
risk and women benefiting 2019
from community violence
reduction/reinsertion
programmes
demonstrating willingness
to work with national
police community
policing initiatives and
law enforcement
authorities

500 youth at risk
and women
cooperating with
national police
community policing
and law
enforcement
authorities (per
year)

Target achieved during
the previous reporting
period.7,216 youth at
risk, including 3,877
women, cooperating with
national police
community policing and
law enforcement
authorities between
15 May and
15 September 2019

6.3 Number of victims
of intentional homicide
per 100,000 citizens,
disaggregated by gender
and age

Rate of 9.3 or less
of intentional
homicide,
disaggregated by
gender and age

1 January–15 September
2019: homicide ratio
estimated at 8.25 per
100,000 citizens (717
intentional homicide
victims, of whom 674 are
men (including 4 minors)
and 43 are women
(including 2 minors)).
There was an average of
22 victims of homicide
per week in the first 30
weeks of the year, but in
August and September,
the number dropped to 8
victims per week, a trend
never observed during the
previous years. The
decrease could also have
resulted from the way in
which the national police
collected data.
Nonetheless, if the data
collected had remained
consistent with the first
six months of the year,
the homicide rate would
be above 9 per 100,000.

April
2019

Trend

23/33

S/2019/805

Benchmark

Indicator

Target
timeline

24/33

Update as at 15 September
(or otherwise specified)

6.4 Number of
kidnappings reported in
the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area

April
2019

50 or fewer
kidnappings
reported in the Portau-Prince
metropolitan area

6.5 Number of gangrelated incidents in the
hotspot zones of Cité
Soleil, Bel-Air and
Martissant

April
2019

18 or fewer gang1 January–15 September
related incidents in 2019: 50 incidents
the hotspot zones of
Cité Soleil, Bel-Air
and Martissant

6.6 Number of sexual
April
and gender-based violence 2019
cases investigated by
national police, reflecting
enhanced national police
capacity

7. The Office of the
National Human
Rights Ombudsperson
functions
independently and
protects citizens whose
rights have been
violated

Target

At least 275 cases
of sexual and
gender-based
violence are
investigated

1 January–15 September
2019: 34 cases of
kidnapping concerning
50 people (36 men and
14 women). Of the 34
cases, 19 were reported in
the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area.

1 January–16 September
2019: 190 cases have
been reported and
investigated, involving a
total of 194 victims
(19 men, including 10
minors, and 175 women,
including 79 minors)

7.1 Level of compliance October A status according
of the Office of the
2019
to Paris Principles
Ombudsperson with
international standards on
the work of national
human rights institutions,
and structural capacity to
operate as an independent
and effective institution in
accordance with the Paris
Principles

Target achieved during
the previous reporting
period

7.2 Number of
recommendations of the
Office of the
Ombudsperson
implemented by national
rule of law institutions

One recommendation
implemented by the
Superior Council of the
Judiciary, in July 2019.
The Council conducted
an investigation and
suspended a judge who
had ordered the release of
a pastor suspected of
raping a minor. This
followed strong
condemnation by the
Office of the
Ombudsperson, who had
raised suspicion of
corruption of justice and

April
2019

Three
recommendations
of the
Ombudsperson
implemented by
national rule of law
institutions

Trend

19-16958

S/2019/805

Benchmark

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 September
(or otherwise specified)

Trend

asked for an investigation
to be conducted.
A total of two
recommendations of the
Ombudsperson
implemented by national
rule of law institutions
during the two-year
mandate of MINUJUSTH
8. Civil society
organizations,
including those
representing women,
engage with the
Haitian authorities to
advocate the promotion
and protection of
human rights, and are
empowered to bring
allegations of human
rights violations to the
competent judicial or
administrative
authorities

8.1 Number of
April
alternative reports
2019
prepared and submitted by
civil society organizations
to international human
rights mechanisms

Two reports
Target achieved during
prepared and
the previous reporting
submitted by civil
period
society
organizations to
international human
rights mechanisms

8.2 Number of cases
reported by local civil
society organizations
monitoring human rights
violations

10 reports
published by local
civil society
organizations
monitoring human
rights violations

9. National authorities 9.1 Availability of
comply with
national plan of action for
international human
human rights
rights obligations,
including holding
individuals responsible
for current and past
human rights violations
and fulfilling their
reporting obligations to
human rights treaty
bodies

19-16958

April
2019

October National plan of
2019
action for the
implementation of
the
recommendations
made by human
rights mechanisms,
in particular
through the
universal periodic
review of the
Human Rights
Council

Target achieved during
the previous reporting
period

In July, an expert national
consultant, who had been
hired in December 2018,
finalized the first draft of
a national action plan on
human rights. The
national action plan will
be discussed with
representatives of public
institutions and civil
society organizations, and
the final draft will then
be approved by the
Inter-Ministerial
Committee on Human
Rights. The final draft
will then need to be
approved by the next
Government, which may
cause additional delays,
given the challenges
encountered in
appointing a new
government.

25/33

S/2019/805

Benchmark

Indicator

9.2 Number of
recommendations made
by the human rights
mechanisms accepted by
the Government of Haiti

26/33

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 September
(or otherwise specified)

April
2019

Three
recommendations
made by human
rights mechanisms
accepted by the
Government of
Haiti

Target achieved during
the previous reporting
period

9.3 Number of reports
April
prepared and submitted to 2019
international human rights
mechanisms by the
Government of Haiti

Two reports
prepared and
submitted to
international human
rights mechanisms
by the Government
of Haiti

Target achieved during
the previous reporting
period. During the
reporting period, the
Inter-Ministerial
Committee on Human
Rights finalized the
midterm report of Haiti
for the universal periodic
review. The report
includes details of the
progress made in the
implementation of the
recommendations
accepted by Haiti during
the second cycle of the
universal periodic review,
in 2016, and was
disseminated and
discussed during a
workshop held on
30 July, in which 47
individuals, including
15 women, participated,
representing ministries,
public institutions and
civil society
organizations. Three
reports were prepared and
submitted to international
human rights mechanisms
by the Government of
Haiti during the two-year
mandate of
MINUJUSTH.

9.4 Appointment by the
Government of Haiti of a
high-level human rights
focal point within the
executive branch

One high-level
focal point within
the executive
branch appointed
by the Government
of Haiti

Target achieved during
the previous reporting
period

April
2019

Trend

19-16958

S/2019/805
Target
timeline

Indicator

10. Rule of law and
anti-corruption
institutions
demonstrate increased
capacity to fight
corruption

10.1 Availability of
annual report on public
spending by Superior
Court of Auditors and
Administrative Disputes

April
2019

The annual report
on public spending
of Superior Court
of Auditors and
Administrative
Disputes is
available

Target achieved during
previous reporting period

11. The Permanent
Electoral Council is
established through a
credible and
transparent process and
exercises its electoral
responsibilities in an
independent and
transparent manner,
without requiring
international support

11.1 Nomination by the
three branches of their
three members for the
Permanent Electoral
Council, with a view to
establishing the Council
as an operational and
independent body

October The nine members
2019
are nominated, and
the Permanent
Electoral Council is
established, is
operational and
functions
independently

No progress registered
during the period owing
to the current political
situation

11.2 Update of the
electoral lists in
preparation for the next
electoral cycle

October The electoral lists
2019
are updated

No progress registered
during the period owing
to the current political
situation

11.3 Existence of the
October 3 – Electoral law is
electoral law in
2019
promulgated
preparation for the next
electoral cycle (1 – draft
law initiated; 2 – draft law
voted by each chamber; 3
– law promulgated by the
President)

No progress registered
during the period owing
to the current political
situation

19-16958

Target

Update as at 15 September
(or otherwise specified)

Benchmark

Trend

27/33

S/2019/805

Annex II
Benchmarks for progress in Haiti in accordance with resolution
2476 (2019)
Benchmark 1: national political and socioeconomic actors, including civil society,
are engaged in inclusive cooperation and consensus-building, resulting in
improved functioning of State institutions and good governance.
Reference: Sustainable Development Goals 5 and 16; 2017–2021 United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for Haiti, outcome 5
Indicators
1.1

Extent or level of engagement of the main political, economic and social actors
in dialogue and cooperation to support structural, electoral, judicial and
governance reforms to underpin long-term stability and development.

1.2

Number of consensus-building initiatives undertaken to identify priorities
through inclusive dialogue with multiple stakeholders at the national and
community levels.

1.3

Executive and legislative branches operate in accordance with normative
requirements.

1.4

Increase in the number of laws and regulations adopted to govern the electoral
process and electoral council, and establishment of corresponding mechanisms
to ensure free, fair and transparent elections.

1.5

Electoral calendar defined and elections organized in accordance with
constitutional and legal requirements.

1.6

Increase in effective budget delivery and human resources by the Government
for longer-term reinforcement of State institutions.

Benchmark 2: State institutions, local authorities and community-based civil
society, youth and women’s organizations are engaged in consultation,
cooperation, decision-making processes and programmes that reduce
community violence, in particular violence associated with gangs and sexual and
gender-based crimes.
Reference: Sustainable Development Goals 5 and 16, national prioritized Sustainable
Development Goal targets; 2017–2021 United Nations Development Assistance
Framework for Haiti, outcomes 3 (outputs 2 and 3), 5 and 11
Indicators

28/33

2.1

Finalization and implementation of a comprehensive and multisectoral national
strategy to address violence, in particular in relation to gang and community based violence, and to build stronger links with affected communities, including
through the development of socioeconomic programmes, community violence
reduction programmes and the implementation of a weapons and ammunition
management programme to strengthen the foundations for peace and
development.

2.2

Capacities of State institutions strengthened for comprehensive care and
protection of victims of violence.

2.3

Decrease in the number of people reported killed or wounded in gang -related
incidents.
19-16958

S/2019/805

2.4

Decrease in the number of victims of intentional homicide per 100,000 persons,
disaggregated by sex, age and cause.

2.5

Decrease in the number of cases of sexual and gender-based violence reported
by communities to the police.

2.6

Increase in the number of cases of sexual and gender-based violence processed
by the police.

2.7

Existence and implementation of comprehensive programmes to prevent and
respond to sexual and gender-based violence, especially during emergencies,
and to prevent such violence in the longer term.

2.8

Increase in the number of children, including teenage girls, and young people
who are employed or are enrolled in education or training institutions, in
selected municipalities.

Benchmark 3: the national police, corrections services, justice and
anti-corruption institutions operate under improved legal and management
frameworks, as well as oversight mechanisms.
Reference: Sustainable Development Goal 16, national prioritized Sustainable
Development Goal targets; 2017–2021 United Nations Development Assistance
Framework for Haiti, outcome 5 (outputs 5, 6, 7 and 11)
Indicators
3.1

Increase in government investment to sustain and further develop Haitian
National Police capacities.

3.2

Adoption and start of implementation of legislation and regulations to advance
reforms in the justice and corrections sectors.

3.3

Proportion of legislation for which implementation has started in order to
advance reform in the justice sector.

3.4

Increase in the number of national laws or regulations successfully
implemented.

3.5

Strengthened independence of judicial and anti-corruption institutions to
address corruption and impunity.

3.6

Reduction in the percentage of unsentenced detainees illegally or arbitrarily
detained in excess of two years, as a proportion of the overall prison population.

3.7

The Directorate of Prison Administration performs key management functions
and provides basic services to all detainees.

Benchmark 4: State institutions, in collaboration with an independent national
human rights institution (Office of the National Human Rights Ombudsperson)
and civil society organizations, protect, promote and ensure respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms, women’s rights and gender equality, and
uphold accountability for human rights violations.
Reference: Sustainable Development Goals 5 and 16; 2017–2021 United Nations
Development Assistance Framework, outcome 5 (output 1)
Indicators
4.1

19-16958

National authorities improve compliance with international human rights
obligations and fulfil their reporting obligations to United Nations human rights
mechanisms.
29/33

S/2019/805

4.2

The national human rights institution functions independently, promotes human
rights and protects the rights of citizens, in accordance with the Paris Principles.

4.3

Government and State institutions promote accountability for human rights
violations and abuses through internal oversight, investigations and judicial
proceedings, including for serious misconduct committed by police and prison
officials.

4.4

Civil society organizations are enabled to engage with the Haitian authorities to
advocate the promotion and protection of human rights and submit reports to
United Nations human rights mechanisms.

Benchmark 5 (contextual): State institutions, local authorities and the private
sector provide access for young persons, women and vulnerable groups to
employment opportunities, including jobs, education and training, contributing
to reduce socioeconomic grievances and address drivers of instability and
inequality.
Reference: Sustainable Development Goals 4, 8 and 10; 2017–2021 United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for Haiti, outcome 1 (outputs 1 and 5)
Indicators
5.1

Reduction in unemployment within a year, in particular for women and young
persons.

5.2

Number of young persons, women and members of vulnerable groups who had
access to education, training and employment opportunities and benefited from
productive activities (entrepreneurship and small and medium-sized enterprises)
in the previous 12 months, disaggregated by gender, age and group.

5.3

Existence and implementation of policies that support the creation of gender responsive employment opportunities, entrepreneurship and the growth of small
and medium-sized enterprises.

5.4

Laws and policies are in place that facilitate the transition of young people from
school to work and increase youth employability through improvements in the
quality and relevance of education and vocational training, so as to adapt to
technological advances and future challenges in Haiti.

5.5

Fiscal policies for inclusive growth are implemented, including pro -poor and
gender-responsive budgeting, progressive taxation and effective measures
against tax evasion.

Benchmark 6 (contextual): State institutions are reinforced to effectively
implement policies and programmes that ensure the delivery of quality basic
services in the most underserved communities and increase their resilience to
climate-related threats, including through disaster management and risk
mitigation.
Reference: Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 10 and 13; Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030; national disaster management
plan
Indicators
6.1

30/33

Capabilities of State institutions for evidence-based policymaking are
strengthened, including through the increased capacity of the national statistical
system for the collection and analysis of data on the Sustainable Development
Goals.
19-16958

S/2019/805

19-16958

6.2

Proportion of the population using safely managed drinking water and sanitation
services.

6.3

Amount of water- and sanitation-related official development assistance that is
part of a government-coordinated spending plan.

6.4

Prevalence of moderate or severe food insecurity in the pop ulation, based on the
Food Insecurity Experience Scale.

6.5

Reduction in maternal mortality rate and mortality rate for children under
5 years of age, per 100,000.

6.6

Proportion of State agencies and local authorities that adopt policies and
implement local disaster risk reduction and climate resilience strategies,
including agriculture sector plans, watershed management and sanitation, in the
most underserved rural and urban communities, in line with community
vulnerability assessments and national disaster risk reduction strategies.

6.7

Full and sustainable eradication of cholera.

31/33

S/2019/805

Annex III
Composition and strength of the police component of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti as at
4 October 2019
United Nations police officers
Country

Women

Formed police units
Men

Bangladesh

1

Benin

3

Canada

1

Madagascar

1

Mali

2

12

2
2

Romania

1

Russian Federation

1

Senegal

1

Spain

Total

12

2

Niger

Subtotal

2

1

El Salvador

Tunisia

Men

5

Colombia

Republic of Korea

Women

1
1

1

10

14
24

14
38

32/33

19-16958

S/2019/805

Annex IV
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti: deployment map

19-16958

33/33
