is has
blics)
d like
I and
I the
oath,

s are
, ad
, The
as an
urity
Irt of
lstify

TWENTY-THIRD
th

111on
ht of
why

:hink

YEAR

MEETING: 1 APRIL 1968
NEW

YORK

why,

him
I’, he
t, He
him

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 410) , . . . . . , . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

ue, I
st, is
this
:iluse
IonId at
d at
have
: the
next

Page
1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President ........................

1

Adoption of the agenda ......................................

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/85 16);
(b) Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8517) . , . . . . . . . . .

1

lbers
‘this
Iem.
tt1e

,100

S/PV.1410.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND TENTH MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 1 April 1968, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Y. A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United IQngdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8516);
lb) Letter dated 29 March 1988 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8517)

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 410)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

5. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): In accordance with the Council’s earlier decision, I invite the
representatives of Jordan and Israel to take seats at the
Council table and to participate in the present debate
without the right to vote.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/85 16);
(b) Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/85 17).

6. I call on the representaiive of Algeria.
7. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): In accordance with the established procedure it is
not customary to take the floor while delegations are being
invited to participate in the work of the Council. However,
my delegation was disappointed to note that some of those
delegations, in the course of such participation, made a
practice of slanderous and insulting attacks on countries
which are members of the Security Council, Consequently,
I feel it my duty to ask you, Mr. President-with
the
consent of the Council, needless to say-to request the
parties which are allowed to participate in the Council’s
work, according to the usual practice, to respect both the
written and unwritten rules of conduct, and at least the
rules of courtesy and respect due to Council members. This
obligation arises from the very fact that membership in the
Security Council, conferred upop all pf us by decision of
the General Assembly, makes it essential for us to exercise a
certain degree of self-restraint, since, as members of the
Council, we bear certain generally recognized responsibilities.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I declare
the 1410th meeting of the Security Council open.
2. Before the Council proceeds to its consideration of the
questions on the agenda of today’s meeting, I should like,
on my own behalf and, I hope, on behalf of all the
members of the Security Council, to express my most
cordial gratitude to our friend and colleague, the representative of Senegal, Ambassador Diop, for the skill, tact
and patience he displayed during his Presidency of the
Security Council in March. It was a great pleasure for us to
work with him and we extend to him our best wishes.
3. Mr. CISS (Senegal) (translated from French): I should
like, Mr. President, to express my delegation’s gratitude for
the generous remarks you made about Ambassador
Ousmane So& Diop, tiho was President of the Security
Council for the month of March. I shall not fail to convey
your kind words to the Ambassador.

At the invitation of the President, Mr, M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took pIaces, at the
Council table.
8. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Russian): This morning I received a letter from the representative of Syria
[~/8522] containing a request that the Syrian delegation be
invited to participate, without the right to vote, in the
discussions in the Security Council. Unless I hear any
objections, I shall invite the representative Of Syria i0 take
a place at the Security Council table.

4. In thanking all members of the Council for the sincer :
co-operation they have given the President during the past
month, I should also like to assure you, Mr. President, of
my delegation’s full co-operation, now that you are taking
over the guidance of our work, I am already convinced that,
with your long experience of international affairs and your
great qualities as a statesman and diplomat, YOU will
discharge your new responsibilities in the most appropriate
manner.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. J. Tomeh
(Syria) took a place at the Council table.
1

it that feels experienced enough to instruct us on how to
defend ourselves under the circumstances we confront?
Who considers it appropriate to suggest to Israel, fighting
for its life for twenty years, that it be less determined, that
it be more forthcoming, more magnanimous and conl.
promising? Can one be more forthcoming towards those
who desire one’s destruction and actively strive for it? Can
there be compromise between war and peace, between
murder and the defence against it?

9. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The
Security Council will now proceed to its consideration of
the item on the agenda. The first speaker on my list is the
representative of Israel, on whom I now call.
10. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President, this being the
first meeting of the Security Council under your
Presidency, I should like to express my profound respect to
you. I should also like to express my delegation’s appreciation to the outgoing President, the representative of
Senegal.

18. How senseless it is to expect that the Arab States,
while not only persisting in warfare against Israel, should
also set the rules for Israel’s reaction to this warfare.

11. Mr. President, I regret to inform you that acts of
aggression against Israel are continuing. Today, 1 April, at
08:OO hours local time, Jordanian military positions opened
artillery and mortar fire on Israeli forces on the west bank
of the Jordan six kilometres south of Abu Tzutz, in the
central sector of the Jordan Valley. Israeli forces abstained
from returning fire. A short while later, fire was opened
again from the Jordanian positions in the same area. This
time the Israeli forces returned fire. Also today, at
approximately 10:00 hours, an Israeli patrol discovered, in
the same area, two anti-vehicle mines, one of them of
Chinese manufacture. The mines were deactivated.

19. By decision of the Arab Governments the war is not
terminated. By action of the Arab Governments the war
continues. It continues by the method of raid, terror and
sabotage. Following the defeat of Arab frontal aggression
last June this is the method most readily available to the
Arab States. This is the method on which the Arab
Governments rely to prepare the ground for the resumption
of full-scale militaiy activities.

21
es
ac
th
te
(II
ar
m
W

20. On 26 February 1968 Radio Baghdad announced:
“The activities of the Fedayeen paved the road for an Arab
regular military operation that will come shortly.” On the
following day the official Cairo daily AZ-Ahrum said: “The
sabotage activities which are increasing from day to day are
the first step towards victory.”

12. Yesterday, 31 March, at 20:00 hours local time, an
Israeli patrol encountered a band of marauders south of
Kuneitra. During the clash that ensued, an Israeli soldier
was killed and two were wounded, One of the marauders
was killed. A Klatchnikoff rifle and two Russian grenades
were found near his body.

21. As early as 7 December 1967, Radio Cairo broadcast
that a military conference had been held at which a single
military strategy was worked out for Fedayeen activities
against Israel. The broadcast added that military communiques will be issued. Then on 20 January it was
announced in Cairo that a joint command was formed for
all terrorist organizations. Since then, warfare by terror and
sabotage has been expanding continuously while the Arab
Governments have made no secret of the fact that they are
behind it. Only two days ago, on 30 March, President
Nasser promised publicly to continue to assist the terror
organizations.

13. On 29 March, I requested an urgent meeting of the
Security Council to deal with renewed Jordanian acts of
aggression and violations of the cease-fire. At the last
meeting of the Security Council, on 30 March, the
representative of Jordan announced once again that the
Arab war of aggression against Israel, started in 1948, was
continuing. The war is not over, he confirmed. The
cease-fire is a cease-fire and nothing more.
14. The people of Israel have been subjected to this war
for twenty years. Our children do not know what a state of
peace is. Our young men and women have known for
twenty years that when they are called up for military
service, it is to face an enemy at war with us that they must
go. Thus the entire people, under constant threat for two
decades, remains beleaguered, besieged and embattled.

22. Prime Minister Telhouni of Jordan stated on the same
day, according to Agence France Presse: “Jordan will
continue to aid the saboteur organizations with all its
power.”
23. Raah Tawil, the Commander of the People’s Army of
Syria, as the paramilitary forces are known there, said
according to Radio Damascus on 13 March: “The People’s
Army is an integral part of the regular army and the
Fedayeen activities constitute the implementation of the
slogans of the popular war.”

15. This is a war unprecedented in its length This is a war
unparalleled in the passions it has generated; a conflict that
has created for Israel a danger never faced by any other
State in the world.
16. Which of the States represented on the Security
Council, or, for that matter, which of the States Members
of the United Nations, has faced a twenty-year long war?
Which of the States has neighbours who teach in school
that it is a virtue for them to kill that State’s people?
Which has enemies who strive not merely to defeat them,
but to wipe them off the map to annihilate their
population?

24. At the last meeting of the Security Council I emphasized the official military character of the terrorist war
machine and its activities. Today I should like to bring tc
the Council’s attention the following facts which have
become known to the Israel authorities.
25. One: in Amman, a recruiting office for El-Fatah has
been opened. There is nothing clandestine about that
office. It is quite open and clearly marked for the public. lt
is carrying out mass recruiting for the terrorist organlze
tions.

17. Who is it, then, that feels competent to give advice to
Israel on how to cope with the war imposed on us’? Who is
2

3
b
1
c
a
tl
a
a
I

26. Two: members of the El-Fatah are exempt from
servicein the Jordanian Army on production of a certificate attestingto membershipin El-Fatah.

0

35. Eleven: in January 1968 the Egyptian Government
decidedto intensify its linkswith the terrorist organizations
and agreedthat terrorists would be trained by Egyptian
officers at army camps.More than 100 have beentrained
under this agreementandmany of thesearenow in Jordan.
A number of El-Fatah units were moved in Egyptian
military planesfrom Syria to Cairoand underwentmilitary
training in army campsnear the capital. The officer in
chargeof their trainingwasCaptainSaber.Theseunitswere
returned to Syria in Egyptian military planesand from
there transferredto Jordan, They were placed under the
command of Major Dahahne of the Egyptian Army.
Together with the units, Egyptian Army equipment, explosives,minesandweaponsweresent to Jordan.

!
g
!t

1e
n
n

c

3
:

27. Three: the membersof El-Fatah and the other similar
terrorist organizationsare free to come and go openly in
Ammanin uniform and carrying arms.
28. Four: the Jordanian Government has facilitated the
establishmentof terrorist basesalong the frontier. The
administrationand policing in thosebasesis in the handsof
the Jordanian authorities. The Arab Legion encourages
the
terrorists to openfire from the proximity of army positions
on the east bank and even from inside these Jordanian
army positions. Recently, El-Fatah received 120-mm
mortars of Russianmake from Iraq. A number of them
werecapturedby our forces on 21 March at Karameh.

36, Twelve: the operationsof the terrorist organizations
are co-ordinatedbetweenthe Governmentsof the United
Arab Republic,Syria, JordanandIraq.

29. Five: the JordanianArmy is helpingthe terroristswith
information on movements of the Israel defence forces,
with co-ordinatingtime and place of infiltrations and with
coveringfire, including artillery fire for forward movement
andfor retreat.
I:

;-

b
9
e
e

/

it
e
:s
L-

I

I,

32. Eight: Iraq is giving assistance
by supplyingarmsand
by training through its expeditionary force in Jordan.
Terroristsare being trained, in particular, in the Iraqi Army
Campsin Mafrak. Iraqi CommandoBattalion 421 is very
active in this. Its officers and men actually take part in the
terrorist actionsand many of them were killed on 2 1 March
at Karameh. I shouldlike to submit to the Security Council
a number of certificates taken from terrorists in Karameh
and indicating their membershipin the Iraqi Commando
Battalion.

lr
d

I
i
S

If
d
‘s
e
e

1

’
b

llr
0
e
4
is
it
:t
1.

30. Six: the field commandof the terrorist organizations
has been transferredfrom Syria to Jordan. However, the
training basesof terrorist organizationscontinueto operate
in El-Hamunenear Damascus,while the E!-FaiXh central
headquartersremainin Damascus.
31. Seven: at the present moment, hundredsof officers
andmen from regulararmy units arebeingtransferredfrom
Syria to Jordan and arejoining the terrorist organizations.
A Syrian lieutenant in commandof the terrorist group was
killed on 10 March nearGesher.

.S

b
e
.t
1r

37. The Security Council is fully aware of the fact that
this is not the first time that the Arab Governmentshave
resortedto this method of warfare. It was appliedby the
Government of Egypt in the fifties and led to the Sinai
campaignin 1956.It wasthen adoptedby the Government
of Syria, pursuedwith greatvehemenceand discussed
time
and againbefore the Security Council. It contributed in no
smallmeasure
to the outbreakof hostilitieslast June.

33. Nine: in Egypt, Fedayeen Battalion 141 of the regular
Egyptian Army was chosen for sabotageoperationsand
went through sabotagetraining in anny campsnear Cairo.
The regiment has been transferred to Jordan and its
activities are directed by the Egyptian Embassyin Amman.
Its activities are conducted in the name of different
organizations.For example,the explosionscarriedout by it
at Eilat on 13 January 1968 were attributed to El-Fat&.
Major SamiDahahne,secondin commandof the regiment,
is in Jordan and is responsiblefor the liaisonbetweenthe
Egyptian Embassyand El-Fatal1and the Jordanianauthorities.

38. As the Secretary-General
pointed out in his introduction to the last annual report on the work of the
Organization:
“Another seriousproblemfor which no solution had
been found at the time of the outbreak of hostilitiesin
June was that of the El-Fatah-type of sabotageand
terrorist activities., . .“I
39. The organizedmilitary character of the terrorist war
machine found incisive confirmation in a dispatch from
Amman publishedyesterdayin The New York Times.The
dispatchsaid:
“Newsmenwho have visited Karamehin recent days
have found the campdesertedby Palestinianrefugeesand
inhabited by about 300 fedayeen armed with Soviet
sub-machine
gunsand pistols,and grenadesfrom.Eastern
Europe. The fedayeenwore spotted camouflagetrousers
and shirts,military foragecaps,andvarious other military
andcivilian garments.
“The fedayeen arms presumably come from Syria,
becauseJordanhasno suppliesof communistweapons.”
40. By now the world is too well acquaintedwith the
warfaretactic of terrorismappliedby the Arab Statesto be
impressedby attemptsto confusethe true nature of this
tactic-attempts madeonly here, not in the areaitself, and
for purely debatingpurposes.

34. Ten: sixty officers and men from the regular
Palestinian battalions of the Egyptian Army have been
transferred from Egypt to Jordan during recent months.
They act asa commandcadrefor the terrorist organizations
in Jordan. Someof them have been captured by the Israel
forces.
3

41. There is too much United Nations jurisprudence
throughout the yearscensuringthis method of warfare for
the Arab representativesto be able to suggestto the
1 Official kecords
of the General Assembly,
Session, Supplement No. IA, para.47.

Twenty-second

undermine the possibilities of understanding and agreement between the two peoples.” /I408th meeting,

Security Council now that it should not concern itself with
Arab terrorism and sabotage against Israel.

paras.60 und 61.J

42. The Arab Governments using this method in preference to others cannot shed responsibility for the attacks
by terrorists and saboteurs any more than they can shirk
responsibility for the acts of their soldiers. Nor can they
escapethe grave consequencesof such activities.

49. If proof of this were required it should be sufficient to
point out that 90 per cent of the acts of terror and murder
carried out in recent months occurred along the cease-fire
line.

43. However, in one aspect the terrorists do differ from
soldiers.

50. The basic tenet of the United Nations is the maintenance of international peace and security.

44. Soldiering is not the pleasantest of occupations. But it
is a profession of honour and valour, quality and respect.
As Napoleon said: “I love a brave soldier who has
undergone the baptism of fire, whatever nation he may
belong to.”

51. When the Arab States went to war against Israel in
1948, the Security Council called on the parties in a
number of successive resolutions to make peace. Today,
twenty years later, there is still no peace between Israel and
the Arab States. There is no peace because the Arab States
refuse to make it. There is no peace because the Arab States
choose to pursue war.

45. One cannot say the same,of the terforist raiders that
the Arab Governments have been sending against Israel.
Look at them and their activities. To steal acrossthe border
in the security of the night; to plant a mine on a truck near
a children’s camp used by dhildren only, so as to blow up a
children’s bus; to throw a grenade into a house where a
family is asleep; to fire a mortar blindly into a village and to
run away into the darkness; to murder a lonely Druze
watchman guarding tractors in a forlorn field; to shoot a
policeman in the back in a crowded market place: there is
no bravery, no valour, no honour in these acts. Those who
perpetrate them are cowardly, miserable creatures who
deserve no respect from anyone. If the Arab Governments
wish to stoop to glorifying these marauders, the world can
have nothing but disdain for such Governments.

52. Though this is the fundamental cause of the present
situation in the Middle East, the Security Council cannot
disregard its own influence on the developments of the last
two decades. Equivocation about responsibility for belligerency and warfare, consideration of symptoms without
sufficient attention to the causes of the present conflict,
censure of Israeli defence measures and application of the
veto or vague generalities about Arab acts of aggression-all
these have undoubtedly had a most unfortunate impact on
the area. Double standards have proved failures in the
internal life of States. Surely they cannot but be disastrous
in international life.
53. We again appeal to the Security Council to see the
situation as it is, in all its gravity, and take a clear stand on
the dangers of continued Jordanian warfare by raid, terror
and murder. We appeal to the Security Council to assistin
putting an end to this warfare and advancing Israel and the
Arab States towards peace.

46. I have with me a sample of the dastardly arsenal of
these terrorists. It is a mine of Chinese manufacture, the
size of a button, shaped like a button. When placed on a
highway, in a park, in a playground or on a street it is
sufficient to pick it up to have it blow up in your face. A
trained soldier will not pick it up. It will be picked up by
the unsuspecting civilian, by the innocent child.

54. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Russian):I call on
the representative of Jordan,

47, The documents found in the terrorist base in Karameh
and the testimony of the terrorists in our hands confirm
that the operations in the immediate future were to be
directed against hospitals, public transport and similar
objectives. All these operations were to be carried out by
raiders, members of the military and para-military forces of
the Arab States coming from the terrorist basesestablished
in Jordanian-controlled territory with the consent of the
Jordanian Government and the assistanceof the Jordanian
Army.

55. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I shall not answerthe many
distortions that we have heard this afternoon. I shall have
more time to do so at a later stage. I should simply like to
say that the heroes of the Irgun and the Haganah, those
who committed the massacresat Deir Yassin and others, are
not competent to preach to us about virtue.
56. The Council is now considering the Jordan complaint,
which is of a very serious nature. It calls for an urgent
remedy. Any delay in taking adequate action will be
harmful both to the area and to the prestige of the Security
Council.

48. I repeat what I said at the previous meeting:
“Attempts have been made here to describe the raiders
as enjoying the support of the Arab population in areas
under Israeli control. This is contrary to the facts, Local
Arab inhabitants do not support these aggressive activities. The Arab population, like its Jewish neighbours, is
weary of the twenty-year war. , . .

57. It cannot be argued that because there were no
observers at the time of the Israeli attack the Security
Council is not in a position to make any findings or any
determination. That, I submit, is nothing but a pretext
intended to serve other designs. There is ample evidenceto
convict Israel. The evidence is there, clear and sufficient.

“The raiders, whether they be called marauders, terrorists, saboteurs, are simply messengers of hate and
death who come from the outside and whose aim is to

58. Indeed, what does the Council need other than the
open admission, or rather the complete confession, mader
4

eeVT>
b
to

1er
‘ire
I
!
inI
/
1a
v**
md
ltes
ltes
ent
not
last
Iligout
ict,
the
-all

1

I
I
‘.
I
I

: on

the
‘OUS

!

the
1on
rror
;t in
the
1011 E
lany
liW2

.eto
lose
, are
aint,
gent
I be
.irity
: no
tlrity
’ any
:text
ce to
t.
1 the
nade

:
’
I
1

by no less a person than the Israeli Defence Minister, Moshe
Dayan, who said over the Israeli radio that the attacks on
Jordan Cere part of the campaign that will continue. until
Israel comes to a decision with the Arabs? What more does
the. Council want than the clear statement made by
Mr. Moshe Kol, the Minister of Development and Tourism
in Israel, who did not hide the fact that the Israelis had
deliberately launched the attack against Jordan and stated
that it was limited in scope but would be bigger and wider
in the future?
59. It will be unfair to Jordan if an attempt is made to
exploit our complaint for a different purpose. To make out
of the Israeli crime a call for observers is not helpful,
because it amounts to diversion. What is before the Council
is not an item on observers. I know of no member round
this table who has suggested such an item. I believe that the
Council should confine its deliberations to the item under
discussion and should not go into a question that is
irrelevant to the complaint. But if the Council deems it fit
to deal with that question at a later stage, after having given
Jordan’s complaint an adequate and effective remedy by
invoking Chapter VII of the Charter, then I submit that it is
the duty of the Council to take action that is not in conflict
with existing arrangements concerning peace-keeping in the
area. Thus it is the duty of the Security Council to request
the parties to employ the armistice machinery as a means of
reducing friction. We are for that. But if Israel finds that
this conflicts with its aggressive designs, neither the
Security Council nor any of the organs of the United
Nations would wish to accommodate those aggressive
designs, because such a course would be harmful to the
Council and not helpful to the executive organ of the
United Nations
60. The purpose of having the Mixed Armistice Commis”
sions in the area was to ensure an impartial investigation
and adjudication through fact-finding machinery, namely,
those Mixed Armistice Commissions. The purpose was to
ensure fact-finding on the spot. If the Security Council does
not encourage and strengthen the functioning of the
armistice machinery in the area, what will the result be?
The answer is simple: since no adequate machinery would
be functioning in the area under the Armistice Agreements,
the Security Council would be resorted to with regard to
each and every issue and violation, It would then assume
the task and function of the Mixed Armistice Commissions.
I appeal to all members of the Council to ponder this;
would that reduce or magnify the tension? Also, would it
enhance or reduce the prestige of the Security Council?
Would it promote or undermine the ‘application of the rule
of law?
61. The past practice of the Security Council shows that
the Council was lucky to have local machinery handling
such disputes and violations in the first instance. That being
the case, the Council should encourage the functioning of
that machinery and reactivate it. To do otherwise-and I
should like to emphasize this-would be to weaken the
Council’s own resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November
1967, which by calling for “withdrawal of Israeli armed
forces from territories occupied in the recent conflict”
recognized the machinery existing before 5 June and the
demarcation line of the Armistice Agreement.
62. Moreover, it has been the desire, and indeed the
practice, of the Security Council to support its machinery

and to urge the parties to use that machinery before coming
to the Council. On 17 November 1950-over seventeen
years ago-the Security Council adopted a draft resolution
that had been co-sponsored by the United States of
America. In that resolution the Council called upon “the
parties to the . . . complaints to consent to the handling of
complaints according to the procedures established in the
Armistice Agreements for the handling of complaints and
the settlement of points at issue” /resolution 89 (ISSO)].
63. The Council’s position tias explained by the United
States. Here is what the Permanent Representative of the
United States said on the question:’
‘&We do not believe that the remedies available to the
parties have been exhausted. We think thit the parties
should make every reasonable and required effort to
exhaust these remedies before they confront the Council
with their complaints.” [52&d meeting, p, i4.f
64. The United States representative felt that that was in
the “interests of ensuring the continued effective operation
of the Mixed Armistice Commissions” [ibid.]. He reiterated
on this question that: “the Council should certainly
concern itself with the continued effective operation of the
Mixed Armistice Commissions. . . and with the general
effective execution of the armistice agreements” [ibid.,
p. 1.51.

65. That was the position of the United States. I have
cited the position of the Security Council, which is
embodied in a Security Council resolution adopted aslong
ago as 1950.
66. Those were the positions of the Security Councti,and
the United States for seventeen years, Would not the
Council by ignoring its original stand risk something of its
prestige, especially after the. Israeli aggression and occupation of 5 June? Even if we assumethat the -United States is
now on its way to changing positions and stands to
accommodate a given situation or certain circumstances,
can the United Nations Security Council afford to do-the
same? No, that amounts to accommodating the aggression,
and we know that by an illegal act no legal result cari be
produced, no right acquired, no fruits can be gained
through aggression. I find no better answer to show what
that would lead to than the position of the United States in
1957, when its representative said:
6‘ . it is incompatible with the principles of the
Charter and with the obligations of membership in th’e
United Nations for any Member to seek political gains
through the use of force or to use as a bargaining point a
gain achieved by means of force”.2
67. Therefore, I hope that those who are really interested
in effective steps to ensure against repetition of Israeli acts
of aggression will support the armistice rigime. They
cannot rightly argue that there are conflicting claims made
by the parties and that therefore United Nations observers
should be stationed in the Israel-Jordan cease-fire sector,
for in the present case the facts are not in conflict,
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, EleventhCession,
Plenary Meetings, 666th meeting, para.25.

5

especially when this body has the admission-the arrogant
admission-of the Israeli authorities.

its contribution, we will oppose any attempt by any
member to exploit the reports for other purposes.

68. Furthermore, what we have now is a cease-fire. 1 said
that before, and Mr. Tekoah quoted me earlier. I maintained, and continue to maintain, that we have a cease-fire.
It continues to be a cease-fireand should be treated as such.
No action should be taken by the Council wh$h might
expficitly
or implicitly create a new situation which would
affect the character of the cease-fire. The cease-fire is
conceived of as a temporary stage in order to enable the
Security Council to take steps to bring about the complete
liquidation of the acts of aggression,so that no fruits can be
gained through aggression.

72. The United States representative asked the Council to
heed the Secretary-General’s advice. The United States
representative asked for the stationing of United Nations
observersin the Israel-Jordan cease-fire sector.
73. Nowhere in his report did the Secretary-General refer
to stationing observers in a specific cease-fire sector and
nowhere in his report did the Secretary-General revoke his
position about the Armistice machinery, embodied in the
introduction to his report of last year, 1967, where he said:
“ . . . there has been no indication either in the General
Assembly or in the Security Council that the validity and
applicability of the Armistice Agreements have been
changed as a result of the recent hostilities”-of
5 June-“or of the war of 1956; each agreement, in fact,
contains a provision that it will remain in force ‘until a
peaceful settlement between the parties is achieved’.“3

69. Certainly the cease-fire was never intended to be a

kind of permanent arrangement, nor wasit intended to give
it a semi-permanent character. That being the case, let me
make it emphatically clear, without any reservations and
with no room for misunderstanding, that we see and reject
the attemps aimed at creating a new machinery and
establishing a new so-called line and cease-fireagreement as
being illegal, in contradiction of the jurisprudence of the
Security Council, in violation of its resolutions and in
defiance of the present machinery created for peacekeeping in the area. We are confident that friendly States
and peace and security loving members of the Security
Council will not be parties to these manoeuvres and tactics
.which reflect not only on the policies of Governments but
on the great prestige which this Council should retain,
indeed, on the authority which makes the Council the hope
of mankind, the primary organ responsible for peace and
security.

He continued as follows:
“Nor has the Security Council or the General Assembly
taken any steps to change the pertinent resolutions of
either organ relating to the Armistice Agreements or to
the earlier cease-fire demands. The Agreements provide
that by mutual consent the signatories can revise or
suspend them. There is no provision in them for unilateral
termination of their application. This has been the United
Nations position aI1 along and will continue to be the
position until a competent organ decides otherwise.“4
74. Are we meeting to decide otherwise on the complaint
of Jordan? This is and continues to be the jurisprudence of
the United Nations. The Armistice Agreements are there
and they are valid. Israel does not have a veto power to
revoke any of them. The Council should not take a position
which it is not authorized to take.

70. I submit that, had all the efforts to convince Jordan to
accept observers been used to bring about the end of
aggression and the termination of the Israeli acts of
oppression against Jordanian citizens, to bring about a halt
to the continued defiance of this Council’s resolutions and
to end Israel’s continued utter contempt of public opinion
and complete disregard of the United Nations values, which
the peoples of the United Nations are determined to make
the basis for saving succeedinggenerations from the scourge
of war, the Council would not have been sitting here to
consider a Jordanian complaint about a renewal of Israeli
aggression. Bad all these efforts to convince Jordan to
accept observersbeen used to liquidate the aggression,there
would have been a better atmosphere in the area and one
conducive to peace. Too much effort is being used on the
question of observers, and little or no effort is being
employed to help in putting an end to aggression,bringing
about withdrawal and discouraging the aggressor from
committing further acts of aggression.

75. It does not help peace or stability in the area to have a
complaint about renewal of Israeli aggression become the
instrument opening the door for new attempts serving
different purposes. We come to the Council for action. We
warned the Council earlier of the Israeli aggression. We
warned the Council of the previous 21 March Israeli
aggression. In both casesthe Council did not take action to
check the aggression before it happened. Some responsible
members of the Council either did not take the question
seriously or were indifferent to it, and therefore we faced
the wide-scale, unprovoked Israeli military attack.
76. The Israelis not only shelled and used artillery on
different Jordanian positions and villages, but went to the
extent of using a huge number of jets to bombard the
food-producing area in the northern part of the east bank
of the Jordan, as well as in the populated areas, including
the villages of Al Baqurah, Al ‘Adasiyah, Shuna
Shamaliyah, Tall al Arba’in, Umm Qays, Al Mashari,
Kuraymah, Deir Abu Said, At Tayyibah and the Karameh
refugee camp.

71. The Council in its resolution last week condemned
Israel and warned “that the Security Council would have to
consider further and more effective steps asenvisaged in the
Charter to ensure against repetition of such acts” [resolution 248 (19@)]. A few days later we were attacked again.
We came to this Council for remedy. To avoid embarrassment, attempts are being made to undermine the complaint
and divert attention to some other issueswhich are indeed
irrelevant. Thus some members are referring to different
reports presented to the Council immediately after it was
convened. Although we are grateful to the Secretariat for

3 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-secottd
Session, Supplement No. IA, para. 43.
4 Ibid.

6

Y
0
:S
IS

:r
!d
is
1e
1:
al
td
xl
,f
it,
a

lY
of
ii
01

:a1
ad
he
nt
of
:re
to
OII

i,,”
ing
We

We
Ieli
il:
ion
:ed
on
the
the
lllk
ling
una
ari,
neh
0t1d

77, Now we come before the Council and not firmness,
butexpediency playing its part; not a concentration on the
needfor withdrawal, which is the basic step for securing
peaceand tranquillity; not a concentration on invoking
ChapterVII of the Charter, asthe Council’s resolution of
lastweekhad warned, but, in someof the statementsmade
here,a lack of desireto help the area.
78, This, we submit, will have far-reachingimplications.If
the Council wants, through its inaction, to make indiscriminate bombing of populated areas, villages, foodproducingfields and irrigation projects the rule of law, and
ausgive Israela greenlight to continue its practices,then I
submitthat the Council is inviting disaster.In doing so,it is
notstopping the resistanceof those who are offering their
livesto promote justice and peace and to safeguardhuman
rights.On the contrary, the Council is telling them that
tlley should not rely on the Council, that this organ is not
the hope of mankind and that they should rely on
tllemselves
and their struggleand their sacrifices.
79. No one wants war. But does the bombing of the
food-producingarea of Jordan and the populatedvillagesin
thenorthern part of the east bank bring peace? Doesthe
failureof the Security Council to take immediateaction to
checkaggressionbring peace? Does the attempt to inject a
foreignsubstanceinto our compl&t bring peace?Doesthe
continued occupation of our territories bring peace?
Mr.Tekoah just spokeabout someindividuals resistingthe
Israelis’occupation. But the question arises:Why are the
Israelis
there? What are they doing in the westbank of the
Jordan?Why are they present in Sinai? How come they
arestill in Gaza, committing all kinds of acts of oppression
andintimidation? Why are they still in Golan? If they
want peace, it is not enough to sing the song of peace.
Peace
requiresactsand deeds.They cannot occupy all these
Arabterritories and then expect peace.To seekpeace,they
mustpractice peace. And you do not practice peaceby
occupyingterritories through force. That is conquest,and
conquestdictates, imposesa duty on every individual to
struggle-to struggle for liberty. It is not somethinginventedby an Arab. This has been the history of your great
country, Mr. President, the Soviet Union, and of the
countriesof many membersaround this table. They were
subjectedto occupation and they had to struggle. I can
countsix, sevenor eight countries here in the Council who
hadto struggleagainstoccupation.

shouldwe expect a solution from the United Nations, or is
the United Nationsparalysedand therefore able to offer no
solution?
82. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): Mr. President, first of all I
shouldIike to associatemyself with the tribute which you
have paid to our former President, Ambassador Diop of
Senegal,who conductedwith such consummate skill, calm
andpatiencethe busy affairs of the Council last month
83. I shouldalsolike to take the opportunity, since this is
the first occasionon which we sit under your Presidency, to
extend to you our very bestwishesand to assureyou of the
desireof the Canadiandelegation to co-operate with you
and to take advantageof the long experience and abiiity
which you bring to this seriousresponsibility.
84. I find it difficult, in view of the statements we have
heard and the submissions
of both parties, to find words to
expressthe deepconcernand dismayof my delegation over
the latestviolent incidentsand the exchange of fire, aswell
asthe seriouschargesandcounter-chargesto which we have
listenedtoday.
85. Confrontation in the area once again threatens peace
and risks disruptingthe efforts of the United Nations to
find a way out of the vicious circle of violence which once
againthreatensto escalate,instead of leading to a political
solution.
86. The complaintsof Israel and Jordan before us in
documentsdated 29 March 1968 and the accounts of the
parties are clear enough, as always, but the evidence that
they have submitted is, in my judgement, conflicting in
somerespects.The information available to the Council
from objective sourcesis scant indeed. Our SecretaryGeneral,in the report which he submitted last Saturday, 30
March 1968[S/793O/Add.66] on the latest breachesof the
cease-fireand the eventswhich we are now discussing,has
statedin unequivocaltermshis inability to provide verified
information from objective sourcesin the present situation,
andhaspointed to the benefits of the maintenance of peace
which could be derived from the presence of United
Nations observersin the area. This seemsto be the point
which-at leastin my view and that of the delegation of
Canada-it is important to take into consideration.

80. Occupation imposesa duty. Strugglingagainstit is the
only legitimate thing unless the Council, faithful to its
obligations,will take action and firmly uphold the values
enshrinedin our Charter, But to come and speakto US
aboutpeace-of course we want peace.Yet what are they
doingin the west bank?

87. General Odd BulI, the representative of the
Secretary.Gencralin the area,advisesthe Secretary-General
that “it is practically impossiblefor me to report on the
developmentsin the Israel-Jordan cease-fire sector”-he
doesnot speakof lines, but of the whole area-‘&due to the
fact that no United Nations observersare operating in the
area”.

81. In conclusion, I appeal to all the membersaround this
tableto look at this seriouscomplaint, not from the point
of view of political expediency or the size of a Member
Stateof the United Nations, but from the point of view of
thegraveresponsibility this Council hasundertakenvis-&vis
humanity at large and the right of man to be free from
crimescommitted because of the arrogance of power,
crimescommitted because.some membersgive the rule of
law lip-service. The Council’s decision on this complaint
will answera seriousquestion in the mind of every Arab:

88. GeneralOdd Bull took the occasionto point out that
the presenceof United Nations observersin an area can be
helpful in preserving a cease-fire in ways other than
reporting. This is the point that he makes;it is not just a
question of reporting. The mere fact of their watchful
presence,he says, can be something of a deterrent to
military activity. They can be in a position t0 report on
indications of the build-ups which often precede military
action, and when fighting doesbreak out they can quickly
intervene on the spot with the opposinglocal commanders

to arrange an immediate cease-fire. The Secretary-General
points out also that it may be noted that, largely becauseof
the presence of United Nations observers, the Security
Council cease-fire resolutions are better served and maintained in the Saez Canal and Israel-Syria sector than in the
Israel-Jordan sector which we are now discussing.

Nations Charter and the cease-fire resolutions. It deplored
all violent incidents in violation of the cease-fire and
declared that such actions of military reprisal and other
grave violations of the cease-firecould not be tolerated and
that the Council would have to consider further and more
effective steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure against
repetition of such acts.

89. The Canadian delegation, for its part feels strongly
that it is not enough simply to call for respect of the
cease-fire, although such a call is certainly in order. Surely
we must ask the parties-this is a matter of co-operation
and voluntary arrangement-to allow observersto function
in a mobile fashion, No one has spoken of a new line or of
some permanent arrangements which are to the disadvantage of one side or another. It would be a voluntary
arrangement, but one which would help in the maintenance
of the cease-fire and secure conditions of calm in the area.

94. Yet, less than five days after the adoption of that
resolution, new and serious incidents have occurred which
have once more bathed the are’s’in blood and have made it
necessaryfor the Council to meet again. Fresh fighting has
broken out along the 120 kilometres of the Jordan valley; a
particularly violent and destructive artillery duel was
carried on for six hours; the Israel Air Force intervened and
numerous localities were subjected to bombardment from
land and air.
95. The Security Council knows my Government’s
position on this matter. The unanimously adopted resolution of 22 November, which laid down the basis for a
settlement in keeping with the views of the French
Government, remains, as our Minister for Foreign Affairs
recently recalled, the foundation of French policy. It is
along the lines laid down in this resolution and not in the
opposite way-by military action-that we must resolutely
proceed until a final solution is reached.

90. For my part, at least, 1 am not in a pdsition to attempt
to pass judgement on the conflicting claims and charges
that are put forward in this Council by both parties without
independent information coming to us from the Secretary
General. When we met only last week the Canadian
delegation expressed the hope that something could be
done to facilitate the assignment by the Secretary-General
of United Nations observersto the area, and we suggested
then that by helping to establish conditions of calm such an
arrangement would assist the efforts of Ambassador Jarring
to ‘achieve agreement on the application of Council resolution 242 (1967), which is our fundamental jurisdiction, on
the basis of which all our discussions are proceeding at the,
present time. The need for such action is even more urgent
and evident today, given the state of open confrontation of
hostile forces in the area which, according to the statements
which we have listened to this afternoon, is becoming even
more dangerous.

96. My Government is deeply concerned over the loss of
human life, the additional suffering and the damage to
property caused by the renewed military activities of 29
March. But what concerns us even more is that the
repetition of such serious incidents can only widen the gap
of mistrust between the adversaries and postpone still
further the peaceful settlement we all desire.
97. We cannot allow such clashes to continue. Their
frequency has mounted dangerously during the last few
weeks and they threaten not only to become more
numerous, but also more widespread, There is a danger that
a real war, in all its forms, may break out once more in that
region, and if that were to happen no one could foresee
where it would stop.

91. I earnestly hope that this Council will continue to urge
the parties to accept observersand to co-operate with them
in restoring a measure of quiet in the area. But surely the
supreme aim at this time must be for us all in this Council
and the parties concerned to give all the support we
possibly can to Ambassador Jarring in his mission of peace
which is being conducted on behalf of all members of the
Security Council in the name of the Secretary-General, The
latest report on Ambassador Jarring’s efforts is contained in
document S/8309/Add.2, of 29 March 1968, which the
Secretary-General has been good enough to put before us. I
should like to take this opportunity, therefore, once again
to urge all the parties concerned to extend full co-operation
to Ambassador Jarring on the basisof the acceptance of the
Council’s resolution of 22 November 1967 [resolution
242 /1967)] as a whole.

98. The Council cannot allow its authority to be flouted
or its decisions ignored. It must demand that its decisions
be respected, especially those embodied in resolutions
242 (1967) and 248 (1968) of 22 November 1967 and 24
March 1968. To adopt resolutions is not en.ough;‘the
Council must ensure that they are carried out. It must seek
solutions and put them into effect.
99. In order to achieve that end, the Council must be in a
position ,to determine the most effective courses of action.
It needs to be fully and accurately informed, Its resolutions
are more valuable when they are batid on unassailable
facts. In the supplemental information he has submitted to
this Council on 30 March [S/7930/Add.66], the Secretary
General poMted out that the presence of United Nations
observersin an area can be helpfuiin preserving a cease-fire
in ways other than reporting. The mere fact of their
watchful presence, he added, can be something of a
deterrent to military activity. They can be in a position to
report on indications of the build-ups which often precede
military action and, when fighting does break out, they ~1

92. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French): First
of all, Mr. President, my delegation knowing as it does your
great authority and experience, would like to expressits
great pleasure at seeing you in the high office you have
assumed today. It should also like to acknowledge the
competence and efficiency with which your predecessor,
Ambassador So& Diop, conducted our work.
93. On 24 March 1968, by its resolution 248 (1968), the
Council unanimously condemned the military action
launched by Israel in flagrant violation of the United
8

deplored
-fire and
nd other
rated and L
md more
re against
1 of that
ed which
e made it
;hting has
1valley; a
duel was or
fened and
lent from
xnment’s
sd resolu.
isis for a
e French
;n Affairs
licy. It is
lot in the
resolutely

i
j
j
:
~

:
he loss of
.amage to
ties of 29
that the
:n the gap
pone still

quickly intervene on the spot with the opposing local
commanders to arrange immediate cease-fires.

106. The magnitude and depth of this human tragedy and
the cruelty and suffering it has inflicted is beyond
description. The Security Council has repeatedly declared
that acts of military reprisal cannot be tolerated; far less
can they be tolerated against a practically defenceless State
such as Jordan, which has been subjected to massive
violence and destruction in reprisal against the acts of the
Palestinian resistance.

100. This is fair enough, but let it be understood that
there can be no question of taking action which might in
any way appear to condone conquest or military occupation, which is something we do not recognize, or to accept
the positions occupied by the opposing sides at the time of
the cease-fire. That must be very clearly understood, But if
a mobile unit could be set up under the command of the
Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization; a unit which would bear these considerations
in mind and which would be capable of intervening
anywhere it was needed in the Israel-Jordan sector in order
to expose and prevent military concentrations such as those
we witnessed on the eve of the 29 March fighting, or in
order to halt military activities as soon as they occur, we
would certainly have taken a step towards a settlement.

107. How can we believe that the resistance emanates
solely from Jordanian territory and that nothing but peace
and tranquillity prevail in the occupied areas? Even if the
Israeli charges were true, here a clear distinction must be
drawn, as has been pointed out by one of our colleagues,
between military operations waged deliberately by Govemments after thorough preparation and acts of individuals or
groups inspired by natural feelings. We cannot forget that
they have been the victims of ruthlessness and violence for
twenty years, condemned to a rootless and hopeless
existence for the rest of their lives; and it has been even
more tragic for their children.

101. At the same time, we must demand scrupulous
respect for resolution 248 (1968) of 24 March 1968,
without, however, losing sight of the fact that it is only
through the full application of resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967 that we can hope to find a lasting solution
to the Middle East problem.

108. Confronted with this situation the Security Council,
in the view of my delegation, cannot but bear in mind the
whole background of the problem. My delegation was
deeply impressed by what the representative of the United
Kingdom, Lord Caradon, said at the 1407th meeting of the
Security Council: “To attempt to deal with last week’s
events in isolation . . . would be to fail to recognize the
realities of the situation as a whole” [1407th meeting,

102. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, my delegation
extends to you our warm congratulations on your accession
to the Presidency of the Security Council, Your qualities of
high statesmanship for which you are well known, and the
fact that you represent a world Power which is dedicated to
the establishment of a just peace and the elimination of
colonialism in all its manifestations, makes it doubly
appropriate that you should preside over our deliberations
on these very issues this month.

para. 381.

109. We cannot fail to recognize the realities. We must
acknowledge that the immediate cause of the problem
before the Council is the continued occupation of Arab
territories by Israel. Nothing but the departure of the
occupying forces will prevent a further deterioration of the
situation and serve to bring tranquillity to the area.

ue. Their i
: last feew i
tme more
anger that i
3re in that /
Id foresee ;

103. I also take this opportunity to pay a sincere tribute
to Ambassador Diop of Senegal for the patience, judgement
and skill of which he gave so much proof while presiding
over the many meetings of the Security Council last month
when questions of great moment-the
enlargement of
freedom and the maintenance of peace in the worldoccupied our attention.

36:flouted
I decisions
esolutions
57 and 24 ;
ough;.the ;
must seek j
/
,
ust be ina :
of action, ,
,esolutions

104. The Security Council on 24 March 1968 adopted
resolution 248 (1968), condemning the military action
launched by Israel in flagrant violation of the United
Nations Charter and the cease-fire resolutions. Yet, five
days later we were faced again with another large-scale
military action by Israel. This was a heavy and concentrated
bombardment of the east bank of the Jordan by land and
air; it caused further loss of life and laid waste fertile lands
which formed the source of livelihood of the Arab refugees
who, for the third time in twenty years, have been
uprooted by violence from their homes.

110. In this context, we greatly deplore the thinly veiled
designs of Israel to annex the Jordanian territory occupied
since June last. These designs inevitably provoke acts of
resistance from the uprooted, despoiled and dispossessed
people of Palestine, Unless we in the Council resign
ourselves to a pattern’ of repeated violations of the
cease-fire, unless we lapse into indifference with regard to
the endless sufferings of the refugees, unless we are
oblivious of the imperative not to countenance any
acquisition of territory by military conquest, we must call
upon Israel to accept and implement, without any further
delay, Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967 and to fully co-operate with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General by withdrawing its
forces from all the territories occupied since 5 June of last
year.

105. In 1968 and 1969, nearly one million Arab inhabitants had to flee their homes in Palestine. In 1967, another
400,000 on the west bank of the Jordan and elsewhere
again became homeless, many of them for a second time.
And this year, since 1.5February, some 77,000 according to
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East have been compelled to flee from
the east bank towards Amman in consequence of Israeli
military operations across the river Jordan.

111. My delegation has taken careful note of the supplementary information submitted by the Secretary-Genera1in
document S/7930/Add.66, of 30 March 1968. While we
appreciate the Secretary-General’s argument for establishing
the watchful presence of United Nations observers in the
Israel-Jordan sector, we consider that the apprehensions
expressed by the representative of Jordan are only natural
and justified in the circumstances, given the record of Israel
and its expansionist designs. The machinery of the United

nassailabk

>mitted to
Secretary
:d Nations :
1 cease-fire C
t of their
ling of a i
position to
en precede /
t, they.can k
$

9

valley, And when a decisionof this organiS at stake
somewhere,peaceis at stakeeverywhere.Whena cease-fire
orderedby the Security Councilis solightly respected,it is
not only the well-beingandsafety of the inhabitantsof the
Jordanvalley that suffer; all other eventual cease-fires
that
this Council may one day order in other parts of the world
alsowill suffer, and with this the very foundations of the
world that the United Nations has been trying to build
since 1945. Therefore, I can never overstressthe vital
importancethat my Governmentattributes to the necessity
for the most scrupulousrespectof the cease-fire.

Nations should not be so exploited as to lead to an
insidious transformation of an occupation into a de facto
annexation of territory acquired by military conquest.

Jordan

112. With those inescapable considerations in mind, my
delegation would like to stress that there is no warrant for
considering Security Council resolution 73 (1949), which
provided for a machinery to supervise the armistice
.between Jordan and Israel, as obsolete.
113. In considering the Secretary-General’s recommendation contained in his supplemental information note, my
delegation is of the view that the Security Council might
well examine how that mz:hinery should be put together
again and deployed to meet the needs of the present
situation.

121. Equally grave is the fact .that the Security Council,
faced with such deplorable violations,’ is not even in a
position to know objectively all the elements of the
situation in the Jordanian-Israelisectorof the cease-fireline
and has to rely on the accounts given by the parties
concerned,In consequence,
the first stepfor US to take here
must be to enablethe Security Council to follow developmentsin that area.My delegationwelcomesthe suggestion
madeby the Secretary-Generalin his last report [ibid.] on
the need for United Nations observersin the JordanianIsraelisectorof the cease-fireline. The reasonsinvokedby
the Secretary-Generalfor such a proposal should be
seriouslyconsideredand acted upon if and when thereisa
political consensus
on the part of this Council. It is indeed
very difficult for the Security Councilto take action on the
basisof conflicting official reports comingfrom the parties
involved or from merehearsay.In this context, I would also
like to point out that, given the present situation in the
Middle East, any curtailment of United Nationsactivitiesin
the areamust be regretted, be it the end of the presenceof
the Organization in Jerusalemor the withdrawal of the
United Nations EmergencyForce just before the war broke

114. Mr. SETTE CAMARA (Brazil): Mr. President, allow
me to convey to you the congratulations of my delegation
on your assumption of ‘the high duties of President of the
Security Council.
115. Allow me also to express to Ambassador Diop of
Senegal our gratitude and admiration for the way in which
he presided over the deliberations of this Council during the
past month of March.
116. I came from my country only last week, but I know
that all of you around this table had a very busy month and
also, may I say, a successful one. I am also aware of the fact
that no small part of that success was due to the dedication
and intelligence which Ambassador Diop brought to the
difficult job that is now yours, Mr. President.
117. Only some days ago the Security Council adopted by
unanimity resolution 248 (1968), in view of the large-scale
military action taken by Israel on the territory of Jordan,
and also in view of the armed attacks launched from
Jordanian territory through and beyond the cease-fire line.
The Security Council, in that resolution, condemned “the
military action launched by Israel” and deplored “all
violent incidents in violation of the cease-fire”. Those are
the very words of resolution 248 (1968).

out.

122. On the other hand, I wish to expressthe concernof
my Government as to the possibleeffects of the most
recent eventson the future and the prospectsof the Jarring
mission. In his latest report of 29 March 1968 on the
mission[S/8309/Add.2/, the Secretary-Generalpoints out
that the mediation efforts of AmbassadorJarring “have
been interrupted by recent events”. It is the hope of my
delegationthat the partieswill continue to co-operatewith
AmbassadorJarring and will enablehim to renew, assoon
aspossible,the contacts that he hasbeenmaintainingsince
lastDecember.

118. Today this Council is examining the occurrence of
new incidents on the Jordanian-Israeli sector of the
cease-fire line where, on 29 March, “heavy and prolonged
firing including artillery exchanges and aerial activity” took
place, according to “Accounts presented by both parties”
[S/793O/Add. 66, para. 11. This is in the SecretaryGeneral’ssupplemental
information of 30 March 1968.

123. LRt me concludemy remarksby appealingagainto
the parties to exercisetheir utmost restraint in the future.
The bitter experienceof twenty years of hostility should
have madeclearto all by now that nothing is to begained
by war. The records of history deride those who thought
119. Resolution248 (1968) of this Council alsomadeit
clear that “actions of military reprisal and other grave they were accomplishingsomethingby the useof force and
violence.History may indeedone day ask scepticallywhat
ViOkdiOnS
of the cease-firecannot be tolerated”, and that
“the Security Council would have to considerfurther an;i was the meaningof all the sound and the fury of the
more effective stepsasenvisagedin the Charter to ensure presentsituation in the Middle East. But this generationof
Arabs and Israeliswill only live up to their responsibility
againstrepetition of suchacts”.
before history if they decide, as I am sure they will, to
120. On past occasionsmy delegationhasfirmly stated’ bequeath to their sons not a legacy of hatred and
that this Council cannot condonethe use of force under destructionbut a heritageof coexistenceandprosperity.
any form whatsoever,and that the cease-fire,on which all
hopesfor the Middle Eastdepend,cannot go on being the
124. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): Mr. President,at the ,outset
object of systematicviolations, The authority and the
I should like to associatemyself with the well-merited
prestigeof the Security Council are at staketoday in the
praise you paid to the representative of Senegal,our
10

take
i-fire
it is

r the
that
rocld
- the
luild
vital
ssity
tncil,
in a
the
! line
icties
here
elop
stion
./ on
nian!d by
1 be
c is a
/deed
II the
:Icties
I also
I the
its in
ce of
f the
,coke
!1’11
of
mast
Mlg
1 the
s out
‘have
If my
with
SO011
since

Iill

to

.tture.

bould
pined
oIlgIlt

:eand
what
If the
ion of
ibility
jll, to
I and
tY#
outset
ccited
I, our

esteemedPresidentduring the difficult month of March. In
welcoming you, Mr. President,to your high office I wish to
assureyou most sincerely of the fullest co-operationof the
Danish delegation.
125. It was with great regret and concern that my
delegation learned about the violent outbreaksof fighting
between Israel and Jordan only five days after the
unanimous adoption by this Council of resolution
248 (1968). I wish to take this oppocttinity to re-emphasize
that it is of the utmost importance that the cease-firebe
scrupulously adheredto by all concerned.For quite apart
from the human sufferingsand material losseswhich ace
inflicted by any violation of the cease-fire,such violations
tend to impedeprogresstowards the establishmentof a just
and lasting peacein the area in accordancewith Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). If new catastrophesaceto
be averted it is indeedessentialthat all partiesextend their
fulI co-operation to the Special Representativeof the
Secretary-General and desist from any step whatsoever
which might further complicatehis endeavours.
126. In my statement in this Council on 21 March 1968
f1403rd meeting] I spoke in favour of a strengtheningof
the United Nations*supervisory functions. The supplemental information presented to us by the SecretaryGeneral in document S/7930/Add.66 confirms the needin
this respect. Fortified by the observationsin this document,
already repeatedly quoted in this meeting, my delegation
would like to put on record that it is prepared to give
positive consideration to any practical steps such as
deployment of the observersof the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization in an appropriate area that may
strengthen the Secretary-Generalin the dischargeof his
reporting responsibilitiesunder the resolutions of this
Council and that may help in deterringfurther violations of
the cease-fire.

to freedom of navigation. The United Nations is now
actively engagedin an effort to establishboundariesand to
define territory. Indeed, the United Nations for the first
time in many years is working towards a just and lasting
peacethat would establishpreciselythoseelementsthat, in
the words of the Jordanian representative,did not exist
underthe ArmisticeAgreement.
131. The Jordanianrepresentativewould nevertheless
like
the Security Councilto take the road backward, to cancel
all prospectsof peace, to thwart all chancesof understandingbetweenthe parties. To Jordan and to the other
Arab Stateswe say: the world expects us to moveforward
to peaceand stability, not backward to renewedchaosand
continued warfare. Let us take this road together. That is
what our peoplesdesire.That iswhat our peoplespcay for.
132. The PRESIDENT(translatedfrom Russian):1 call on
the representativeof Jordanin exerciseof his right of reply.
133. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Last year I said, and I
continueto maintain,that the Armistice Agreementdid not
fix boundaries.Certainly, the Armistice Agreementdid not
fix a boundaryfor Israel.The boundariesare fixed by the
United Nations.There is a resolution referring to boundaries,but the Armistice Agreementnever fixed boundaries.
What Israel occupiedby force, in violation of the United
Nationsresolutions,is certainly not a boundary; otherwise,
the United Nationswould be condoningaggression.
It was
taken by force in the sameway that Israel took by force
the territory it hasbeen occupying since5 June. There is
nothing wrong in the statementthat the Armistice Agreement did not fix boundaries.It is not Jordansayingthis. It
has been affirmed by the United Nations, by the Security
Councilandby the GeneralAssembly.

134. Mr. Tekoahtellsus: “Let usmove forward to peace.”
They ace moving forward-to expansion. They moved
127. Although we do not underrate the difficulties, it is forward when they occupied the west bank. They also
moved forward in Sinai, forward in Gaza and forward in
the hope of my delegationthat it will prove possiblefor the
Security Council, in co-operation with the parties con” Syria. Mr. Tekoah speaksabout moving forward to peace.
cerned, to find the formula that will allow for the presence But they shouldgo backwardfirst to what wasgiventhem
by the United Nations. They should implement the
of United Nations observers in accordance with the
demandsof the United Nations.They shouldgo back to the
observations of the Secretary-General.
LausanneProtocol signedby them on 12 May 1949.5 That
would be a reflection of peaceful motives. But to keep
128. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Russian):I call on
the representativeof Israelin exerciseof his right of reply.
speakingabout peacewhen they are practising aggression
certainly doesnot fool anybody-not even the Israelis.
129. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The representativeof Jordan
referred to the Amljstice Agreements-destroyed by the
13.5. The PRESIDENT(lranslatedfrom Russian):The list
of speakersis exhausted.Thereare no other representatives
Arab States.What is behind that reference? At the Security
Council meeting on 31 May 1967, the representativeof
who wishto speakat today’s meeting.
Jordan said:
136. After informal consultationswith the membersof
“There is an Armistice Agreement. The Agreementdid
the Council it hasbeenestablishedthat a majority of the
not tlx boundaries;. . . The Agreement did not pass membersis in favour of holding the next meeting of the
judgement on rights-political, military oc otherwise. Council for the considerationof this item of its agendaat
Thus I know of no territory; I know of no boundary”
3 p.m. on 2 April. Since I hear no objection, it is SO
[13&h meeting,para. 841.
decided.
137. Before closingthe meeting, I shouldlike to express
my gratitude to those membersof the Security Council

130. As the Security Council is aware,the United Nations
through its representative, AmbassadorJarring, is now
engaged in an effort to vindicate the political and military
rights of the Statesin the area, suchasthe right to live in
peace, the right to live free from threats of force, the right

5 See Official

Ad Hoc Political
annex B.

1

Records of the General
Committee,
Annex,

Assembly,
Fourtlr
SEssion,
Vol. II, document A/927,

HOW
-

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

Notions
publications
5 United
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.
COMMENT

NATIONS
may
bookstore

SE PROCURER

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Sales Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
der
deporitoires
du monde

Nations
entier.

Nations

Unies,

der

KAK

flOIlY’iMTb

Section

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

Unles
sent
Informer-vow

venter,

MBAAHMR

DES NATIONS

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES
de lar

Naciones

en todos porter
del mundo.
Cons&e
Ventar, Nueva York o Ginebro.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

UNIES

en vente
dons
ler libroirier
et les oganccs
oppr&s de votre libroirle
ou edrerrez-vour
I:

New York ou GenPve.
OPrAHM3A~HM

~~3~~llllltl
O~~~t~llll:l~l~llll
bh~,~~JtL?lllll~lS
Ihl\lll"l
ilI'CIITI'Tll;lS
110 IlVl'S ~J8ilOIlllX
~lIl~Hl. hlO~~lTC
HllPB:lllllC
II.111 l.lllltlllTC
110 ll;(~N'~:
Opwl3aqllll
UpO~Ll;l;C Il~l~EllIll~,
IIblo-l~Ol)Ii
lldll 8hllCLKL

Lor publicociones

tfiroughout
New York

06bEAMHEHHblX

JlOilillO
IiyllltTh
II lilllI;tillldS
Jllll'LWllllElX
II
Nl~aJWIl
Oij ll:l~allIltlX
" ,tl,l,lP~, I~lllIilillO1
Oi)'bcAlI1lelllll~lS
IInl\llil,
CclillllH
II0

DE LAS NACIONES
Unidor

HAuIifi

est6n

en vento

e so librero

o dirljore

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

UNIDAS
en librerios

y cosos

a: Nociones

in other currencies)

Unidor,

dirtribuidorar
Seccidn

de

35372~September

1972-2,100
