United Nations

S/PV.5256

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5256

th meeting
Wednesday, 7 September 2005, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Baja . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Philippines)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Aho-Glele
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Denisov
Sir. Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Manongi
Mr. Bolton

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-48154 (E)

*0548154*

S/PV.5256

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sumaida’ie
(Iraq), took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Paul Volcker,
Chairman of the Independent Inquiry Committee into
the United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Volcker to take a seat at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Paul Volcker, Chairman of the
Independent Inquiry Committee into the United
Nations Oil-for-Food Programme.
I now give him the floor.
Mr. Volcker: I and my colleagues with me today
greatly appreciate this opportunity to address the
Security Council directly on the results of our inquiry.
Eighteen months have now passed since the
inquiry was launched, with the full support of a
resolution of the Security Council. That resolution was
critically important in signalling Council members’

2

interest in the investigation and in eliciting cooperation
by Member States, their agencies and, importantly, the
countries represented around this table.
Our assignment has been to look for
misadministration or maladministration in the oil-forfood programme and for evidence of corruption within
the United Nations and by contractors. Unhappily, we
found both. The investigation and the findings are
documented in great detail in the very large report
before the Council. What I want to emphasize this
morning are not the details, but the broad conclusions
and recommendations the Committee has reached.
They are summarized in the preface to our report,
released yesterday, which I believe is in members’
hands.
In essence, the responsibility for the failures must
be broadly shared, starting, we believe, with member
States and the Security Council itself. In the first place,
the programme left too much initiative with Iraq. It
was, as one past member of this Council has put it, a
compact with the devil, and the devil had means for
manipulating the programme to his ends. That basic
difficulty was compounded by a failure to clearly
define the complex administrative responsibilities
shared between the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990) and the
Secretariat, and by continuing political differences.
The result was that no one seemed clearly in command.
Delays in or evasion of decision-making were chronic.
The administrative structure and practices of the
Secretariat and some agencies clearly were not up to
the truly extraordinary challenge presented by the
programme. Sadly, those weaknesses were aggravated
by unethical and corrupt behaviour at key points at the
top of the Office of the Iraq Programme and in the
purchasing department.
There was a pervasive absence of effective
auditing and administrative controls. Weak planning,
sorely inadequate funding, and too few professional
staff were all characteristic of the process. The absence
of truly independent status for the auditing and control
functions was a critical deficiency. Close cooperation
among various United Nations organs apparently goes
against the grain for agencies with their own funding,
management and oversight. It is true that autonomy can
bring benefits, but in a complex programme requiring a
range of competencies, while at the same time

S/PV.5256

invoking common funding and a common purpose,
absence of full cooperation should not be tolerated.
That is a litany of problems. Clearly, there is
another side to the story — one of positive success. An
expert study commissioned by the Committee confirms
that the programme averted the clear and present
danger of malnutrition and a further collapse of
medical services in Iraq. That is no small achievement,
especially when combined with the support that the
programme provided for maintaining the basic
sanctions against Iraq and its inability to obtain
weapons of mass destruction.
The conclusions we draw will not surprise the
Council. They emphasize the need for stronger
operational capacity and authority. Specifically, we
suggest or recommend that a new chief operating
officer be appointed with a clear mandate and authority
for administration. Our conclusions underscore the
need for strong and independent auditing control and
investigatory functions. And again, we recommend a
strong independent oversight board.
These and other recommendations are common to
most recent commentary and reports. What our work
does is bring new dimensions to the discussion.
I believe our investigation is unprecedented in
both scale and detail. It covers both the Security
Council itself and the Secretariat in New York. It has
touched directly on nine other members of the United
Nations family.
Consequently, we do not believe our conclusions
can be dismissed as simply reporting aberrations in one
programme or something that can be smoothed over
with patchwork changes. Instead, the problems are
symptomatic of deep-seated systemic issues. Those
issues arise in an Organization designed 60 years ago
for a simpler time, an Organization then without large
and complex operational challenges alongside its
political and diplomatic responsibilities.
I believe I speak for my colleagues as well as
myself in the conviction that in an unsettled world the
United Nations will again be called upon — it is being
called upon today — to deal with complex operational
problems
crossing
national
and
disciplinary
boundaries. The administrative ability and the technical
capacity of the Secretariat and the agencies will be
tested again and again.

A United Nations programme carries with it —
and should carry with it — a strong sense of
international legitimacy. No single nation or group of
nations can match that potential quality. But we believe
that more than legitimacy is essential to success.
Support is, in the end, dependent upon credibility and
confidence. And it is that credibility and confidence
that have been challenged by the travails of the oil-forfood programme. To some degree, the Organization has
been weakened.
That is why reform is so urgent. We commend
our particular recommendations to the Council. And
we urge the Council and the General Assembly to set
firm benchmarks for progress. Quite specifically,
action should be taken by the time the General
Assembly completes its meetings in 2006. The
opportunity for reform should not — in my view, must
not — be lost.
The President: I thank Mr. Volcker for his
briefing.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting. I now
invite him to take the floor.
The Secretary-General: As members know, it
was on my initiative, and with the support of the
Council, that in April of last year, Mr. Volcker, Justice
Goldstone and Professor Pieth were asked to conduct
their inquiry. I took that initiative not with a view to
deflecting blame or to forging a political weapon
against anyone, but with the sole purpose of
uncovering the truth. I was convinced that only by
revealing the full truth, however painful, could the
United Nations regain its credibility and establish what
changes were needed.
Mr. Volcker himself remarked, when presenting
his first interim report, that few other organizations
would have opened themselves to independent scrutiny
as fully as this one has. And indeed, the truth as
revealed in the successive interim reports of the inquiry
and in this full report today is painful for all of us.
There can be few people, either in the Council or in the
Secretariat, who will take pleasure in hearing or
reading the conclusions that the inquiry has reached.
Yet I believe we should all be profoundly grateful
to Mr. Volcker and his colleagues for the work they
have done and the report they have produced. I have no

3

S/PV.5256

doubt — no doubt at all — that the Organization will
benefit from it.
My colleagues and I have only just received the
full report, as Council members have, and therefore it
would be premature for me to give a detailed response
at this stage. But there are some things that I am ready
to say now.
The report is critical of me personally, and I
accept the criticism. Earlier this year the Committee
concluded that I did not influence, or attempt to
influence, the procurement process. And I am glad to
note that that conclusion is reaffirmed.
But I accepted then, and still accept, the
conclusion that I was not diligent or effective enough
in pursuing an investigation after the fact, when I
learned that the company that employed my son had
won the humanitarian inspection contract. I deeply
regret that.
The evidence of actual corruption among a small
number of United Nations staff is also profoundly
disappointing for all of us who work in the
Organization.
But, while I have not yet had time to study the
full text of the report, I am gratified to see that two
essential points are made in the preface. First, the
Committee notes that the programme did succeed in
restoring and maintaining minimal standards of
nutrition and health in Iraq, while also helping
maintain the international effort to prevent Saddam
Hussein from acquiring weapons of mass destruction.
Secondly, it observes that the wholesale corruption
within the programme took place among private
companies manipulated by Saddam Hussein’s
Government.
More important, however, are the Committee’s
findings about the general management of the
programme, which was characterized by weak
administrative practices and inadequate control and
auditing. Most important of all is the way those
findings reflect on the system of decision-making,
accountability and management throughout the
Organization. Here too, as chief administrative officer,
I have to take responsibility for the failings revealed,
both in the implementation of the programme and,
more generally, in the functioning of the Secretariat.
The report also finds that many of these problems
were rooted in an unclear demarcation of roles and

4

responsibilities among the Council, the 661 Committee
and the Secretariat — and in particular in the Council’s
decision to retain substantial elements of operational
control within the 661 Committee, composed of
national diplomats working under highly politicized
instructions from their home Governments, yet willing
to take decisions only when there was unanimous
consent among all the 15 members. This, of course,
calls for reflection by Member States.
There are hard lessons for all of us to learn. They
are lessons about the importance of accountability,
particularly of having clear lines of responsibility and
reporting, so that all officials and all parts of the
Secretariat know exactly where their responsibilities
lie. They are lessons about oversight, particularly about
the need for mechanisms to ensure that when oversight
reveals deficiencies, someone takes prompt action to
repair those deficiencies. And, above all, they are
lessons about the need for the United Nations to
maintain the highest possible standards of integrity and
effective performance.
We shall have to study all these lessons, and all
the Committee’s recommendations, with great care. It
may well be that we shall have to propose specific new
reform measures to put them into practice.
But one thing should be clear right now. The
Inquiry’s findings underscore the vital importance of
proposed management reforms, many of which are at
this very minute being negotiated by Members in the
General Assembly with a view to their adoption, as
part of a broader agenda of political and institutional
change, by next week’s summit.
As the Council knows, I have already embarked
on new reforms in areas where I have discretion —
reforms designed to improve the performance of senior
management,
to
strengthen
oversight
and
accountability, to increase transparency and to ensure
the highest standards of ethics, notably by creating a
new ethics office. But there are many key decisions
that only the General Assembly can make.
As the Inquiry’s report says, we cannot be sure,
however much we might wish it, that fresh
emergencies will not sooner or later impose on us new
tasks as complex as the oil-for-food programme.
Therefore, it is vital that we review fully the rules
governing our budgetary and human resources. The oilfor-food programme is only the most extreme example

S/PV.5256

of the wide range of new types of operation that
Member States have called on the Secretariat to
undertake in the last 15 years. It surely illustrates the
point that our rules must allow us to attract, retain and
develop a cadre of professionals with appropriate skills
to manage such operations, to move them from post to
post in a fair and practicable way and to rationalize the
budgetary process, which at present is far too heavy,
time-consuming and bureaucratic.
Even more obviously, it is vital that we build a
stronger and better-resourced oversight structure and
ensure that it is fully independent both from the
Secretariat and from political interference by Member
States. One important element in this new structure
would be the independent oversight advisory
committee proposed in the draft outcome document
submitted by the President of the General Assembly,
which corresponds closely to the Committee’s
recommendation of an independent auditing board.
But it is no less vital that the Secretary-General
himself should be allowed to carry out his functions
effectively, taking day-to-day decisions on the
deployment of staff and resources without having to
wait for prior approval from the General Assembly,
this Council or their various committees. As the report
says, one of the fundamental problems with the oil-forfood programme was that neither the Security Council
nor the Secretariat leadership was clearly in command,
and that turned out to be a recipe for the dilution of
Secretariat authority and the evasion of personal
responsibility at all levels. In future, the respective
roles and powers of the different parts of the
Organization must be clearly defined so that the
Secretary-General knows precisely what is expected of
him and Member States can hold him fully accountable
for the results.
As I told the General Assembly negotiators last
week, I know that none of you want a Secretariat that
can always blame its failings on Member States, or
Member States blaming their failings on the
Secretariat. You want a Secretariat that is given clear
instructions by Member States and then takes
responsibility for its success or failure in carrying them
out.
The findings in today’s report must be deeply
embarrassing to us all. The Inquiry Committee has
ripped away the curtain and shone a harsh light into the
most unsightly corners of the Organization. None of

us — Member States, the Secretariat, agencies, funds
and programmes — can be proud of what it has found.
Who among us can now claim that United Nations
management is not a problem or is not in need of
reform?
On the contrary, as the Volcker report puts it,
reform is imperative if the United Nations is to regain
and retain the measure of respect among the
international community that its work requires.
Next week’s summit gives world leaders a golden
opportunity to enact such a reform. But the negotiators
are leaving it perilously late. There is a grave danger
that the opportunity will be missed. I hope that I am
wrong.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is grateful to Mr. Volcker and the
Secretary-General for their presentations.
I think this morning we need to remember above
all that it is Saddam Hussein who remains the key
culprit in the oil-for-food saga, as he sought
continuously to corrupt the programme for personal
benefit. Indeed, it was because of the humanitarian
imperative that the Security Council and the United
Nations Secretariat were obliged to reach less-thansatisfactory agreements with the Saddam regime and
ensure a programme that would meet the essential
needs of the Iraqi people. We have heard Mr. Volcker
describe the circumstances of how that initial
programme was put in place.
But none of that can excuse the corruption, the
criminality and the mismanagement that took place.
But in condemning that, let us not forget that the
greater wrong that was done to the people of Iraq and
to the region was done by Saddam.
This morning, we have heard the SecretaryGeneral’s acknowledgement of a personal and
institutional responsibility. And with hindsight, it must
be clear to all of us that many concerned in the
circumstances of the time were too focused on other
aspects of the Iraq problem, rather than on the
accountable functioning of the oil-for-food programme.
The report seems therefore to rightly highlight the
shortcomings in the Secretariat’s management, the part
played by the Security Council in creating and

5

S/PV.5256

monitoring the oil-for-food programme and that of the
Member States in enforcing Iraq’s sanctions.
So, as far as the United Kingdom is concerned,
we very much agree with the Secretary-General that in
studying this report we have to draw lessons for the
future, particularly on the question of management
reform. The serious shortcomings that have been
identified have to be corrected, and that underlines the
need for a successful summit outcome next week, with
real changes to secure the efficiency, the
accountability, the transparency and, perhaps above all,
the oversight that is necessary, and then to ensure that
responsibilities are fulfilled by all concerned.
For our part, we fully support the SecretaryGeneral in his efforts to ensure that the right lessons
are drawn from this report and that action is then taken.
Mr. Bolton (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for allowing Member States to
express their preliminary reactions to the most recent
report of the Independent Inquiry Committee. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his comments today.
And I thank Chairman Volcker for the important work
he has done over the past year.
The United States will carefully review the report
that Mr. Volcker has delivered, with one principal
purpose in mind: to see how we can use the findings
and recommendations made in his report to reform and
improve the United Nations. Identifying those who
failed to execute their responsibilities is a necessary
part of the process; prosecuting wrongdoers is equally
necessary. But what is most important is to consider
the shortcomings of the oil-for-food programme as a
catalyst for change at the United Nations.
It appears from the preface of the report of the
Independent Inquiry Committee that, in spite of
success in the humanitarian objective of ensuring that
the Iraqi people were adequately fed, there is plenty of
blame to go around for the failings of the oil-for-food
programme. When we have had a chance to review the
report, the United States may or may not agree with all
of the findings of the Committee in that regard. What
we can all agree on is that Saddam Hussein exploited
the goodwill of the international community towards
the people of Iraq. He exploited that goodwill in order
to obtain billions of dollars for his own personal use
and for the use of his regime so as to strengthen his
authoritarian grip on his own people.

6

We can also agree that there was corruption both
inside and outside the United Nations system and that
that corruption allowed Saddam to achieve many of his
illicit goals. There were bribes; there were kickbacks;
there was lax oversight from the Secretariat. And some
Member States turned a blind eye to that corruption.
We look forward to our heads of State arriving in
New York next week to discuss, among other topics,
the importance of reforming the United Nations
system. We note the call by Chairman Volcker for
greater auditing and management controls, including
an independent audit board, stronger organizational
ethics and more active management of the United
Nations and its programmes by the Secretariat. Over
the past several days we have been pushing for exactly
that, only to meet with resistance from dozens of
countries that are in a state of denial — countries
which contend that business as usual at the United
Nations is fine. This report unambiguously rejects the
notion that business as usual at the United Nations is
acceptable. We need to reform the United Nations in a
manner that will prevent another oil-for-food scandal.
The credibility of the United Nations depends on it.
Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I should like at the outset to welcome the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and the Chairman
of the Independent Inquiry Committee, Mr. Volcker.
We thank Mr. Volcker for the report and commend him
and the other members of the Independent Committee
for their work. We have received the report, which is a
comprehensive, detailed document. We will need time
to examine it, and we will clearly pay close attention to
that task.
However, having familiarized ourselves, before
this meeting, with the preface of the report, and having
listened today to Mr. Volcker and to the SecretaryGeneral, I would like to say, by way of preliminary
comment, that I share many of their conclusions. The
United Nations humanitarian oil-for-food programme
was authorized by the Security Council nine years ago
as a measure aimed at easing the humanitarian
suffering of the Iraqi people that resulted from the
many years of comprehensive sanctions and embargo.
The programme was in operation until March 2003,
when it was suspended for reasons that are well known.
We believe that it is unfair to describe the
humanitarian programme in solely negative terms. As I
see it, in the report Mr. Volcker sets forth a true

S/PV.5256

understanding of the essence and nature of the
humanitarian programme. I would like to remind the
Council that he notes that the programme was designed
correctly but that it was undermined in terms of its
implementation. As we know, that is a frequent
occurrence with operations that are of much lesser
magnitude.
A discussion is currently under way on United
Nations reform. The Secretary-General has proposed
measures to improve the activities of the Secretariat; in
general, we endorse and support them. We call on the
Secretary-General to continue to make further efforts
in that direction.
Despite the mistakes and miscalculations, the
corruption and the grievous errors in implementation of
the programme in general, it did show that broad
actions of this type are possible and that the United
Nations is in a position to provide assistance to
civilians living under difficult conditions. Furthermore,
as we see it, only the United Nations is capable of
carrying out assignments of such a comprehensive,
global nature. Unfortunately, recent events have
demonstrated that major international humanitarian
operations will still be called for. Right now, the most
important thing is to adopt the necessary and correct
conclusions as to how they are to be executed and
managed.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Mr. Volcker for his introduction of
the report of the Independent Inquiry Committee. I
would also like to thank him for the excellent work he
did in chairing the Committee. It would be pretentious
and utterly unreasonable of me to pass judgement at
this point on a document that is many hundred pages
long and that has just been distributed and introduced
to us. However, I would like to make some preliminary
general comments on the oil-for-food programme.
It cannot be denied that that programme — a
humanitarian programme whose scope was by far the
largest of any such United Nations operation — was
able to save the lives of millions of innocent people
against whom an implacable sanctions system had been
imposed by the Security Council. Without the
programme, they would have died. Furthermore, as the
Committee has made clear, the existence of the
programme meant that Iraq neither acquired nor
developed weapons of mass destruction. That is not an
insignificant achievement.

It cannot be denied, either, that the United
Nations was quickly overwhelmed by the immensity
and complexity of the tasks involved in managing the
programme. The United Nations — first of all, the
Secretariat — was not equipped, with regard to
management and planning or control of the operation,
to carry out so many tasks that had to be learned on the
job. However, also and above all, the Security
Council’s major concern — if not obsession — was to
make sure that goods sold to Iraq could not be used for
military purposes. For example, contracts on the sale of
buses and river vehicles were blocked on the grounds
that such vehicles might be used for military purposes.
The Security Council must thus accept a very
significant share of the responsibility for the
aberrations that occurred, because it was the Council
that created the programme, that monitored the
sanctions that it had imposed and that authorized all
the contracts relating to the provision of goods to Iraq.
It is clear that differences of opinion — as is so
often the case — among some of the most influential
members of the Security Council did indeed hinder the
effectiveness of the Council’s activities in ensuring
effective control of the programme. It is also
undeniable that, as a result of lack of vigilance on the
part of the Security Council and the Secretariat, there
was corruption in the activities of private companies
that had a relationship with the Council, as well as with
respect to certain Secretariat officials.
It is also undeniable that, from the time of the
imposition of sanctions until the aberrations occurred
in the programme, it was the people of Iraq who paid
the highest cost. First of all, they were buffeted by the
impact of harsh sanctions. The also suffered from
extortion by their leaders, by corrupt private
corporations and by certain Secretariat officials, having
their wealth stolen from them.
The Volcker Committee’s report is shattering and
its judgment is definitive. The United Nations has
failed egregiously. That is all the more serious given
that, more than any other institution, its actions must
be above reproach. The Committee has also pointed to
the Organization’s inadequacies, shortcomings and
malfunctioning, as well as to the way to redress them.
It has clearly highlighted the absence of truly
independent auditing and control and indicated that the
Secretary-General does not have at his disposal the
structures and tools to enable him effectively to

7

S/PV.5256

supervise and monitor the operational activities of the
Organization. The report correctly underscores the fact
that the Secretary-General is today perceived more as a
diplomat and a political official than as a manager. In
that connection, the report also pays well-deserved
tribute to the Secretary-General’s work on the political
and diplomatic fronts.
One lesson that the Council must learn has to do
with the sanctions regime itself. The Council has
indeed stopped applying sanctions in an impersonal —
and I would even say blind — manner, but it should do
more. Sanctions must be imposed as a last resort, they
should be crafted in a way that does not impact upon
innocent civilians, and they must be time-bound.
The ambitious reform programme we are
involved in today — whose initiator and architect is the
Secretary-General himself, in whom we have full
confidence — provides us with the opportunity to
make, in a prudent and well-thought-out manner but
with a heightened sense of urgency, the changes needed
if we want the Organization, for which there is no
substitute, to be able to play its role on the
international stage effectively, responsibly and with
renewed confidence.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): We thank Mr. Volcker for
his detailed introduction of the Committee’s report. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his observations.
We appreciate the high professionalism and the
exemplary meticulousness with which Mr. Volcker and
other members of the Committee carried out their task
under difficult circumstances. Japan welcomes the
present report. Because of its large volume and the
sensitivity of the matter, we need time to study it
carefully and thoroughly. However, at this stage we
wish to make a few preliminary observations.
First, before we start pointing fingers at the
problems and shortcomings that have come to light
now, it is important to note the central fact that the oilfor-food programme succeeded in saving the lives and
alleviating the suffering of many Iraqis over the several
years that the programme functioned through its
essentially humanitarian work, thus averting a major
humanitarian catastrophe. As Mr. Volcker noted, that is
no mean achievement.
The programme was indeed a serious attempt —
of an extraordinary scale and complexity — designed
to bridge the gulf between the need to maintain

8

effective sanctions against Saddam Hussein’s
Government, on the one hand, and the need to
ameliorate the humanitarian conditions of ordinary
Iraqi people living under the regime, on the other. The
programme was unprecedented in the history of the
United Nations and the Security Council, in the scale
and magnitude of the values involved and in the great
complexity of operations that had to be executed and
accounted for. My delegation therefore once again pays
tribute to the many staff members of the United
Nations who dutifully carried out their responsibilities
under the programme without being in any way
involved in any wrongdoing or corruption.
Secondly, that having been said, it is indeed
unfortunate and serious that there were apparently
certain lapses and instances of wrongdoing, which are
unforgivable. The report is very thorough and
comprehensive in its inquiry. Given the magnitude of
the alleged corruption and mismanagement, and taking
into account their political ramifications, the
Committee was expected to meet a very high standard
so as to help restore confidence in the United Nations.
We are pleased that it has indeed met that challenge. In
particular, the issue of ethics had never been taken up
squarely by a United Nations report in such a
fundamental way. Had it been left untouched, it might
have become impossible to restore confidence in the
United Nations. For that reason, the Committee’s
contribution is critically important. All Member States
should
take
the
Committee’s
findings
and
recommendations seriously, take those allegations that
shake the international community’s confidence in the
United Nations very seriously, and try their best to
restore that confidence.
Lastly, the four specific recommendations in the
report concerning United Nations management reform
are useful inputs for the ongoing discussions in the
General Assembly on the summit that begins next
week. We will study each one of them in detail.
Member States, particularly including those that had a
close relationship to the management of the programme
in the Security Council, as well as the Secretariat, have
a solemn responsibility to adopt and implement the
needed managerial and other relevant reforms
steadfastly, so that the Organization as a whole will
learn lessons from the oil-for-food programme issues
and regain the world’s confidence in the United
Nations.

S/PV.5256

Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania):
We, too, join in thanking Chairman Volcker and his
team for the report before us, as well as the SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
As others have said, the oil-for-food programme
is a programme that should never have been
undertaken by the United Nations. We agree. It is a
programme that has given rise to questionable practices
that have largely only served to taint the Organization
and undermine its international confidence. To a large
extent, that is unfair. The oil-for-food programme did
not and could not have run for years without the
influence and oversight of Member States. This was
not and is not a case of the Secretariat run amok
without Member States’ supervision. Chairman Volcker
has made that patently clear in his introductory
remarks. Whatever happened did so under the
collective watch of the Council. As we receive this
report, the need for balance must prevail, both in
assessing what the Secretariat could have done better
and what Member States ought to have done better.
The Secretary-General has put it succinctly and well:
there are lessons for all of us to learn.
We do not belittle the reported allegations of
corruption. Corruption is a menace that must be fought
at all costs. It raises transaction costs and, in the end,
renders all of us victims. Any such allegations must be
investigated, as has been done, and those responsible
brought to answer to the law. Nonetheless, what was
disconcerting for many of us was to witness, while the
investigation was under way, a concerted campaign to
paint the Organization, with one broad brush, as being
inherently corrupt, incompetent and out of tune with
current demands. That is deeply regrettable and
incorrect. Corruption is not the preserve of any
country, nor is it the preserve of public organizations
alone. It can be found everywhere, including at the
United Nations.
The report must not be taken to be an indictment
of the vision, ideals and aspirations of the United
Nations. Those lofty goals remain above reproach. We
have an undertaking and an obligation to preserve them
and to protect them. We have to make this
Organization, and especially the Secretariat, better at
serving those objectives. That is the challenge that
faces us as we receive the report and as this Council
and, especially, the General Assembly embark on
examining its implications in an attempt to make this
institution a better Organization.

Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank Mr. Volcker for presenting the final
report of the Independent Inquiry Committee into the
United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his statement.
France commends the submission of the report to
the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1538
(2004), in which the Council, in April 2004, welcomed
the appointment of the Committee at the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative. The Secretary-General acted
courageously to ensure transparency and truth, and
France pays tribute to him.
My country fully supported the establishment of
that independent body and has cooperated fully and
transparently with it. We have always hoped that the
brightest light would be shed on the irregularities
committed under the oil-for-food programme. The final
report has been highly anticipated. We welcome the
important work done by the Committee and its
Chairman in a limited amount of time and in often
difficult conditions.
We have considered the preface to the report that
was made public yesterday. The French authorities
shall
carefully
study
its
conclusions
and
recommendations before making a final statement on
its substance. As a preliminary reaction, we would
stress the following points.
First, as noted by Mr. Volcker, the oil-for-food
programme was the largest, most complex and most
ambitious humanitarian effort ever undertaken by the
United Nations. Given its magnitude, political stakes
and financial costs, it cannot be compared to any other
programme ever launched by the Organization. The
report stresses that the programme provided
considerable assistance to the Iraqi people, thereby
enabling it to surmount the threat of a humanitarian
crisis and to maintain the international effort aimed at
preventing Iraq from acquiring prohibited weapons.
There were a number of breakdowns. As
Mr. Volcker pointed out, responsibility for those is
collective. It fell above all to the Iraqi regime itself,
but also to other players in the programme. All of us
must now draw the appropriate lessons from the
experience.
In
that
regard,
we
note
the
recommendations in the preface of Mr. Volcker’s
report. We have every confidence in the United Nations
ability to learn lessons from the report and to address

9

S/PV.5256

the dysfunction’s highlighted by the Committee’s
inquiry.
Finally, we note that the Committee’s report
underscores the importance of achieving successful
United Nations reform at the forthcoming summit
meeting of the General Assembly. France shares that
concern and reaffirms its determination to ensure that
the summit will be a venue for in-depth reform of the
Organization so that it may more effectively address
the challenges currently facing the international
community.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, may I thank Mr. Paul Volcker for
introducing the report of the Independent Inquiry
Committee into the United Nations Oil-for-Food
Programme.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement early in this meeting.
The clearest indication of the good work done by
Mr. Volcker and his colleagues, Mr. Goldstone and
Mr. Pieth, is the very lengthy report before us. Given
that we obviously have not yet had time to study that
very complex document, our immediate reaction here
can be only preliminary. Once we have thoroughly
analysed it and the conclusions and recommendations
it contains, we shall comment further.
In our view, the conclusions presented by
Mr. Volcker are extremely important and deserve
thorough study, not only by the Security Council and
the Secretariat, but also by the General Assembly, the
agencies of the United Nations system, and, of course,
each and every State Member of the Organization.
We continue to believe that, despite all its
constraints, the oil-for-food programme was successful
in alleviating the humanitarian crisis in Iraq over a
number of years. It helped to provide food and
medicine to innocent and vulnerable civilians.
Unfortunately, as the report indicates, the programme
was manipulated by Saddam Hussein’s regime for
political and economic benefit. Private companies also
manipulated it, and we await a more detailed report on
that aspect when the Committee completes its work.
The benefits to Saddam Hussein’s regime were
made possible, as has been noted here, by the many
breakdowns in administration, planning, auditing and
supervision on the part of the Secretary-General and
the Secretariat. The Security Council also clearly bore

10

a certain degree of responsibility in that respect,
particularly on the part of its most influential members,
which allowed their attention to and management of an
extremely sophisticated and unwieldy programme to be
distracted.
However, we believe that is all in the past. It
seems important to us to think now about the future
and to act collectively in the implementation of indepth reforms that will make it possible in the future to
solve the problems identified by the Committee so as
to avoid the recurrence of this kind of situation.
However, based on what he have just heard, we
think it is important to underscore the fact that that
reform, like all reforms that the United Nations should
carry out, is a responsibility of all Member States — all
the Member States of the Organization. The Security
Council also has a responsibility in that area, and it is
for that reason that we are prepared to work within the
Council, with the requisite energy, to attempt to restore
confidence in the Organization in this extremely
important year for its reform. We believe that is the
single major undertaking we should carry out at the
moment in order to be able to mount future missions
with the magnitude and complexity of that attempted
by the programme we have been speaking about.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to thank
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his statement this
morning. My delegation also wishes to thank Mr. Paul
Volcker for the report and for his briefing on the main
findings of the Independent Inquiry Committee on the
oil-for-food programme. In view of the comprehensive
nature of the document we have received, I shall
confine myself to a preliminary reaction.
The complexities involved in executing a
multibillion-dollar programme throughout the better
part of a decade of work recommend careful scrutiny
and consideration of the findings published by the
Committee. We trust those findings will shed light on
the numerous allegations of mismanagement and other
accusations relating to the oil-for-food programme. We
remain hopeful that they can provide definite answers
to doubts and suspicions regarding this matter.
My delegation believes that the report should be
approached in a forward-looking, systematic manner to
promote, on the basis of its findings and
recommendations, the establishment of adequate
oversight mechanisms able to ensure that the
ascertained wrongdoings and mismanagement will not

S/PV.5256

happen in the future. It must be kept in mind, however,
that the oil-for-food programme was unanimously
established by the Security Council and that it achieved
its aims of providing essential humanitarian assistance
to the needy population of Iraq under international
sanctions and in other difficult situations.
Currently, all attention is directed towards
preparations necessary to make the upcoming highlevel plenary event a success. With little more than a
week to go before the event, we are all engaged in
delicate, complex negotiations to ensure that the
summit’s outcome will be commensurate with its
dimensions as the greatest gathering of world leaders,
perhaps in all time. All efforts, therefore, should be
made to ensure that the issuing of the report at this
particular time does not have the unintended effect of
diverting attention away from the high-level plenary
event. Conversely, the imminence of the summit must
also not lead to a less-than-ideal consideration of the
findings of the report itself.
As far as the work of the Committee is
concerned, my delegation is very interested in
receiving the upcoming report focusing on the private
companies involved in the oil-for-food programme.
It will contribute an important — perhaps
indispensable — dimension for the correct assessment
of the shortcomings of the programme.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): I too wish to thank
Mr. Volcker for his briefing and his introduction of the
report of the Independent Inquiry Committee.
Likewise, I thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement.
During the coming days, Denmark will study the
wide-ranging findings and conclusions of the report.
We look forward to further discussions of the report.
However, our preliminary reaction is the following.
As expected, the report points to various
deficiencies
in
the
management
structures,
administrative
procedures
and
accountability
mechanisms of the United Nations, which led to
serious incidents of abuse and corruption in the oil-forfood programme. The report also makes clear that the
responsibility for the shortcomings of the programme
must be widely shared among Member States, private
companies and United Nations personnel. However, it
must not be overlooked that the report underlines that
the programme did contribute significantly to
alleviating the humanitarian suffering of the Iraqi

people. But, likewise, the report also underlines the
importance of successful administrative reform of the
United Nations.
Denmark has long supported proposals to reform
the management of the Organization. If the United
Nations is to have full credibility, it must have a
transparent, effective and accountable system for
managing its resources. We therefore note the
Commission’s focus on the need for thorough
administrative reform and more reliable controls and
auditing, as well as strong executive leadership. The
responsibility to ensure that rests with the Member
States of the Organization — members of the Security
Council as well as members of the General Assembly.
The time has come, and it is short, for bold decisions
on reform of the management of the United Nations.
The summit next week must take such a decision.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): The last two years have
definitely been very difficult for the Secretary-General.
But we all followed his courage, determination and
candidness in presenting suggestions and making
changes, starting with the appointment of the
Independent Inquiry Committee. I think his statement
today proves what I just said.
We thank Mr. Volcker and the other members of
the Committee for today’s briefing and their
submission of the Committee’s report to the Security
Council. If I had to judge it simply on its size, the
report would certainly appear to reflect more than a
year’s work done by dozens of attorneys, investigators
and forensic specialists. However, regardless of the
size of the report, what is important is what it contains.
As to its contents, we have been given a small insight
by both the preface, which was posted yesterday on the
web page of the Independent Inquiry Committee, and
Mr. Volcker’s briefing this morning.
It is understandable that, in order to do justice to
the extensive work done by the Committee as well as
in order to draw possible lessons for the future, we
have to study the report carefully and scrupulously
examine the findings contained therein. Needless to
say, that will take some time, but no matter how long it
takes, something needs to be done, and in a coherent
and level-headed manner.
We must not be too quick to draw conclusions
under pressure as to whether the credibility of the
United Nations has been seriously undermined by the
workings of the oil-for-food programme. One should

11

S/PV.5256

not forget that, as the Committee states, the programme
served well the nutrition and health needs of the Iraqi
people, which were disregarded so much and so
continuously by Saddam. At the same time, the
programme prevented Saddam from acquiring weapons
of mass destruction.
I suspect that much of what is contained in the
report reflects essentially the nature of the beast — that
is, the nature of the United Nations itself. We must not
forget that the United Nations is a unique Organization,
unlike any other in the world. It is the sum of all its
parts, and its parts include, inter alia, 191 sovereign
Member States and countless different bodies,
specialized agencies, commissions, and so on.
The inquiry into the oil-for-food programme
provides us with valuable information as to how we
can improve the workings of this common
Organization. I am confident that all of us will take
those findings into serious consideration in our shared
desire to ensure that the optimum effectiveness of the
Organization in all areas — especially in the fields of
management, transparency and accountability — is
being realized as we all strive to do in our respective
countries.
Mr. Motoc (Romania): My delegation, too,
commends Chairman Volcker and his team for the
impressive work carried out in record time to review
the management of the oil-for-food programme, the
most complex humanitarian programme ever entrusted
to and managed by the United Nations.
In April 2004, the Council proceeded to adopt
resolution 1538 (2004), expressing support for the
Secretary-General’s initiative to appoint this panel. On
the one hand, we were guided at that time by what we
perceived to be a common interest of us all: to achieve
maximum clarity and to shed light on delegations’
concerns related to the management of the oil-for-food
programme. On the other hand, we trusted that the
outstanding credentials of Mr. Volcker and his
colleagues would ensure the high standards of
impartiality, independence and professionalism that
one would expect from that truly exceptional inquiry.
We have read the executive summary of the
massive report and we have noted that the overall
investigation has come to “unambiguous conclusions”.
We cannot be expected, however, to have become fully
acquainted with the findings of the final report, the
grounds for those findings and, least of all, the entire

12

range of political, legal and organizational implications
of those findings. I will therefore make only a couple
of preliminary points based on aspects that appear to be
manifest already at this early juncture.
First, as highlighted in the previous interim
reports, several key factors combined to produce
shortcomings and failures in the management of the
oil-for-food programme: the primary role of the former
Iraqi regime in turning the programme to its own
advantage; the endemic corruption prevailing on the
ground; the absence of an adequate checks, controls
and auditing mechanism within the United Nations
system; individual acts of corruption and malfeasance
within the Secretariat; and the imperfections of the
Security Council-imposed sanctions, as well as their
uneven implementation by Member States. However,
we should not overlook the fact that the programme did
achieve positive results in a difficult attempt to
reconcile and balance tough sanctions with the needed
supply of humanitarian goods for the Iraqi people.
Secondly, the final report indicates that the
Organization and the Secretariat “were simply not fit to
meet the truly extraordinary challenges presented by
the oil-for-food programme or even programmes of
much lesser scope”.
Thirdly, the inquiry has, in our view, held the
Organization to very high and egregious standards of
accountability. Of course, we cannot settle for anything
less for an Organization that is expected to be a beacon
of our joint endeavours in the world. We cannot, on the
other hand, be unfair and overlook the very complex
context in which the reported failures occurred, just as
we cannot overlook the unprecedented nature and
magnitude of the oil-for-food programme.
The findings of the Inquiry Committee signal
once again the urgent need for United Nations reform
to embrace the need to establish new organizational
ethics and standards within the Organization. Although
preliminary, the look we are now taking at the report
before us conveys a strong argument for keeping up the
momentum for United Nations reform, including with
respect to the issue of the Organization’s internal
management. It is true that that is not within the sole
purview of the Security Council, and it is up to the
United Nations system as a whole to draw upon the
findings of the Volcker report.
The findings do, however, have evident
implications for the future undertakings — both

S/PV.5256

political and operational — of this important body. My
delegation is prepared to further pursue the
examination of the full range of implications deriving
from the important document now in our hands. In
doing that, we feel bound to bear in mind a very
precise definition of what the Security Council stands
for within the United Nations system and of its
responsibilities and connections with regard to both the
oil-for-food programme and the investigation just
concluded.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset to thank Mr. Volcker for his
briefing and the Secretary-General for his statement.
China appreciates the work of the Independent
Inquiry Committee over the past year. We believe that
the inquiry will enable all parties to better understand
the problems that occurred in the oil-for-food
programme. The report just presented by Mr. Volcker
contains more than 1,000 pages involving a series of
recommendations and important issues. China will
study the report closely, and we look forward to future
Council discussion of it.
Mr. Aho-Glele (Benin) (spoke in French): We
thank you, Sir, for having convened this meeting to
enable us to exchange views on the publication of the
final report of the Independent Inquiry Committee,
established by the Secretary-General to look into
allegations of embezzlement related to the oil-for-food
programme.
My delegation congratulates Mr. Volcker and his
entire team on presenting the report, in which Benin
takes great interest. Now that the report has been
issued, United Nations Member States should study it
with all due attention so that they can draw lessons
from it and undertake the necessary reform of the
relevant United Nations structures. While we believe
that the report must be studied closely, it is currently
available only in English. We hope that it will shortly
be available in all other United Nations languages.
Thus, my delegation is not in a position to
express its views on the substance, but at this
preliminary stage, Benin would like to pay tribute to
the Secretary-General for the far-sightedness and the
courage that he demonstrated in first commissioning
the Independent Inquiry Committee and for his
determination throughout the process to act in a
transparent fashion with respect to this matter, which,
we must acknowledge, is highly sensitive.

Benin also welcomes the initiative of the
Secretary-General to promote a new ethic in the
management of the Secretariat. The failings revealed in
the functioning of the structures concerned and in the
coordination and cooperation among the various organs
of the United Nations provide lessons that justify the
reforms now under discussion. Measures advocated by
the Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly in that regard are very encouraging.
We welcome the invaluable contribution of the
programme to alleviating the suffering of the Iraqi
people under the weight of economic sanctions. That
key objective having been achieved, Benin believes
that we must now all seek appropriate solutions to the
shortcomings identified and avoid diverting our
attention from the imperatives of democratizing and
strengthening our Organization.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the Philippines.
We join the other members of the Security
Council in thanking the Secretary-General for his
important statement. We are also grateful to
Mr. Volcker for presenting to the Security Council the
Committee’s final report on the oil-for-food
programme.
The programme was admittedly the largest, most
complex and most ambitious humanitarian relief
operation in the history of the United Nations. It is
therefore natural that an assessment or evaluation of a
programme of that magnitude would require an
elaborate process. It is also understandable that a
project of that scope would produce a voluminous
outcome document to highlight its multifarious aspects,
ranging
from
programme
management
and
administration to programme effectiveness. Given the
complexity of the programme — not to mention the
lengthy report that documents it — we certainly need
more time to further study the many findings and
recommendations that Mr. Volcker and his group have
suggested in the report.
However, it is timely that this report should come
at this stage, when the whole of the United Nations is
busy talking about reform. The reform of the United
Nations is one of the things that the report calls for in
order to improve the Organization’s overall
effectiveness in the future, given the upsurge of threats
and challenges that the Organization faces. It is that
same reform that the Secretary-General has advocated

13

S/PV.5256

in his “In larger freedom” report. More important, it is
also the reform of the United Nations system that the
High-level Plenary Meeting will discuss next week. In
short, this is a question of urgent reform, and the time
for that reform, as the Volcker report has rightly put it,
is now.

and various actions will be taken, but that loss is
permanent. Thus, at the end of the day, the Iraqis paid
the price for whatever failings and shortcomings arose.

As the whole of the United Nations reviews the
overall management system, it is important to ensure
that appropriate reform measures be put in place and
incorporated into a draft outcome document that our
leaders can adopt in a week’s time.

It is also clear that the main beneficiary of the
recommendations of the Volcker Committee is, in fact,
the United Nations, because the report has pointed to
systemic shortcomings and problems that had to, and
have to, be put right. All the speeches that we have
heard today echo that conclusion. Indeed, the
Secretary-General has clearly stated that that is now
one of his central objectives.

With respect to the subject of reforms, the
Philippines commends the Secretary-General for
initiating the whole reform process of the United
Nations even before the creation of the Independent
Inquiry Committee to review the oil-for-food
programme.

For some reason, however, Iraq had to pay the
bill for arriving at this point. We were the people who
paid for the Volcker Committee; we protested. I must
say that, regrettably, that was decided with the tacit
consent of the Security Council and implemented by
the Secretary-General.

The Philippines is confident that many of the
recommendations, as well as the lessons learned from
the report, will serve very well as substantial inputs for
the ongoing reform process of the United Nations.

Now we have to think of the future. We will go
forward and, hopefully, turn the conclusions of the
Volcker Committee into action that will rebuild the
credibility of the United Nations, which we all need.
Iraq is a proud founding Member of the United Nations
and dearly wants the United Nations to continue to
play its great role in the world and in Iraq itself.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Sumaida’ie (Iraq): I thank you, Sir, for
allowing Iraq to participate in this meeting. I did not
realize until I arrived here that I had the right to speak,
so, I did not prepare a statement, but if you allow me, I
will make some brief remarks based on what I have
heard.
First, I would like to express my appreciation to
Mr. Volcker and his team for the very thorough and
extensive inquiry that they have conducted. I would
also like to express my thanks to the Secretary-General
for his remarks and say that it is very much to his
credit that he commissioned the inquiry in the first
place.
In taking control of oil revenues in Iraq to run the
oil-for-food programme, the Security Council in effect
appointed itself the guardian of the Iraqis’ wealth.
Therefore, it had a responsibility to discharge that
function, together with the Secretariat. From all the
conclusions that have been reached by the Volcker
Committee, it is very clear that the Iraqi people have
not received full value for their money. For various
reasons, they were robbed of a great deal of what was
theirs by right. The lessons will continue to be studied

14

Therefore, thinking forward, I would call upon
the Council to consider the formation of a nucleus or
group — perhaps a small part of the Volcker team
itself — this time funded by the United Nations, to
help Iraq pursue assets belonging to it that have been
dispersed, let us say, through the oil-for-food
programme. The Volcker Committee has, I believe,
identified many, many ways in which assets have been
taken away from Iraq. Some of those assets could be
retrieved if we all cooperate in a systematic way. I
hope that that will be taken up by the Council. We
remain ready to work with any member of the Security
Council to make that happen. That would, at least to
some extent, recompense Iraq for some of its losses.
I would like to thank you, Sir, for having given
me the opportunity to speak, and I hope my remarks
lead to some concrete actions.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.
