xv
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIFTH COlUMITTEE
450 (V).

Financial report and accounts of the
United Nations for the financial p·ar PlHled
31 December 1949, and report of tlw Board
of Auditor8

The General Assembly

1. ,·lccepts the financial report and accounts of the
United Nations for the financial year ended 31 lkcrmber 1940. and the certificate of the Bmrd of Auditors ;1
2. Concurs in the observations" of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
with respect to the report of the Board <1f Auditors.
302nd plcnarv meeting,
3 ;Vovcmber 1950.

)
J ,;i·,'.1 110/ c ol thl' repmt ,, of t I1c Advisory Committee t111 Ad1:1i11istrati\T and Budgetary Questions with
rcsp('ct t« th, rL'port of tli(' lhiard uf ,\uditors.
.W.!nd j,/cnary meeting,
3 Nm•cmher 1950.

453 ( V).

lJ nited Nations Joint Staff Pension
.Fund: annual report of the United Nations
Staff Pn1sion Committee

The (icni'rnl Assembly
Takes 110/,' of the annual report 7 of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee for the year ended 31
[)eee111!l('r ]</.:(()_

302nd plenary meeting,
3 Nm•i"mber 1950.

451 (V).

United Nationi. International Chlldren's Emergency Fund: financial report and
accounts for the financial year ended 31
December 1949, and report of the Board of
Auditors

454 (V).

The General Assembly

1. Accepts the financial report and accounts of the
United Nations International Children's Emergency
Fund for the financial year ended 31 December 1949,
and the certificate of the Board of Auditors;"
2. Takes note of the observations4 of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
with respect to the report of the Board of Auditors.
302nd plenary meeting,
3 November 1950.

Organization of a United
postal administration

Nations

The C, eneral .Assembly,
Referring to resolutions 232 (III) of 8 October
1948 and 342 (IV) of 20 October 1949, and in particular to paragraphs 2 and 3 of resolution 342 (IV),
Hm•ing considered the report 8 of the SecretaryGeneral on the organization of a United Nations postal
administration dnd the observations" thereon submitted
by the Advisory Comi·ittee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,

1. Ta/,es note of the annexed draft agreement between the United Nations and the United States of
America for the establishment of a United Nations
postal administration in conformity with the terms of
the Headquarters Agreement;

452 (V).

United Nations Relief for Palestine
Refugees: financial report and accounts for
the period I December 1948 to 30 April
1950, and report of the Board of Auditors

2. Rc11nests the Secretary-General to proceed with
the conclu:,iun of the aforesaid agreement and with
the 11ece~•,;,1, arrangements for the establishment of
a L~nit,•rl Nations postal administration at the earliest
possible date consistent with sound administrative
arrangen1ents;

The General Assembly

1. Accepts the financial report and accounts of the
United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees for the
period 1 December 1948 to 30 April 1950, and the certificate of the Board of Auditors ;5

3. '!-utlwri:::es the Secretary-General to appoint a
committee which shall be empowered to give final
approval to designs for United Nations postage stamps;

See Official Records of the General Asssembly, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 6.
2 Jbid., Supplement No. 7.
" See document A/1336.
• See document A/1413.
5 See document A/1354.
6 See document A/1414.
1

7 See document A/1335.
" See document A/1394/Rev.1.
'' See document A/1453.

57

Gn1eral Assembly-Fifth Session

58

4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly, not later than the beginning of its
seventh session, a comprehensive report 011 the establishment and operations of the United Nations postal
,idministration.
_~//5th piowry mcet£ny,
16 November 195U_
ANNEX

Postal Agreement between the United Nations and
the United States oj America

t ities as may be necessary to fulfil all reasonable needs
of the Gnited Nations Post Office Station_ All revenue
derived from such sales of United Nations postage stamps
;md from uther services rendered by the United Nations
Post Office Station shall be retained by the United States
1'11,l (lt~ce Department as full and complete compcmation
for pnlorrn:tn,·e of its obligations under the terms of this
. \g!·,·ement, except, however, that the United States Post
( rntcc Department shall be reimbursed for performance
n_f any postal services resulting from use of United Natrnns pos_tagt: stamps sold for philatelic purposes under
the prov1s1011s of paragraph ( ii) of this section which
;ire _used as postage on mail matter posted at the United
\J;tt1011s Post Office Station by being paid an amount equal
to the face value of any such stamps rn used as postage.

Whereas, a certain Agr,·ement between the United
Nations and the United States of ,\mcrica, dated the 26th
day of June, 1947. regarding tilt: [kadqu;nters of the
United Nations (said Agreement being hnei11after referred to as the "Ilcadquartn, :\gTceme11t"') proYides
that in the event that the llnitccl l\Jations should propose
to organize its own postal ,ervi,-t:, the conditions under
whicl1 such service shall hL· set up shall he the subject of
a Supplemental Agreement ;" ancl
f-Vhereas, the United Nations desires to establish a postal
service in conformity with thC' Headquarters Agreement.

l ii) '!:he United Nations may maintain a separate
ag~ncy _for the sale of United Nations postage stamps for
pl11l:!tehc purpmes i_n _response to orders rl'ceived by mail.
Sub;ect to the prov1s1ons of paragraph (i) of this section
all revenue derived from such philatelic sales of United
'.'Jat1ons post;_ige stamps shall he retained hv the United
''fat1on, for its own use.
-

Now thcref ore, the partic, heretrJ agree .is follows·

The Uni_te<l N atio_ns shall fnrnish all postmarking stamps
to_he ~ppl_1ed to mail poste? for mailing in the Headquarte1 s ~1s\r1.ct and s~all ft~rmsh all su~h postmarking stamps
to the L mtc-d N at10ns I ost Office Station free of charge.
All postmarks shall he designated as United Nation., post
marks.

Section I
SCOPE OF AGREEMENT

( i) Subject to the provisions of this Agreement, there
shall be established a United Nations Post Office Station
in the Headquarters District of the United Nations, as
defined in the Headquarters Agreement, which shall be
operated by the United States Post Office Department.

Section 4
UNITED NATIONS POSTMARKS

Section 5
l!.'l!TED

KATIONS

PosT OFFICF

:-;TATTON

PREMISES

(ii) The United Nations Post Office Station shall provide at the prevailing rates all the services offered by any
United States Post Office having comparable operations
except that the United Nations Post Office Station shall
use only 'United Nations postage stamps.

The United Nations shall provide the United States Post
O!'fice Department at the expense of the United Nations
with the quarters, custodial services and utilities necessary
to enable the lJnited S~ates Post Office Department to
operate the Umted Nat10ns Post Office Station in the
Headquarters District.

Section 2

Section 6

SUPPLY OF UNITED NATIONS POSTAGE STAMPS AND STAMPED
PAPER

(i) The United Nations shall at its own expense furnish
all United Nations postage stamps required under the terms
of this Agreement.
(ii) In the event that the United Nations shall produce
or authorize production of stamped envelopes and postcards, such envelopes or postcards shall conform to the
specifications of the United States Post Office Department
as to size and as to quality of paper used.
(iii) No United Nations postage stamps shall be distributed except in accordance with the terms of this
Agreement.

STAFF AND EQUil'"'{ENT

l~xcept as otherwise provided in this Agreement the
~mted States Post Office Department will provide at
its own. ~~pense all staff, equipment and other services
am) fac1ht1es necessary to enable the United States Post
Ofl1ce Dep_artrnent to operate the United Nations Post
Office Stat10n under the terms of this Agreement

Section 7
POSTAL ADDRESS OF THE UNITED NATIONS

'[:he posta) address of the Headquarters District of the
U111ted Nations shall be "United Nations, New York"_

Section 3
SALE OF UNITED NATIONS POSTAGE STAMPS

(i) The United Nations Post Office Station shall sell
only United Nations postage stamps which shall be provided by the United Nations free of charge in such quana See Official Records of the General As~embly, Second Session, Resolutio11 (Headquarters Agreement, aritcle II section 6) page 94.
'

Section 8
DURATION

OF THE AGREDfENT

( i) This Agreement shall take effect on a date to be
agreed upon between the United Nations and the U11ited
States Post Office Department.
(ii) This Agreement shall be subject to revision on the
written proposal of l'ither contracting party, after dne year
from the date of commencement of operations.

:i9

Resolutions adopted on reports of tht> Fifth (:ommith·e

Nations, with only such alteration,; a~ are required to
meet the constitutional provisions and organizational
stn1ct11r<' of the re.-;pcctive agencies.

(iii) This Agree111ent may be tenninated by either [?arty
"iving the other written n(Jtice of its inte11t1on to termmate
;uch .\greement at least twelve (12) months in advance
of the tnrnination date fixed in such notice.
I:,; wITN 1-:ss w11 EREOF the respective representatives have
,ign<'rl this Agreement and have ;iffixed their sc:ils r.creto.
Do:-.E in duplicate this

305th plenary meeting,
16 November 1950.
ANNEX

day of

Financial Regulations of the Vnited Nation,
455 (V). Expenses resulting from obligations
placed on the United Nations by in~truments
relating to the control of narcotic drugs:
assessment of non-member States signatories
of those instruments

Article I
APPLICABILITY

1.1 Th('se regulati"n~ shall govern the financial adrrnnistration uf the United Nations, including the lnternation;il
( ·, ;i1rt ,,f Ju,ticc.

The General Assembly,

.·I rtidc ii

Taking note of the report 10 of the Secretary-General
to tht> fifth session of the General Assembly on the que~tion of the assessment of signatorirs of international
instruments relating to the control of narcotic dru .. ·
which are non-memhers of the United Nations, forth•
fare share of expenses resulting from obligations plal, ·
on the United Nations by those instruments,

THE FINANCIAL YEAR

_
Th, financial vear shall be the peric, 1 I Janna n
to :n lk,·crnher incln;ive.

1

1. Approves the principle proposed by the ::-iecretary
General ior determining the expenses to be considered
as assessable on such non-members;
2. Requests the Committee on Contributiom to determine the rates at which such non-members should be
assessed by the same method as that followed in determining the assessment of non-members which are parties
to the Statute of the International Court of Justice for
their share of the expenses of the Court ,
3. Directs the Secretary-General to seek payment of
such amounts as are determined by the method established above in respect of the 1950 expenses and those
of future years.

305th plenary meeting,
16 November 1950.
456 (V).

Financial Regulations of the United
Nations

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the agreement reached in the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination to recommend a
common set of financial regulations for the United Nations and the specialized agencies,
Approving the amendments 11 recommended by the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,

I. Declares that the Financial Regulations of the
United Nations set out in the annex to the present resolution are adopted in place of those adopted by the General Assembly at its second session under resolution 163
(II) ;
2. Expresses the hope that Member States will support the adoption by the specialized agencies of the
Financial Regulations approved herein for the United

Article Ill
THE BUDGET

,i.l
:·h,
1'·, ~ecrcL,

nmi:d budget estimates shall he prepar"d by
Ccneral.
Th •.,timatcs shall cover income and expenditure,
for th, •· :, .:ial year to which they relate, and shall he
presen, . J ,,1 lJnitrd States dollars.
3.3 Tlw annual budgrt estimates shall be divided into
part;;, sections. chapters and articles, and shall be accompanied by such information annexes and explanatory statements a,; may be requested by, o: on behalf of, the General
Assernblv, and such further annexes or statements as ·b·
:-;errct:ir·y-(;cneral may deem necessary and useful.
3.4 The Sec-retary-General ,hall submit to the regular
~ession of the General Assembly budget estimates for the
following financial year. The estimates shall be transmitted
to all Member States at least five weeks prior to the open•
ing :>f the regular session of the General Assembly.
3.5 The Secretary-General shall, at least twelve weeks
prior to the opening of the regular session of the General
Assembly, submit the estimates to the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (hereinafter
referred to a, the ''Advisory Committee") for examination
3.6 The Advisory Committee shall prepare a report to
the General Assembly on the estimates submitted by the
Secrctary-Crneral. This report shall be transmitted to all
:\1ember States at the same time as the estimates.
3.7 The budget for the following financial year shall
be adopted hy the General Assembly after consideration
and rcriort ,m the estimates bv the Administrative and
Huclgetary ( ·ommittee of the .'\.ssembly.
3.8 Supplementary estimates may be submitted by the
Secretary-( ;cneral whenever necessary.
3.9 The Secretary-General shall prepare supplementary
estimate, in a form consistent with the annual estimates
and shall submit such estimates to the General Assembly.
The Advisory Committee shall review such estimates and
report thereon.
Article IV
APPROPRIATIONS

1o See document A/1418.
11

See document A/1412.

4.1 The appropriations voted by the General Assembly
shall constitute an authorization to the Secretary-General
