General A■aembly-Twenty-aeeond Se■■ion

66

2358 (XXII). United Nations International School
The General Assembly,
H aving considered the report of the SecretaryGenerai22 and the report of the Board of Trustees of
the United Nations International School annexed
thereto, and the report of the Advisory Cornmittee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions thereon, 28
N oting that the construction of a new school at the
25th Street site leased from the City of New York
has been suspended pending the ·conclusion of feasibility
studies on a new site closer to the United Nations
complex,
N oting the rapid growth in school enrolment and the
urgent need for a solution to the physical problems of
the School,
N oting further the slow growth in the Development
Fund, the achievement of which is a major condition
of the Ford Foundation grant and essential to the
financia! viability of the School,
N oting that, without an adequate Development Fund,
the School again faces an operating deficit of $49,000
for the current school year,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
extend his good offices to the Board oí Trustees of the
United Nations lntemational School with a view to
reaching a fully satisfactory and speedy solution for
both the interim and the permanent accornmodation
problems;
2. Decides to contribute $49,000 to the International
School Fund in 1968 to cover the deficit foreseen for
the current school year ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-third session on the
status of the Development Fund and any new proposals
designed to achieve the target of $3 million.
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

2359 (XXII). Composition of the Secretariat
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling all its resolutions emphasizing the need
to improve the geographical d.istribution of the staff of
the United Nations Secretariat at ali levels,
Reaffirming that the principle of an equitable geographical distribution in the composition of the Secretariat does not conflict with the paramount consideration in the employment of staff, namely, the necessity
of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, as laid down in Article 101,
paragraph 3, oí the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming further that, in view of its international
character and in order to avoid an undue predominance
of national practices, the policies and administrative
methods of the Secretariat should reflect, and profit
to the highest degree from, the assets of the various
cultures and the technical competence of all Member
nations,
Reiterating its invitation to the Secretary-General to
give preference to candidates from inadequately represented countries,
22 !bid., agenda item 84,

23 Tbid.,

document A/6%2.
document A/6974.

Recognizing the need for a more equitable distribution
of staff among the Member States as between regions,
and within each region, in particular at the level of
senior posts,
N oting with appreciation the efforts made by the
Secretary-General to improve the geographical distribution of the staff of the Secretariat,
Concerned, however, that significant imbalances in
the geographical distribution of the staff of the Secretariat continue to exist,
Having considered the Secretary-General's report on
the composition of the Secretariat,24 in particular the
measures recommended for the consideration of the
General Assembly in paragraph 70 thereof,
1. A pproves the measures outlined in paragraph 70
of the Secretary-General's report;
2. Renews its request to the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts to achieve a better geographical distribution of the staff of the Secretariat at ali levels ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
future reports on the composition of the Secretariat a
table, to be prepared on the basis of a system, suitable
in his view, chosen out of the four systems outlined in
annex II, table 11, of his report, showing the geographical distribution of posts by nationality and leve} ;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session on
the progress achieved in the implementation of the
present resolution.
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2241 B (XXI) of 20 December 1966 on the use of the working languages,
H a-ving examined the relevant part of the report submitted by the Secretary-General in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 2241 B (XXI), 26
N oting that inadequate progress has been made in
implementing the above-mentioned resolution,
C onsidering that the use of severa! languages by the
United Nations could constitute not a hindrance, but
rather an enrichment and a means of attaining the
objectives of the Charter of the United Nations,
l. Reaffirms its interest in the question of the use
of the working languages and in related problems of
staff at all levels of the Secretariat ;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to continue to take
steps and to strengthen those taken, so that real progress
may be achieved in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 2241 B (XXI), with a view to a
better utilization of the linguistic abilities of the staff
and a better balance among the working languages in
the recruitment oí Secretariat staff at ali levels, and in
particular at the higher level, without prejudice to the
principie of equitable geographical distribution ;
3. Invites the Secretary-General, to this end, to take
in particular the necessary steps to ensure:
(a) A linguistic balance within the Secretariat and
in particular the presence oí staff using the different
working languages of the United Nations in the services
24 !bid.,
25 !bid.

agenda item 82, document A/6860.

67

Resolutions adopted on tbe reports of the Fifth Committee

responsible for the recruitment of Secretariat staff,
at ali levels;
( b) The ea,rly introduction of an accelerated language
instruction programme and of a language bonus for
staff in the Professional category subject to geographical distribution who use two working languages,
with the understanding that the institution of a language bonus system will not be implemented befare
1969, so that the General Assembly at its twenty-third
session may consider a full report to be submitted to it
by the Secretary-General on practica! measures for the
implementation of this system, and of such other incentives as he considers feasible to encourage broad
linguistic proficiencie! ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to state in his
report to the General Assembly at its twenty-third
session what steps have been taken to give effect to
the provisions of the present resolution.
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.
2360 (XXII). lmplementation of the reeommendations of the Ad Hoc Committee of
Experts to Examine the Finances of thc
United Nations and the Specialized Agencies
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2049 (XX) of 13 December
1965 and 2150 (XXI) of 4 November 1966 relating to
the work of the Ad H oc Committee of Experts to
Examine the Finances of the United Nations and the
Specialized Agencies,
Recalling in particular the provisions of resolutions
2150 (XXI) approving the recommendations contained in the second report of the Ad H oc Committee,
of 19 July 1966,26 and calling for their earliest possible
implementation,
N oting further Economic and Social Council resolutions 1264 (XLIII) of 3 August 1967, 1277 A (XLIII)
of 4 August 1967 and 1280 (XLIII) of 4 August 1967,
and the pertinent paragraphs of section 111 of Council
resolution 1275 (XLIII) of 4 August 1967,
H aving considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 2150 (XXI), 27 and the observations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions28 on this report,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General
on the Panel of Externa) Auditors of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies, 29
l. Notes that sorne of the recommendations of the
Ad Hoc Committee have been implemented by the
United Nations and the specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency and that numerous other recommendations are under study or .review
for the purpose of their implementation ;
2. Recognizes that the Joint Inspectioh Unit should
be brought into operation not later than 1 J anuary
1968 and that the assurances given concerning the
26 /bid., Twenty-first Session, Anne.res, agenda item 80,
document A/6343.
2 1 /bid., Twenty-second Session, Anne.res, agenda item 80
document A/6803.
28 /bid., document A/6853.
29 /bid., document A/C.5/L.902.

independence, powers and functions of the Unit will

be fully observed;
3. Reaffirms the continuing concern of the General
Assembly that rapid progress should be made by the
United Nations, the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency in completing the
studies which are to be made and in carrying out the
recommendations contained in the Ad H oc Committee's
second report ;
4. Invites the Secretary-General, as chief administrative officer of the United Nations and in his capacity
as Chairman of the Administrative Committee on Coordination, to submit to all Members and to the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, at the earliest -possible date and in any event
not later than 30 April 1968, a report giving fuller
information on the implementation by the United
Nations, by the individual specialized agencies and by
the International Atomic Energy Agency of each of
the specific recommendations contained in the Ad H oc
Committee's report, indicating not only their positions
and the action they have taken to date but also what
further action they propose to take and the timing
thereof;
5. Requests the Economic and Social Council again
to give full consideration at its next sessions to the
implementation of those recommendations of the Ad
H oc Committee which fall within its field of competence
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
twenty-third session ;
6. Decides that the General Assembly at its twentythird session, following receipt of an updated report
of the Secretary-General and the comments of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions thereon, shall again consider the current state
of the implementation of the Ad Hoc Committee's
recommendations by the United Nations family of
org-anizations.
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

B
The General Asse1nbly
Endorses the conclusions of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Qucstions as set
out in part 111 of its tenth report to the General Assembly at its twenty-second session. 80
1642nd plena,y meeting,
19 December 1967.

•

•

•

The Presiden/ of the General Assembly, on the basis of the
recommendation of the Ad Hoc Committee of E.rperts to
E.ramine the Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies,3 1 as approved by the General Assembly in
its resolution 2150 (XXI) of 4 November 1966, designated
ARGENTINA to rep/ace MExrco in the list of States which would
nomina/e candidates for the Joint /nspection Unit.82
As a result, that list comprises the following M ember States:
ARGENTINA, FRANCE, INDIA, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS, UNitED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN ANO NORTHSO /bid.,

document A/6887/Rev.l, paras. 16-20.

31 /bid., Twenty-first Session, Anne.res, agenda item 80, docu-

ment A/6343, para. 67, B.
32 See A/6984. See also O/ficial Records u/ the General
Assembly, Twl'nly-second Session. !'lenary mertings, 1619th
meeting, paras. 3-6.
