S/PV.7017

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7017th meeting

Wednesday, 14 August 2013, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Perceval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. King
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Ahmad
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Parham
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2013/470)

13-42697 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1342697*

S/PV.7017

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

(spoke in English)

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2013/470)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate in
this meeting: Mr. Babacar Gaye, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central
African Republic; Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; and Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/470, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gaye.
Mr. Gaye (spoke in French): It is a privilege to
address the Security Council. Doing so as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General is an honour
accorded to me for the first time, and I take this
opportunity to express my deep respect to the Council.
I am pleased to present to the Council the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic (S/2013/470) and on the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic (BINUCA), in the
presence of Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos
and Assistant Secretary-General Ivan Šimonović, both
of whom visited the Central African Republic in July
and will discuss the humanitarian and human rights
situations.

2

Since the publication of the report, the overall
situation in the Central African Republic has remained
highly volatile and unpredictable, although there has
been some progress on the political front. Following the
promulgation of the Transitional Charter, on 18 July,
and in accordance with its article 25, the Government
of National Unity appointed on 13 June was reshuffled
on 2 August. While its composition remains almost
the same, Mr. Michel Djotodia is no longer Minister of
Defence; a new Junior Minister in charge of defence,
restructuring of the army, former combatants and
victims of war was appointed instead.
The portfolio of water and forests held by former
Senior Minister Moussa Dhaffane has been filled. The
representation of women remains low, with only three
women out of 34 members of the Cabinet, although they
hold key ministries such as foreign affairs and rural
development; the Minister who holds the latter is also
State Minister.
Similarly, the National Transitional Council,
which was expanded from 105 to 135 members in
July, appointed a new Bureau on 8 August. While the
re-election was requested by the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) to ensure greater
diversity and representation, the Bureau remains almost
intact, with only one of the Rapporteurs losing his seat.
Meanwhile, the members of the Transitional
Constitutional Court will be sworn in on 16 August.
They will administer the oath of office to Mr. Djotodia,
as the head of State of the transition, on 18 August.
According to the Transitional Charter, the ceremony
will officially launch the transition, which should last
from 18 to 24 months. Thus most of the transitional
institutions and mechanisms have been established in
accordance with the decision made by ECCAS.
That progress was made possible thanks to the direct
involvement of ECCAS leaders and the Mediator they
appointed for the Central African Republic, President
Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of the Congo.
However, tensions persist between Mr. Djotodia, Prime
Minister Tiangaye and the President of the National
Transitional Council over the management of the
transition process. Their relations are characterized by
mutual suspicion and mistrust. Therefore, the political
gains made remain fragile, while the road map for
elections remains to be established.

13-42697

S/PV.7017

While there is still a total absence of the rule of law
nationwide, the security situation has improved slightly
in Bangui following the arrest of General Mohamed
Moussa Dhaffane, a former prominent military leader
of one of Séléka’s factions and Senior Minister for
Water and Forests. Nine sites for the cantonment
or regroupment of Séléka have been established in
five localities, and four sites for the cantonment and
regroupment of former elements of the Forces armées
centrafricaines, the former army, were also established.
Joint patrols by Séléka and the Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
(MICOPAX), the subregional peacekeeping force, have
resumed in the capital. However, the looting of people’s
property, plundering, kidnapping, torture and killings
continue. For example, a so-called Ramadan tax was
paid by local people in the provinces. On 9 August,
armed men suspected of being Séléka elements robbed
a local supermarket in broad daylight and kidnapped
the owners. In addition, human rights violations
have become widespread, further compounded the
breakdown of law and order, particularly in the
provinces, where Séléka elements continue to prey on
the civilian population.
We must ensure that there is no impunity for
perpetrators of gross human rights violations.
Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation has reached
unprecedented levels; 4.6 million people are affected
by the dire humanitarian crisis, which has moved from
a protracted humanitarian crisis towards a complex
emergency. Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović
and Under-Secretary-General Amos will present the
Council with a detailed picture of the grave human
rights and humanitarian situation, respectively.
As there is no proper chain of command, the
country runs the risk of descending into anarchy and
chaos. Some police officers are reporting to work, but
they are not equipped to work safely and effectively.
Furthermore, they do not trust but fear their Séléka
counterparts.
The reorganization of the security and defence
forces is yet to be supported by a clear, credible and
structured plan. In that regard, the police and the
gendarmerie were instructed to absorb 500 Séléka
elements each, including suspected foreign elements,
without prior screening to determine their suitability.
The intended integration of an additional 1,000 Séléka
elements into the newly established Armée de la

République centrafricaine is not based on any set of
objective criteria either.
The integration process in the police faces the
challenge of the lack of proper facilities, as the Training
School of the National Police is still occupied by a
MICOPAX contingent. Many elements of the Forces
armées centrafricaines have reported for duty at four
different sites in Bangui, although some have also
sought refuge in neighbouring countries, including
the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Cameroon, with their weapons. Diplomatic efforts are
under way for their voluntary repatriation. Discussions
were ongoing between the Séléka leadership and the
rebel group Force démocratique du peuple centrafricain,
led by Abdoulaye Miskine.
Meanwhile, the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
has continued to thrive in the turmoil caused by the
political events of March 2013. Since May 2013,
BINUCA has been receiving reports on the presence of
LRA elements in the prefecture of Haute-Kotto, where
the diamond sites are located.
On 19 July, the African Union (AU) Peace and
Security Council authorized the deployment, for an
initial period of six months, of an African-led peace
support operation, the International Support Mission in
the Central African Republic, effective 1 August 2013.
The new mission will have a total strength of 3,652
civilian and military personnel, composed mainly of
the contingents currently serving in MICOPAX. The
mission is mandated to protect civilians and restore
security and public order; restore State authority;
reform and restructure the defence and security sectors;
and create the conditions conducive for the provision of
humanitarian assistance to populations in need.
The mission has a robust mandate and will have an
important role in stabilizing the security situation. The
African Union is dispatching a technical assessment
mission to Bangui from 17 August to refine the concept
of operations for the mission and to develop a realistic
logistical support plan for the mission. The United
Nations will participate in that technical assessment
mission in an advisory capacity. In parallel, the AU
is also deploying a joint transition planning team
to Libreville to develop, jointly with ECCAS, the
modalities for the transition from MICOPAX II to
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic.

13-426973

S/PV.7017

We welcome the establishment of the African
Union mission and encourage the Security Council
to lend its full support to the force. We hope that the
forthcoming deployment of the impartial force that is
the new mission will provide the leverage needed to
end the anarchy and the chaos in Bangui and in the
provinces.
On the political front, Mr. Djotodia, the Prime
Minister, and the President of the National Transitional
Council must work together to urgently bridge their
differences, which, if unaddressed, could jeopardize
the progress made thus far and seriously aggravate the
crisis in the country. Moving forward, there will be a
need to agree on a road map and a chronogram to end
the transition period and hold elections. There will also
be a need to tackle the question of impunity and ensure
proper assistance to populations in need.
(spoke in French)
The Central African Republic is facing tremendous
challenges, but I am convinced that with the continuing
and active support of the international community,
along with political will on the part of stakeholders,
together we can overcome those difficulties. During my
discussions with national stakeholders and with leaders
in the subregion, I took every opportunity to draw their
attention to the imperative need to resolve the security
problem, which remains by far the most urgent priority.
Without a doubt, much remains to be done elsewhere,
but resolving problems relating to security and the rule
of law will have a positive and immediate effect on the
political, humanitarian and human rights challenges
that we are facing. In short, it is time to act.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Gaye
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Amos.
Ms. Amos: I thank you, Madam, for the opportunity
to brief the Council on the humanitarian situation in
the Central African Republic following my recent
visit to the country with Ms. Kristalina Georgieva, the
European Commissioner for International Cooperation,
Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Response.
The political and security situation in the Central
African Republic, as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Gaye, has already said, remains
volatile and unstable. The new Government of National
Unity is fragile and faces considerable challenges,
including divisions within Séléka; the proliferation

4

of weapons in Bangui and beyond; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration efforts; and the
absence of State administration outside of Bangui.
Over the past months, the humanitarian situation
has deteriorated dramatically and has shifted from
being a long-term crisis of poverty and chronic
vulnerability to a complex emergency characterised
by violence, acute needs and grave protection issues. If
inadequately addressed, the crisis threatens to spread
beyond the Central African Republic’s borders and to
further destabilize a region already facing significant
challenges.
As Special Representative Gaye has already said,
all 4.6 million Central Africans have been affected by
the crisis. Half of them are children. Some 1.6 million
people are in dire need of assistance, including food,
protection, health care, water, sanitation and shelter.
Humanitarian needs are increasing by the day. More
than 206,000 people have been internally displaced
and nearly 60,000 have sought refuge in neighbouring
countries — two-thirds in the Democratic Republic
of Congo. Many people continue to hide in the bush
and remote areas in poor sanitary conditions and
without access to basic services or clean water. More
than 650,000 children are not able to go to school due
to the closure and occupation of schools by armed
groups. Some 484,000 people are now severely food
insecure, and thousands of boys and girls are acutely
malnourished.
During our visit, we heard reports of armed
attacks against civilians, illegal detention, torture and
abductions, and according to UNICEF, 3,500 children
have been recruited into the armed forces and groups
during the conflict. I am also extremely concerned
about reports of widespread sexual violence, with
women and children again paying a heavy price.
The already fragile health-care system is
overwhelmed. Many public service officials have
left their posts and health care is now being provided
almost entirely by non-governmental organizations
(NGOs). Basic drugs and hygiene products cannot be
purchased locally due to the breakdown of the supply
chain. The risk of disease outbreaks is very high,
and international NGOs already report a spike in
malaria. The replacement of goods in hospitals, such
as generators, and supporting the supply, for example,
of fuel will be challenging, and the risk of further
looting remains high. During a field visit to a hospital
in Kaga Bandoro, I saw the daily struggle doctors and
13-42697

S/PV.7017

nurses face to provide for the most basic health needs of
people. The hospital, with just 60 beds, serves as many
as 130,000 people throughout the province. Most of the
mattresses had been looted and there is no electricity.
The deterioration in the security situation since
December 2012 is of great concern and needs to be
addressed. I visited United Nations premises that had
been looted and some United Nations premises remain
occupied by Séléka elements. Persistent insecurity and
the degradation of infrastructure have posed serious
challenges to the humanitarian response. Despite that,
we have reached nearly 160,000 people with food
assistance and nutrition programmes; 590,000 have
benefited from water and sanitation programmes; and
200,000 have received health support. But this is tiny
in comparison with widespread needs throughout the
country.
NGOs have played and continue to play a
significant role. Many remained present in the areas
worst affected by fighting, and I thank them for their
ongoing work. Staff from the United Nations are in the
process of deploying beyond the capital. Redeployment
to Paoua, Bouar, Kaga Bandoro and Bambari began on
10 August. Human rights and protection monitoring
will also be increased. The establishment of a United
Nations presence in new areas will provide assistance
and much-needed protection.
The authorities in the Central African Republic
have shown a genuine willingness to cooperate with
humanitarian actors to address the challenges we
face. During our visit, the authorities reiterated their
commitment to facilitating the humanitarian response,
including guaranteeing the security of humanitarian
workers. Encouragingly, officials identified the
restoration of security and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration as their main priorities. However,
as already stated by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Gaye, they face a considerable
challenge given the numbers of the Séléka forces,
the lack of command and control over them, and the
presence of fighters from other countries.
Humanitarian assistance cannot be the longterm solution to the complex challenges facing the
Central African Republic. A comprehensive response,
prioritizing the restoration of security and addressing
humanitarian, recovery and development needs, is
urgently needed. The authorities must do more to protect
civilians and respect human rights. That includes
releasing and reintegrating children associated with

armed groups. Those children are the next generation
of Central Africans, and we must ensure they have the
opportunity to contribute to a peaceful future.
I have a number of requests to make to the Council.
First, in order to support the restoration of security
and stability in the Central African Republic, I ask the
Council to treat the request for support by the African
Union (AU) for its newly established peacekeeping
mission, the African-led International Support Mission
in the Central African Republic, with urgency. It
is critical for the continued safety of humanitarian
operations that the AU Mission have the funds and
logistical support to operate effectively.
Secondly, I ask the Council to again remind all
parties to the conflict of their responsibilities under
international humanitarian and human rights law, and
to ensure that all those responsible for violations are
held to account.
Thirdly, I ask Council members to use any
influence they have on the authorities to facilitate
dialogue towards political reconciliation.
Fourthly, we need to increase funding. Only 32 per
cent of the $195 million required has been raised to
date. While the European Union (EU) announced an
additional contribution during our visit, bringing its
emergency relief to €20 million this year — and it is the
highest donor — much more international support is
required to meet growing needs. Critical sectors, such
as water, sanitation and hygiene, have received less
than 10 per cent of the funding required.
Finally, I ask the Council to support the authorities
in expediting the swift return of public service officials
to areas outside Bangui to facilitate the restoration
of much needed basic services. We need to make the
longer-term investments required to put the country on
the path back to recovery and self-reliance.
The Central African Republic is not yet a failed
State, but has the potential to become one if swift action
is not taken. Despite the significant challenges, there
is an opportunity for the international community,
working with the authorities, to make a significant
contribution to the political, economic and social
development of the Central African Republic. A failure
to act now could not only prolong and exacerbate the
appalling conditions the people of the Central African
Republic have had to endure, but could also see the
crisis spread beyond its borders and throughout a region
already facing enormous challenges.

13-426975

S/PV.7017

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Amos
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Šimonović.
Mr. Šimonović: I thank you, Madam, for the
opportunity to brief the Council. I visited the Central
African Republic from 28 July to 2 August to
discuss human rights challenges with the transitional
authorities and identify ways to address them. My
mission followed a fact-finding mission sent by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to Central Africa from 19 June to 11 July to gather
information on human rights violations committed
from December 2012 onwards, in order to report to
the Human Rights Council in September. During my
mission, I met with the Prime Minister of the transitional
Government and key ministers, as well as victims, civil
society organizations, religious leaders, the diplomatic
community and United Nations colleagues.

critical of the transitional authorities have also been
reported.
While widespread attacks and looting of Christian
places of worship by Séléka elements have been
reported, there have been a number of initiatives to
contain religious tensions, including the establishment
of a platform for dialogue between Catholic, Protestant
and Muslim religious leaders. When meeting with the
Archbishop and the head of the Islamic community, I
was encouraged to see that they closely collaborate to
prevent confrontations and violence between religious
groups. It is important to strengthen this collaboration
in order to prevent a dangerous deepening of the
religious divide.
Some communities have violently opposed Séléka
elements trying to arrest alleged suspects. This has in
turn been met by ruthless retaliation by Séléka elements,
including killings and the burning of entire villages.

The Central African Republic has been plagued by
decades of fighting and instability. The Bozizé regime’s
corruption and its neglect of and discrimination against
the north of the country, which has a large Muslim
population, are among the numerous factors that
contributed to the rebellion. Many of the country’s
problems, such as the weak justice system and poor
access to health and education, are not new. However,
the conflict was marked by an unprecedented level of
violence, looting and destruction.

Another disturbing element is the systematic and
widespread destruction of public registries, from birth
certificates to court and prison records. This is fuelling
suspicions of an attempt by the Séléka coalition to
modify the ethnic and religious balance, given the
porous borders of the country. The lack of public records
to establish voter lists poses an additional challenge to
organizing free and fair elections in the next 18 to 24
months — an issue about which Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Gaye has already spoken.

From December 2012 to March 2013, both Séléka
and the former Government’s forces committed
serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law, although the majority of the human
rights violations and abuses were committed by Séléka
elements. Following the seizure of power by Séléka
on 24 March, human rights violations committed by
Séléka have continued until today.

Currently, while security in Bangui has improved,
in the rest of the country the State is almost
non-existent. There is no security or rule of law, and no
police, prosecutors or judges, but unpaid Séléka forces
are everywhere, often sustaining themselves through
extortion or looting. Most hospitals and schools are not
functioning and have been looted. The Bambari court
of justice, which I visited, is an empty building with no
tables. Its doors and windows are broken, and remnants
of official records and documents are scattered about
the floor.

The abuses committed include extrajudicial
killings, summary executions, forced disappearances,
hostage-taking, arbitrary arrest and detention, torture,
sexual and gender-based violence, grave violations
against children — including killing, sexual violence,
the recruitment of child soldiers, and the use of children
as human shields — and the destruction and looting
of private and public property, including hospitals,
schools, administrative buildings and United Nations
and other international premises. Retaliation measures
against civil society activists and journalists who are

6

Fear is pervasive everywhere. Victims, witnesses
and civil society organizations spoke to me about their
fear of being killed, physically or sexually assaulted,
or looted. They spoke of their fear of speaking out,
going to the fields or going home after dusk. Some do
not even dare to go home at all, but remain hidden in
the bush. In some areas, less than 20 per cent of seeds
have been planted, and severe food shortages can be
expected starting in early 2014.

13-42697

S/PV.7017

Accurate data on violations is difficult to gather due
to a lack of access to areas outside Bangui for security
reasons, and to the much-too-limited human rights
monitoring capacity of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA). There is an urgent need to have credible
and reliable information on human rights violations
in order to respond effectively. To strengthen national
monitoring and reporting, it is essential to urgently
establish a national commission for human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
In May 2013, the transitional authorities established
the national Mixed Commission of Inquiry to investigate
human rights violations and crimes committed since
2004. However, it does not meet international standards,
lacks independence and impartiality, and does not
have the mandate or capacity to address impunity
appropriately. Civil society is therefore calling for an
international commission of inquiry.
If security does not improve, teachers and doctors
who have taken refuge in the capital will not return to
schools and clinics countrywide, more than 650,000
children will lose another year of schooling, and
another crop will be lost. Rapidly spreading diseases,
including malaria and malnutrition, may kill more than
the conflict itself.
Let me conclude by proposing six recommendations
to the Council and the international community.
First, a key priority is to swiftly provide security
and protect the population from further human
rights violations. The problem is that Séléka forces
distrust the former police and gendarmerie, while the
population mistrusts the Séléka forces. It is therefore
urgent to establish a credible and legitimate national
security force composed of a limited number of former
regime security elements and Séléka forces. They have
to be screened and vetted under international guidance
to exclude perpetrators of human rights violations,
and they must be properly trained. The remaining
Séléka forces should be disarmed, and foreign fighters,
especially those from Chad and the Sudan, must be
repatriated. The promotion and protection of human
rights should be mainstreamed at all stages of this
security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process. However, it will take time.
Secondly, the deployment of a large international
force with a strong protection mandate is therefore
necessary to immediately provide security, protect the

population throughout the country, restore the rule of
law and create favourable conditions for free and fair
elections within 18 to 24 months, as envisaged under the
Libreville Agreements. The presence of 1,400 uniformed
personnel of the International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic, with a maximum strength of
3,500 uniformed personnel authorized by the African
Union, is a step in the right direction, but a much larger
and nationally more diversified force is needed to
provide security and protect the population throughout
the country. Such a force would also prevent foreign
rebel groups, such as the Lord’s Resistance Army or
Islamist extremist groups, from finding a safe haven in
the country.
Thirdly, it is urgent to also reinforce the human
rights component of BINUCA. In its current state,
the human rights component does not have sufficient
capacity to monitor, verify or report on human rights
violations throughout the country. Strengthening the
component will allow BINUCA to provide the needed
support to both security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes and to the
national institutions mandated to protect human rights,
fight impunity and promote reconciliation.
Fourthly, in order to overcome the humanitarian
crisis that Under-Secretary-General Amos described,
urgent international aid is needed. Major donors
have suspended development aid because of the coup
and the provisional character of the Government.
However, they should now invest the same amount of
money in humanitarian aid and community protection
programmes in such areas as strengthening civil
society, human rights monitoring, rebuilding schools
and hospitals and reconstructing archives and registers.
Fifthly, our Office has documented numerous human
rights violations committed since December 2012. In
order to prevent further abuses from being committed,
these and other violations must be investigated through
independent national or international mechanisms
and the perpetrators held to account. In her statement
last week, the ICC Prosecutor publicly expressed her
readiness to investigate and prosecute those responsible
for the commission of serious crimes, if necessary. The
Council should send a clear message to the military
commanders and the transition authorities that under
international law they are criminally responsible for
preventing crimes and punishing perpetrators.

13-426977

S/PV.7017

Finally, ahead of the elections, there is a need for
national consensus that the future Government will be
inclusive, that the development of all regions will be
even, and that nobody will be discriminated against on
the basis of ethnicity, religion or political affiliation.
That can prevent pre-electoral, electoral and postelectoral violence. The international community should
encourage that to contribute to sustainable peace and
security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Šimonović for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.
Mr. Doubane (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): As a regular visitor to the Security Council
over the past two years, and as my tenure as Permanent
Representative of the Central African Republic to the
United Nations is coming to an end, I would like to
thank each and every member for their unwavering
support, care and understanding to me and my
colleagues. Members have been friends to me and to my
battered country, which is struggling to heal its wounds
and once again take its place within the community of
nations.
Allow me to take this opportunity to congratulate
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
Council presidency for the month of August, as well
as to assure you of the full support of my delegation
as you steer the Council. We also welcome the new
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, Ms. Samantha Power, and wish her every
success. We would also like to pay tribute to the United
States of America for its presidency in July and thank
it for nominating Mr. David Brown as United Nations
Special Adviser on the Central African Republic. We
also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
commitment to my country.
With respect to Mr. Babacar Gaye, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic, his team and the United Nations
agencies on the ground assisting my people, I should
like to thank all of them and call upon them to continue
their efforts despite the numerous obstacles to peace,
stability and development of the Central African
Republic.
Finally, I would like to thank Ms. Margaret Vogt,
who, during her term and despite the various difficulties,
has spared no effort in carrying out her mission as
8

best she could. I would also like to thank my friend
Ambassador Jan Grauls who, as Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, has done much for my country.
Allow me to begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for the briefing on the situation in the
Central African Republic, which has provided us with
information on the tragedy experienced by the Central
African people. I take the floor today on behalf of
my suffering people, which has daily been subject to
killings, sexual attacks and inhuman and degrading
treatment of all sorts.
Yesterday, on 13 August, the Central African
Republic marked the fifty-third anniversary of
regaining its sovereignty, but also 53 years that have
seen the progressive erosion of the State. On 24 March,
the final blow was delivered to what remained of
an already fragile State. All institutions of power
disappeared. Today, the Central African Republic no
longer has an army, courts outside of Bangui, national
archives or civil records. The Government is no longer
able to pay its officials, nor can it keep hospitals stocked
with medication. The country has been delivered as a
war trophy to those who have passed themselves off as
administrators, tax collectors or local commanders.
There is a dramatic situation within the country,
where four-fifths of the people live. The situation in
the Central African Republic is very similar to that in
a brotherly country where the crisis is being resolved,
that is, the people are being held hostage and the social
fabric being torn by foreign traditions being imposed
from the outside. In addition, the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) continues to be a scourge to be eradicated.
We are pleased with the intention of all stakeholders on
that track and we would like to thank them for their
commitment to continue the fight against the LRA, to
put an end to its rebellion. Let us remain vigilant until
the chaotic situation has been resolved and justice is
served for all victims.
Today, we are pleased with the different meetings
and summits in Libreville, N’Djamena, Brazzaville
and Addis Ababa on the fate of the country. However,
my people continue to live in distress and look to
the Council at this time. My people await peace and
security so they can return home to their country, to
emerge from the bush and go home to their villages
and send their children to school. My people no longer
wish to fear for the future of their children and today
hope justice will be served because crimes have been
13-42697

S/PV.7017

perpetrated. Justice should be served for the women
and children who have been victims of sexual attacks,
for houses burned and property looted and carted off.
The Central African people await the Council’s help in
order to rebuild their country and finally leave behind
coups d’état and rebellions, to freely elect their leaders,
and build political and economic institutions in an
inclusive manner. The Central African people would
like to take their destiny in their own hands and live
in a stable state of peace and enjoy good relations with
their neighbours.
As duly noted by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2013/470), the Central African State has
totally collapsed — and I am very sad to say that after
53 years of independence. The international community
must recognize all the consequences and shoulder its
responsibilities. I would therefore like to commend the
activities undertaken by all friendly countries, namely,
all of the countries that are represented around the
table here today, and all of our friends in the contact
group — the Economic Community of Central African
States, the Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in
the Central African Republic, the African Union,
the European Union, the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie — all
of whom have somewhat alleviated the suffering of
the people in Bangui and, recently, throughout the rest
of the country. I would also like to welcome the work
of non-governmental organizations, which, in spite of
insufficient security, have been providing help to those
in need.
The seriousness of the situation in the Central
African Republic requires greater mobilization and
the involvement of the entire international community.
Specifically, the Central African people expect
the international community to facilitate the swift
deployment of the forces of the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic, with
a clear mandate and significant resources from the
Security Council, so as to bring peace to the country
as a whole. We also urge that the mandate of the force
be broadened to the rebuilding of new defence and
security forces that are genuinely owned by the Central
African Republic and able to take up the task. The
Central African people expect the Security Council to
adopt sanctions targeting the perpetrators of the serious
violations of human rights described and condemned
in the briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General. The

Central African people request the United Nations to
work in concert with other bilateral and multilateral
partners to head the necessary economic and social
reconstruction of the country.
In order to render them adequate to this task, the
human and financial resources of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic must be strengthened. The human and
financial resources of the relevant United Nations
agencies should also be strengthened. And, finally,
we hope that the Security Council will appoint, or at
least consider appointing, a penholder for the Central
African Republic, because we do not wish this crisis to
continue to be a forgotten one.
Today, here and now, I ask that the Council
give hope back to the people of the Central African
Republic. I ask this on behalf of the young, defenceless
girl, brutally raped in Ouandago; of the mother who
gave birth to a child under inhuman conditions in
the hospital of Kanga-Bandoro, as Under-SecretaryGeneral Amos just described; of the widow whose
husband was murdered in cold blood in Galafondo
because he protested when his meagre possessions
were looted; of the families in Batangafo and Bangui
expelled from their houses so they could be occupied
by warlords; of the young student in Bangui, dragged
from a classroom and gratuitously killed; of the young
travellers who, because T-shirts with political slogans
were found in their suitcases, were arrested, tied up,
tortured, murdered and their bodies thrown into a
river; of the defenceless peasants in Markounda and
Kabo whose cattle were seized on their way to their
plantations, which were then destroyed by farmers
from elsewhere protected by armed men; and of the boy
whose school in Ndélé was closed and who was forced
to become a child soldier.
Considering our leadership’s inability to meet the
aspirations of our bewildered, helpless people, I ask
that the Council help us bring a new Central African
Republic into the world, to rebuild a State in the heart
of Africa, a modern State, based on peace, security and
stability; one where, simply, it is good to live.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

13-426979
