S/2000/1234

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 December 2000
Original: English

Letter dated 22 December 2000 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
The members of the Security Council have carefully reviewed your report of
4 October 2000 on the establishment of a Special Court for Sierra Leone
(S/2000/915). The Council members wish to convey their deep appreciation for the
observations and recommendations set forth in your report.
The members of the Security Council reaffirm their support for resolution
1315 (2000) and its reiteration that the situation in Sierra Leone constitutes a threat
to international peace and security. With the objective of conforming to resolution
1315 (2000) and related concerns, and subject to the agreement of the Government
of Sierra Leone as necessary and appropriate, the members of the Council suggest
that the draft Agreement between the United Nations and the Government of Sierra
Leone and the proposed Statute of the Court be amended to incorporate the views
set forth below.
1.
Personal jurisdiction. The members of the Security Council continue to hold
the view, as expressed in resolution 1315 (2000), that the Special Court for Sierra
Leone should have personal jurisdiction over persons who bear the greatest
responsibility for the commission of crimes, including crimes against humanity, war
crimes and other serious violations of international humanitarian law, as well as
crimes under relevant Sierra Leonean law committed within the territory of Sierra
Leone. The members of the Security Council believe that, by thus limiting the focus
of the Special Court to those who played a leadership role, the simpler and more
general formulations suggested in the appended draft will be appropriate. It is the
view of the members of the Council that the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
will have a major role to play in the case of juvenile offenders, and the members of
the Security Council encourage the Government of Sierra Leone and the United
Nations to develop suitable institutions, including specific provisions related to
children, to this end. The members of the Security Council believe that it is the
responsibility of Member States who have sent peacekeepers to Sierra Leone to
investigate and prosecute any crimes they may have allegedly committed. Given the
circumstances of the situation in Sierra Leone, the Special Court would have
jurisdiction over those crimes only if the Security Council considers that the
Member State is not discharging that responsibility. Therefore, Council members
propose the inclusion of language in the Agreement to be concluded between the
United Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone and in the Statute of the Special
Court to that effect.

00-81277 (E)

221200

*0081277*

S/2000/1234

2.
Funding. Pursuant to resolution 1315 (2000), members of the Security Council
support the creation of a Special Court for Sierra Leone funded through voluntary
contributions. Such contributions shall take the form of funds, equipment and
services, including the offer of expert personnel that may be needed from States,
intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations. It is
understood that you cannot be expected to create any institution for which you do
not have adequate funds in hand for at least 12 months and pledges to cover
anticipated expenses for a second year of the Court’s operation.
In order to assist the Court on questions of funding and administration, it is
suggested that the arrangements between the Government of Sierra Leone and the
United Nations provide for a management or oversight committee which could
include representatives of Sierra Leone, the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, the Court and interested voluntary contributors. The management
committee would assist the court in obtaining adequate funding, provide advice on
matters of Court administration and be available as appropriate to consult on other
non-judicial matters.
3.
Court size. The members of the Security Council do not believe the creation of
two Trial Chambers and the use of alternate judges as proposed in your report is
necessary, at least not from the very outset. The Special Court should begin its work
with a single Trial Chamber, with the possibility of adding a second Chamber should
the developing caseload warrant its creation. Council members also question the
provision in the draft Agreement and Statute calling for alternate judges. It should
be noted in this connection that neither the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia nor the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda employs alternate
judges.
The members suggest the following further adjustments of a technical or
drafting nature to the Agreement: Add an express provision to article 13 as a new
subparagraph (d) under paragraph 2, concerning immigration restrictions; to article
14 concerning witnesses and experts; and to article 4 (c) of the Statute of the Court,
modifying it so as to conform it to the statement of the law existing in 1996 and as
currently accepted by the international community.
The members of the Security Council express their hope that you will concur
with the proposals outlined above and adjust the draft Agreement between the
United Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone and the Statute of the Court as
expeditiously as possible, along the above lines and as indicated in the attached
annex.
(Signed) Sergey Lavrov
President of the Security Council

2

S/2000/1234

Annex
In consequence of the comments contained in the letter, it is suggested that
consideration be given to adjustment of the “Agreement between the United Nations
and the Government of Sierra Leone on the Establishment of a Special Court for
Sierra Leone” and the “Statute of the Special Court for Sierra Leone”.

Agreement
Preamble
No change.
Article 1
Establishment of the Special Court
1.
There is hereby established a Special Court for Sierra Leone to prosecute
persons who bear the greatest responsibility for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and Sierra Leonean law committed in the territory of Sierra Leone
since 30 November 1996.
2.
The Special Court shall function in accordance with the Statute of the Special
Court for Sierra Leone. The Statute is annexed to this Agreement and forms an
integral part thereof.
Article 2
Composition of the Special Court and appointment of judges
1.
The Special Court shall be composed of a Trial Chamber and an Appeals
Chamber with a second Trial Chamber to be created if, after the passage of at least
six (6) months from the commencement of the functioning of the Special Court the
Secretary-General, the Prosecutor or the President of the Special Court so request.
Up to two alternate judges shall similarly be appointed after six months if the
President of the Special Court so determines.
2.
The Chambers shall be composed of no fewer than eight (8) independent
judges and no more than eleven (11) such judges who shall serve as follows:
(a) Three judges shall serve in the Trial Chamber where one shall be
appointed by the Government of Sierra Leone and two judges appointed by the
Secretary-General, upon nominations forwarded by States and in particular the
Member States ...
(b) In the event of the creation of a second Trial Chamber, that Chamber
shall be likewise composed in the manner contained in subparagraph (a) above;
(c)

Former paragraph 2 (b).

3.

No change.

4.

No change.

5.

If an alternate judge or judges have been appointed, in addition ...

3

S/2000/1234

Article 3
No change.
Articles 4 and 5
No change.
Article 6
Expenses of the Special Court
The expenses of the Court shall be borne by voluntary contributions from the
international community. It is understood that the Secretary-General will commence
the process of establishing the Court when he has sufficient contributions in hand to
finance the establishment of the Court and 12 months of its operations plus pledges
equal to the anticipated expenses of the second 12 months of the Court’s operation.
It is further understood that the Secretary-General will continue to seek
contributions equal to the anticipated expenses of the Court beyond its first 24
months of operation. Should voluntary contributions be insufficient for the Court to
implement its mandate, the Secretary-General and the Security Council shall explore
alternate means of financing the Court.
Articles 7 to 12
No change.
Article 13
New paragraph 2 (d)
Immunity from any immigration restrictions during his or her stay as well as
during his/her journey to the Court and back.
Article 14
... The provisions of article 13, paragraph 2 (a) and (d), shall apply to them.
Articles 15 to 20
No change.

Statute
Preamble
No change.
Article 1
Competence of the Special Court
(a) The Special Court shall, except as provided in subparagraph (b), have the
power to prosecute persons who bear the greatest responsibility for serious
violations of international humanitarian law and Sierra Leonean law committed in
the territory of Sierra Leone since 30 November 1996, including those leaders who,

4

S/2000/1234

in committing such crimes, have threatened the
implementation of the peace process in Sierra Leone.

establishment

of

and

(b) Any transgressions by peacekeepers and related personnel present in
Sierra Leone pursuant to the Status of Mission Agreement in force between the
United Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone or agreements between Sierra
Leone and other Governments or regional organizations, or, in the absence of such
agreement, provided that the peacekeeping operations were undertaken with the
consent of the Government of Sierra Leone, shall be within the primary jurisdiction
of the sending State.
(c) In the event the sending State is unwilling or unable genuinely to carry
out an investigation or prosecution, the Court may, if authorized by the Security
Council on the proposal of any State, exercise jurisdiction over such persons.
Articles 2 and 3
No change.
Article 4
... (as is)
(c) Conscripting or enlisting children under the age of 15 years into armed
forces or groups or using them to participate actively in hostilities.
Articles 5 and 6
No change.
Article 7
Should any person who was at the time of the alleged commission of the crime
below 18 years of age come before the Court, he or she shall be treated with dignity
and a sense of worth, taking into account his or her young age and the desirability of
promoting his or her rehabilitation, reintegration into and assumption of a
constructive role in society, and in accordance with international human rights
standards, in particular the rights of the child.
Articles 8 to 10
No change.
Article 11
(a) The Chamber, comprising one or more Trial Chambers and an Appeals
Chamber;
Article 12
1.
The Chamber shall be composed of not less than eight (8) or more than eleven
(11) independent judges, who shall serve as follows:
[consequential changes in paras. 1 (a) and 4]

5
