S/PV.7772

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7772nd meeting

Thursday, 15 September 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. McCully/Mr. Van Bohemen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Arcia Vivas

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-28845 (E)
*1628845*

S/PV.7772

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General: I should like to thank
Foreign Minister McCully for organizing this meeting
at a cruciall important time. Allow me to begin by
wishing all Muslims who celebrated this week Eid
Adha Mubarak.
I also want to reiterate my hope for the swift and
full recovery of former Israeli President Shimon Peres,
who has been tireless in seeking peace between Israelis
and Palestinians.
Twenty-three years ago, almost to the day, the
first Oslo Accord was signed between Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization. Unfortunately, we
are further than ever from its goals. The two-State
solution is at risk of being replaced by a one-State
reality of perpetual violence and occupation. Despite
warnings by the international community and the
region, leaders on both sides have failed to take the
difficult steps needed for peace.
Just yesterday, militants in Gaza fired yet another
rocket into Israel, which I condemn. Israel fired four
missiles at targets in Gaza in response. Once again, I
reiterate that such attacks and the response they elicit
do not serve the cause of peace. In the past two weeks
alone, plans have been advanced for yet another 463
housing units in four settlements in Area C of the
occupied West Bank. Official Israeli data shows that
the second quarter of 2016 had the highest number of
construction starts in three years. The decades-long
policy that has settled more than 500,000 Israelis in
Palestinian territory is diametrically opposed to the
creation of a Palestinian State.
Regrettably, the reporting period also saw the
continuation of statements by both sides that only
perpetuate an environment of mistrust. I am disturbed
2/19

15/09/2016

by a recent statement by Israel’s Prime Minister
portraying those who oppose settlement expansion as
supporters of ethnic cleansing. This is unacceptable and
outrageous. Let me be absolutely clear — settlements
are illegal under international law. The occupation,
stifling and oppressive, must end. The international
community, including the Security Council and the
Middle East Quartet, universally views the expansion
of settlements as an obstacle to peace.
I continue to be appalled that Palestinian parties
choose to praise despicable acts, such as the 1972
terrorist attack against Israeli athletes at the Munich
Olympics. The glorification of terror is disgraceful and
the Palestinian leadership must put an end to it.
As Palestinians prepare for the first local
elections in over 10 years, we see increasing threats
to the electoral process and the credibility of elected
institutions, including politically motivated attacks
and a growing number of questionable rulings. I am
particularly concerned by last week’s decision of the
Palestinian High Court to suspend all preparations
while deliberations continue on a petition to cancel
elections. Local elections in the West Bank and Gaza, if
held in line with international standards, could provide
an important renewal of Palestinian democracy and a
first step towards advancing national unity. Regional
efforts to encourage reconciliation and strengthen
moderate political forces can also play a positive role.
Turning to Gaza, there has been progress in the
two years since the 2014 ceasefire. Houses, hospitals,
schools and critical infrastructure have been repaired
thanks to generous donors and good cooperation
among Israel, the Palestinian Authority and the United
Nations. At the same time, 65,000 people remain
displaced. More assistance is needed to rebuild nearly
5,000 destroyed houses. More coordination is required
to accelerate ongoing reconstruction. Since 2014, the
Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism has facilitated the
entry of more than 1.5 million tons of construction
material and helped significantly to boost imports into
Gaza, positively impacting the private sector.
Israel has legitimate security concerns with regard
to the smuggling or seizure of materials. Nevertheless,
the mechanism is closely monitored and all sides
continue to ensure that appropriate controls are in place
for aid to reach its intended recipients. I encourage
Israel and the Palestinian Authority to continue their
cooperation with the United Nations and facilitate the
16-28845

15/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

import of reconstruction materials that are so vital to
rebuilding people’s lives, while ensuring that materials
are not diverted for military use.
Apart from reconstruction, Gaza’s humanitarian
needs run deep. More than 1.3 million of its 1.9 million
people need of assistance. Continued humanitarian
access and funding services to the Palestinian
population in Gaza remain critical. In this dire
context, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
continues to face serious financial challenges. I appeal
to Member States for their generosity to ensure that
UNRWA can carry out its activities effectively and in a
predictable manner.
Looking at the broader situation, Gaza remains
under closures and is a ticking time bomb. Instability
and the risk of violent escalation are ever-present.
The continued arms build-up and militant activities
of Hamas and other radical groups keep both sides of
the border in a state of constant alert. The continued
humanitarian deprivations of Gaza’s nearly 2 million
residents smother dreams and ambitions, and feed
instability and extremism.
The corrosive Palestinian political divide worsens
the humanitarian situation and stifles development,
and the absence of a Government of national unity,
espousing the principles upon which to build peace,
inhibits the realization of an end to the occupation and
the establishment of a sovereign Palestinian State. In its
July report (S/2016/595, annex), the Quartet highlighted
these complex political, security and socioeconomic
dynamics in Gaza as one of the negative trends severely
undermining hopes for peace. Lasting progress in Gaza
can be realized only on the basis of Palestinian unity, an
end to the illicit arms build-up and militant activities,
and a full lifting of movement and access restrictions iñ
line with resolution 1860 (2009).
Turning to the Golan, I remain concerned by
the continued breaches of the ceasefire line and by
fighting in the areas of separation and limitation. These
developments undermine the 1974 Disengagement
of Forces Agreement and jeopardize the ceasefire
between Israel and Syria. In particular, recent fire from
the Syrian Arab Armed Forces impacted the Israelioccupied Golan. On both occasions, the Israel Defense
Forces responded with an airstrike. I call on Israel
and Syria to abide by the terms of the Disengagement
Agreement and exercise maximum restraint.

S/PV.7772

In a matter of days, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians will meet here in New York. I encourage
both sides to focus on positive policy shifts, consistent
with the transition to greater Palestinian civil authority
in Area C, contemplated by prior agreements. To
this end, I welcome the parties’ recent agreement on
outstanding electricity debts and the creation of a new
energy market, which will transfer authority to the
Palestinian Government for the management of energy
infrastructure. Such steps, echoing the intentions of
Oslo, are critical to the viability of a future Palestinian
State.
At the same time, international stakeholders
must continue to work towards a negotiated end to
the occupation, now entering its 50th year, and the
establishment of a viable, democratic Palestine living
in peace with Israel, each respecting the other’s historic
and religious connections to this holy land. Building on
its report, the Quartet will continue its role to promote
consensus to that end.
I wish to thank my Special Coordinator, Nickolay
Mladenov, for his unwavering commitment and
continued engagement with the parties in what remains
a challenging context. For the sake of regional and
indeed global peace, we must intensify our efforts to
encourage the Israeli and Palestinian leadership to take
the difficult steps to change the destructive trajectory
currently leading us towards a one-State reality.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of New Zealand.
It is deeply disappointing to have to acknowledge
that the comments I am about to make and that others
will make today could have been made with equal force
and relevance at any time in the two and a half years
since negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians
were suspended. We all express dismay and outrage
about the violence affecting ordinary Israelis and
Palestinians, and yet innocent lives continue to be lost.
We all condemn settlements, and yet they continue
to expand. We repeatedly encourage both sides to
compromise and find a road to peace, and yet angry
rhetoric and incitement prevail. The international
community does what it can to support the parties in
resuming negotiations, and yet despite the best efforts
of a range of players we are no closer to a solution. We

16-288453/19

S/PV.7772

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

all proclaim our firm commitment to the two-State
solution as the only viable option, and yet the Council
remains a spectator as the two-State solution erodes.
There have been some positive developments, such as
this week’s agreement between Israel and the pauth to
resolve the Palestinians’ debt to the Israel Electricity
Corporation, but the picture painted by the SecretaryGeneral in his briefing should alarm us all.
New Zealand regards itself as a friend of both
Israelis and Palestinians. We are not a part of that
troubled region. We have no baggage or vested interests.
We try hard to bring a fair and balanced perspective
to this conplex and difficult topic. Today we say to
both parties that they are falling seriously short of the
expectations of the international community and that it
is time for them to step back and think again about what
they need to do to keep the prospect for a negotiated
two-State solution alive. And it is time that the Security
Council and the international community told them
so and resolve to take practical steps to help them on
their way.
Recent developments with respect to Israeli
settlements are of particular concern. The
announcement, on 31 August, of approvals for a further
463 housing units on the West Bank, including 284
new units, is at odds with Israel’s stated commitment
to talk with the Palestinians and reach an agreement.
So far this year, plans for 2,623 settlement units have
been advanced, including the retrospective legalization
of 756 units. No amount of spin can hide the fact that
those actions are a violation of Israel’s international
obligations and that they have profoundly negative
implications for the peace process.
The Palestinian side, too, has fallen short of the
expectations we should all have. Violence against
Israeli citizens continues to be condoned. The first
local elections in a decade — a chance to mend faces
and renew mandates — seem to have been postponed.
Reconciliation has been placed on the back burner. And
rockets from Gaza continue to target Israeli towns and
cities.
The result of those developments is that the twoState solution — the vision and goal of the Security
Council for nearly 50 years — is close to becoming a
shattered dream. For those in Israel who think that that
does not matter, who think that time is their friend, I
urge them to think again. If the prospect of a two-State
solution is shattered by the negative trajectory of events,
4/19

15/09/2016

international attention will shift to the two standards of
citizenship that exist in the single State that remains.
No friend of Israel wishes to see such an outcome.
Therefore, today I say to colleagues on the Security
Council, time is running out. It has been eight long
years since the Council adopted a draft resolution on
this issue. History and the international community
will not judge us well. It is time for us to ask more of
each of the parties, to require that they face up to their
responsibilities, and to ask more of this organ, which
is charged with maintaining international peace and
security.
While we welcome other efforts to bring about
an improvement in this negative cycle, New Zealand
believes that the Quartet remains the body best placed
to harness the efforts of other parties and to report to
and give advice to the Council. In that respect, we note
with concern yesterday’s reports that Israel’s Defence
Minister has placed a boycott on Special Coordinator
Mladenov. That action, reportedly taken in response
to the Special Coordinatior doing the job we have all
asked him to do, is deeply counterproductive.
It was seriously disapponting that the recent
report (S/2016/595, annex) of the Quartet was subject
to such significant delays and that, when it arrived,
its recommendations were not adopted as a basis for
further Council engagement. That would have been a
modest step forward, and the Council could not even
agree on that. New Zealand intends to revisit these
matters over the coming weeks as we try to find a way
of ensuring that the Council becomes re-engaged in a
matter that cries out for its attention.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Two
days ago, on 13 September, we celebrated the twentythird anniversary of what is known as the Oslo Accord
between Palestinians and Israelis, by virtue of which it
was agreed to temporarily manage Palestinian affairs
for a period of no more than five years, as of 1993,
provided that negotiations were conducted on final
status issues on the basis of the two-State solution, by
establishing a Palestinian State within the 4 July 1967
borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. The
anniversary of that historic agreement should prompt
16-28845

15/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the international community, including the Security
Council, to ask itself whether it has been able to help
the Palestinian people to attain a modicum of their
inalienable rights as enshrined in international law and
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. I
would like to underscore that I am confident that our
collective conscience recognizes unequivocally that the
answer to that question does not require any research,
or effort or scrutiny: the realities on the ground speak
for themselves.
Today, 23 years after the Oslo Accord, instead
of seeing a sovereign Palestinian State pursuant to
international legitimacy, we see a pseudo-State of
illegal settlements that contain at least half a million
settlers. Those settlements have proliferated on
Palestinian territories with official support from
the Israeli occupation, which has spared no effort
throughout decades to seize land, destroy houses and
expel Palestinians, as well as with the support provided
by the inability of the Organization and the silence of
the Council, which had to surrender to the passiveness
of the sole super-Power able to end this illegal invasion.
The principle of land-for-peace, which is
internationally accepted, reflects the fact that the
Palestinian question is actually about land. It shows
that the settlements, the destruction of houses, the land
seizures, the Judaization of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, and
the separation wall are the root cause of the disease at
the core of the problem, and the main obstacle to any
possible negotiations to achieve the two-State solution.
Some are wrong to think that the continuing
international powerlessness in the face of those illegal
and inhumane practices has become something routine
that could be acceptable, or that it establishes new
rights other than the right of Palestinians to their land.
Allow me to reiterate that we feel great sorrow
when we see attempts to exploit that powerlessness as a
pretext to promote an alternative narrative concerning
the Palestinian question, or to hold Palestinian people
living under siege behind walls in Gaza responsible
for such powerlessness, or to push for accepting the
occupation and its determination and practices aimed
at altering the fait accompli on the ground. That is an
excuse worse than the crime.
The delay in resolving the Palestinian question
because of the lack of political will on the part of the
major Powers, and the ongoing policy by the occupation
to pursue the illegal settlements on the ground, must

S/PV.7772

not lead us to forget the main role of the United Nations
and its organs, or divert us from the path set out by
international legitimacy. Perhaps it is necessary to
remind everyone, in particular United Nations bodies
and their representatives, that the obstacles to resolving
this issue do not absolve the Organization of its
responsibility and primary role as legal guarantor of
the rights of the Palestinians throughout history, nor do
they invalidate the relevant the Security Council and
the General Assembly resolutions or the provisions of
international law, without any concessions, regardless
of the balance of power between the parties concerned,
and without the Organization becoming a party to
political arrangements that run counter the international
legitimacy. Those arrangements will have no impact
on the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. And
that will not change regardless of the duration of this
crisis, and even if those rights have been enshrined so
far in the Organization’s documents and international
conventions.
Despite the fact this crisis has lasted for so long,
and Israel continues to turn a deaf ear to the calls of
the international community, we still insist on the path
to peace. That has always been made clear in the Arab
Peace Initiative, which confirmed that Arab States are
ready to live normally side by side in peace with Israel
as neighbours, if Israel accepts the basic principles of
good neighbourliness and puts an end to its occupation
of Arab territories by withdrawing from the lands it
occupied in 1967, including the Syrian Golan and the
remaining occupied Lebanese territories in the south of
that country.
As Council members can see, the equation is
simple and does not consist of incitement, or hatred or
even talk about legitimate resistance to occupation. It
simply reflects the desire of Arab States to have normal
relations with Israel, thus guaranteeing security and the
legitimacy of its existence.
We are still waiting for an Israeli response to the
Arab Peace Initiative, put forward years ago. We are
still unable to understand why the Israeli Government
is ignoring the Initiative despite the fact that it deals
directly with Israel. That has been an obsession for
Israel.
We also underscore that the assessments undertaken
in an attempt to distort the Initiative are erroneous and
false. The Arab peoples are too aware to accept any
concessions on the rights of the Palestinian people,

16-288455/19

S/PV.7772

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

or the rights of the Syrian and Lebanese peoples, to
recover their occupied territories.
Egypt remains committed to the Arab Peace
Initiative and continues to encourage international
parties to relaunch negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis, including the efforts of France, Russia
and United Nations Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov.
Egypt will remain determined to work in multilateral
and bilateral formats to execute its vision for peace in
the region — a vision that was launched 37 years ago
when Israel and Egypt signed a peace treaty. It can still
be implemented, with the necessary political will and if
Israel finally decides to opt for comprehensive and just
peace, for itself and for the States in the region.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to start by thanking the Secretary-General for his
presence here today, for his commitment and for his
briefing. We would also like to pay tribute to the United
Nations and the Special Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for their work on the ground. I take this
opportunity to reiterate France’s full support for
Mr. Mladenov.
We find ourselves, on the eve of the beginning of
the ministerial segment seventy-first session of the
General Assembly, at a moment where it is appropriate
to take stock. The results of the past year have been
indisputable. What we are seeing here is the inexorable
marginalization of two-State solution, which is a
solution, let us be clear, that is today at risk. Israeli
settlement policy constitutes one of the main threats
to the implementation of a two-State solution. By
splintering Palestine’s future territory, the settlement
policy undermines the prospects for a Palestinian
State. The settlement policy is demonstrated by
the de facto annexation of Area C, the transfer of
populations, impediments to movement, and the
destruction of housing and humanitarian infrastructure
for Palestinians. The radicalization of public opinion,
acts of violence, incitements to violence and terrorism
seriously undermine the prospects for seeing two States
coexist — a State of Israel and a Palestinian State living
side by side in peace and security. Progress in terms
of Palestinian reconciliation are also indispensable and
urgent.
Following two years of interruption of the
negotiations process, France vigorously advocates
for the need for renewed international assistance for
6/19

15/09/2016

the peace process and the preservation of a two-State
solution. We must act collectively to place this conflict
at the very core of our priorities and extricate ourselves
from the current impasse, which is an impasse that
weakens the Palestinian Authority, jeopardizes security
for Israelis and fuels the radicalization of public opinion
throughout the region and beyond.
It is in that context that France has presented to the
parties and their main partners an initiative aimed at
recreating collective political mobilization in favour
of the peace process. Our approach is both progressive
and collective. It is progressive because all of us know
that the conditions for the immediate relaunch of the
negotiations are simply not in place today. It is therefore
the responsibility of the international community to
urge the parties to return to the negotiating table by
creating around them a conducive climate coupled with
a positive agenda, with a set of incentives to that end.
This is the very heart of our initiative. It is a collective
approach because we are attempting to tailor each stage
of our initiative to existing efforts, in particular those
of the Quartet and our Arab partners. Furthermore,
France has always yearned to see the Security Council,
when the time is right, play a key role in assisting and
consolidating the negotiations process.
The ministerial conference that was held in Paris
on 3 June was a decisive moment that enabled us to take
a first step. The international community reaffirmed its
commitment to the two-State solution and expressed
its determination to engage collectively to recreate
the necessary conditions for the resumption of peace
negotiations. On 19 September, in New York, at the
margins of the General Assembly, France will organize
a working meeting at the level of high officials to
take stock of work already carried out and to identify
measures that should enable us to preserve the twoState solution and make progress on the conditions
necessary for a resumption of the peace process. It
goes without saying that we will continue to involve
the parties and inform them of our work in the most
transparent manner, as we have always done at all
stages of the process.
If we do not act with resolve, the two-State solution
will die, and it will gradually make way for a situation
of fait accompli, which will never guarantee a just
and lasting settlement of the conflictl; rather, it will
continue to weigh upon the region’s equilibrium. France
will therefore spare no effort to prevent this drift and
16-28845

15/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

will work to recreate a political momentum based on
the two-State solution.
We will never give up. Together with all of our
partners, we will continue to work unstintingly to this
end.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
too wish to convey my thanks to the Secretary-General
for his briefing. We are grateful to the presidency of
New Zealand and to you, Foreign Minister Murray
McCulley, for convening today’s meeting and for your
presence at the Security Council today.
Uruguay is concerned at the lack of progress in
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and its humanitarian,
political and security consequences in both countries
and the entire region. Unfortunately, in the past few
months we have had no significant news with respect
to the peace process. We were hoping to see a quicker
pace and a greater impact following the Quartet report
(S/2016/595, annex) but that has not been the case. So
far, the parties have not taken any measure to reverse
the trends that are threatening the two-State solution
despite the helpful recommendations set out in the
report.
Despite the fact that there seems to have been a
gradual reduction in terrorist acts and the general level
of violence, the political climate has not really changed,
and we still see a paralysis when it comes to the possible
renewal of direct bilateral negotiations. In Uruguay’s
opinion, as the Quartet’s report rightly pointed out,
Israel’s continuing construction of settlements is a
serious threat to peace. The fact that only a few days
after the publication of the report, Israel announced its
decision to build 560 new houses in the West Bank and
240 in East Jerusalem, without considering the report’s
recommendations, is a very bad sign however we look
at it.
We reiterate our concerned about the protracted
stalemate in the peace process between Israel and
Palestine. Political signals should be sent so as to
break the vicious circle of misunderstanding and
violent clashes that undermine the Palestinian people’s
aspirations to finally live in peace after half a century
of occupation and a serious humanitarian situation,
particularly in Gaza, which has worsened after every
armed escalation. We hope that both countries can
overcome their differences and reach an understanding
on the key issues that divide them. Today, almost 23
years after the Oslo Accords, at which both countries

S/PV.7772

recognized each other and laid the groundwork for
working towards a solution based on two independent
States, we were sorry to see that the Quartet indicates
a situation of continuing violence, attacks on civilians,
incitements to violence and weakening trust, none of
which is conducive to achieving a peaceful solution to
the conflict.
The importance of taking urgent measures to
reverse the current stalemate in the conflict compels
us to reiterate our call to the parties to resume their
contact on a basis capable of meeting the desires
of both sides. That means dealing with terrorism
in the Palestinian territories, ending Israel’s illegal
settlement of those territories, silencing incitement to
violence through hate speech and striving for a genuine
commitment to achieving a two-State solution through
appropriate policies, such as the Quartet recommends
in its latest report.
I should reiterate that seeking solutions to issues
related to international peace and security is a priority
for Uruguay, and we will work unceasingly to try to
bring the parties together to that end. We do not ignore
the continuing serious problems, but we refuse to
give up hope and would like to remind everyone that
more complex situations have been resolved when the
requisite political will could be found, such as occurred
with the Camp David accords and the Sinai agreement
between Egypt and Israel. Similarly, in 1994, the State
of Israel and the Kingdom of Jordan were able to arrive
at a peace acceptable to both parties.
While Uruguay believes that the achievement of a
lasting solution is up to the two parties to the conflict,
the international community also plays a significant
role in it, particularly since up to now the parties have
been unable to reach an agreement on their own. It is
therefore important that the international community
step up its efforts to support the process and encourage
the parties to resume a dialogue and sit down once
again at the negotiating table, with a view to coming
up with a peaceful, just, negotiated and lasting solution
in accordance with international law. In that regard,
we emphasize the importance of ensuring that the
parties come up with a specific timetable and measures
that each of them has to take in areas where the path
to a solution has been blocked, such as combating
terrorism, demonstrating unity within the Palestinian
Government and agreeing on a process for removing
the illegal settlements.

16-288457/19

S/PV.7772

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Uruguay is ready to support and collaborate on
any proposal that can bring both parties back to the
negotiating table and make progress with the peace
process. In that regard, we commend the Arab Peace
Initiative, the French initiative and any others that may
emerge. Lastly, I would like to conclude by saying
that, sadly, almost 70 years since the process began,
and despite massive efforts, we still see no closure.
The international community continues to call for
a negotiated political agreement, the only way out of
this endless tunnel of death and destruction. I urge the
parties to listen to those calls and allow us to help them.
We must not forget that the most important part of
coexistence among States is peace; nor should we allow
generations of young people and children to continue to
grow up in mistrust, fear and hatred.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Secretary-General for his
substantive statement. Despite some reduction in
tensions on the ground, the Palestinian-Israeli situation
remains problematic. Various incidents in the West
Bank and Jerusalem, as well as the sporadic aggravation
of tensions around the Gaza Strip show that the risk of
an escalation in the conflict is as high as ever.
Against the background of a stalemated settlement,
new initiatives aimed at finding ways to reignite
the peace process are appearing. Those ideas seem
reasonable and are at least aimed at achieving some
genuinely essential goals. Nonetheless, in our view they
should only complement the efforts being made within
the framework of the established mechanism of the
Middle East Quartet. Attempts to shift focus to other
forums will merely divert the international community’s
attention from the Palestinian question. We concur with
those calling for a more active involvement in the issue
on the part of the Security Council, and maybe they
should take a more vigorous approach to promote that
idea.
On 22 September, on the margins of the general
debate in the General Assembly at its seventy-first
session, we will hold a ministerial meeting of the
Quartet. I would once again like to draw attention to
the recommendations in the report (S/2016/595, annex)
of the Quartet published on 1 June. We firmly believe
that if we can move forward on them we could create
the conditions for reviving Palestinian-Israeli relations
and a relaunch of the political process on the basis of
internationally recognized agreements. In that context,
8/19

15/09/2016

we would like to emphasize the crucial significance of
the Arab Peace Initiative.
The lack of unity among Palestinians is another
obstacle to reviving the political process. All those
who wield influence on the Palestinian side should
urge them to unite without delay on the basis of the
Palestinian Liberation Organization’s platform and the
principles of the Quartet.
The humanitarian and economic situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, especially the Gaza
Strip, continues to be a serious concern. It exacerbates
dissatisfaction among the population, helps to radicalize
social attitudes and makes it harder to reach a negotiated
solution. The violence, and the incitements to violence,
must be stopped and the settlement activity must end.
We believe that a durable peace, based on a two-State
solution, can meet the aspirations of the Palestinians
to an independent sovereign State as well as Israelis’
desire for security. And it will help to normalize
conditions in the region as a whole.
For our part, we pursue our efforts to overcome the
negative trends in the Palestinian-Israeli situation and
to channel it towards a political and diplomatic solution.
We are working actively and directly with the parties
to the conflict and the concerned States in the region.
In our contacts in the past few weeks with President
Abbas of Palestine and Prime Minister Netanyahu
of Israel, they underlined their interest in meeting in
Moscow in order to discuss the best ways to unblock
the peace process without preconditions. Our activity is
based on the international efforts to arrive at a reliable
negotiating process between the Palestinian and Israeli
sides. Needless to say, those efforts will be conducted
further in close coordination with the Quartet partners
and key international and regional actors.
In conclusion, I would like to affirm our support
for the work of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): On behalf of my
delegation, I warmly welcome you, Sir, to the Security
Council and thank you for presiding over this meeting.
Malaysia appreciates New Zealand’s tireless efforts to
propel the Council to take urgent action on the Palestinian
question. We share your view, Sir, on the crucial role
of the Council in creating the necessary conditions for
peace and pushing the parties to restart the dialogue
process in order to salvage the two-State solution. My
16-28845

15/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

delegation is also grateful to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his presence and briefing today.
My delegation decided to take the floor today
in view of the worsening situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory and the ongoing apathy in the
Council to address the situation. In particular, we wish
to highlight the expansion of settlement activities,
which constitutes the biggest threat to peace and the
two-State solution.
Over the years, we have heard repeated warnings
from the Secretary-General and his Special Coordinator,
Mr. Mladenov, about the expansion of settlement
activities, which threatens to bury the two-State
solution. Over the past few months alone, hundreds of
Israeli settlements have continued to expand despite
their undeniably illegal nature under international
law, clear recommendations of the Quartet report
(S/2016/595, annex) and widespread condemnations on
the part of the international community. In addition,
we also see attempts by the Israeli authorities to
retroactively legalize outposts in another systematic
attempt to change the realities on the ground.
For far too long, such activities have persisted
with impunity as we continue to restrain our response
to mere verbal disapproval without any effective
measures to halt the illegal activities. The expansion
of settlement activities and the legalization of
outposts are accompanied by increasing demolitions
of Palestinian homes and structures, the confiscation
of Palestinian lands and increasing settler violence. In
2015, on average, four cases of settler violence against
Palestinian civilians were reported per week. In one
recent incident, Israeli settlers unleashed dogs to attack
a Palestinian man, while, in another, Israeli settlers
pumped sewage onto land belonging to Palestinian
farmers, consequently damaging Palestinian-owned
trees. Even young Palestinian girls have not bee spared
from settlers’ violence, as they have been harassed and
beaten by Israeli settlers. In most cases, there is no
recourse to justice.
In the case of one Palestinian family, which owns
olive orchards and agricultural lands in the occupied
West Bank, the members were prevented from working
their land located in close proximity to an illegal Israeli
settlement. Their trees and land were damaged and
poisoned by the settlers. Despite complaints submitted
to the Israel police 86 times, no action has been taken
to hold the settlers to account or provide redress. Settler

S/PV.7772

violence can no longer be treated as isolated incidents.
It is clear that the settlers are becoming emboldened
as a direct result of the Israeli Government’s policy on
settlement expansion and the impunity allowed them.
Settlement expansion occurs against a backdrop
of severe restrictions on the national growth and
development of Palestinian communities. We are all
aware of the near-impossible prospect of obtaining
permits from Israeli authorities to enable Palestinian
families to expand their homes to accommodate the
natural growth in Area C of the occupied West Bank.
Many Palestinians have had to resort to building homes
without permits, only later to face Israeli demolition
orders and costly fines. Unable to pay the unjust fines,
which could amount to tens of thousands of dollars,
many have been forced to demolish their homes. We
saw one such case just last week. As a Palestinian who
had to destroy his home in East Jerusalem stated,
“The first hammer blow feels like you are hitting
yourself. It is not easy to demolish your dream”.
In another incident, a Palestinian father had to demolish
a room for his three small children to avoid exorbitant
demolition fines issued by the Israeli municipality
after spending 12 years in a failed attempt to fight the
demolition order in Israeli court.
Such examples are part of a brutal and systematic
attempt by Israel to break the spirit of the Palestinians
and make their lives in occupied East Jerusalem
unbearable, so that they will eventually leave. We agree
with the Secretary-General that it is disturbing that any
opposition to Israeli settlement expansion to protect
the legitimate rights of Palestinians is now labelled
by the Israeli leadership as ethnic cleansing. That is
truly provocative, senseless and reflects nothing more
than a feeble attempt to defend the indefensible — an
incorrigible attitude to stay the destructive course of
harvesting Palestinian despair and misery.
Clearly, doing nothing is not an option for the
Security Council as the organ entrusted to maintain
international peace and security. We must take urgent,
effective actions to halt and reverse illegal settlement
activities, which are fuelling radicalization owing to
widespread frustrations and anger among occupied
Palestinians. We must discourage Israel from wallowing
in their repressive policies. We must not allow our plea
to fall deaf ears. We must have the courage to nurse our
bleeding conscience.

16-288459/19

S/PV.7772

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

To maintain international attention on this issue,
Malaysia, together with like-minded members of the
Council, is planning to hold an Arria Formula meeting
in October with a focus on the issue of settlements.
Malaysia also welcomes the upcoming meeting of the
Quartet in New York as a follow-up to the international
ministerial conference held in Paris in June. We continue
to support the French initiative, which complements the
efforts of the Middle East Quartet. We look forward
to concrete actions being taken by the relevant parties,
backed by the international community, to recreate the
much-needed political horizon for a two-State solution.
In conclusion, I reiterate Malaysia’s call for the
Council to use the various tools at its disposal to create
the necessary conditions for peace and to influence the
parties’ behaviour in order to salvage the two-State
solution. We stand ready to engage constructively with
other Council members in that regard.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We thank you, Sir, for
presiding over this important meeting and for your very
insightful remarks on such a troubling and sensitive
issue. We also thank Secretary-General Ban-Ki-moon
for his briefing and his continued commitment to a just
resolution of this intractable conflict, which has been
a source of frustration and despair for so many of us.
As we reach the final months of our tenure in the
Security Council, it is with great regret that we note the
lack of progress towards a two-State solution and the
lack of unity within the Council on how to reverse the
negative trends on the ground. Despite the efforts of a
large majority to provide the guidance and support that
Israel and Palestinians need to move towards a peaceful
resolution of the conflict and a negotiated two-State
solution, which envisages the coexistence of Palestine
and Israel living side-by-side in peace and security, key
stakeholders remain reluctant to put their weight behind
those efforts.
The reluctance to enforce the decisions that have
been adopted, along with the unwillingness to enforce
basic respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law, has not only delayed any meaningful
progress but also demonstrated the importance of
mechanisms such as the Middle East Quartet, whose
recommendations remain largely ignored by the
Government of Israel. Since the latest Quartet report
(S/2016/595, annex), which offers recommendations
for the way forward in the peace process, the Israeli
Government has increased settlement-related activities
10/19

15/09/2016

as well as demolitions of Palestinian homes and civilian
infrastructure, and demonstrated a total disregard for
any international initiative to bring the parties together
to negotiate a just and final settlement to the conflict.
That is not only regrettable, but also unacceptable.
It has been nearly 40 years since the Security Council
determined that Israeli settlements in occupied
territory had no legal validity and were an obstruction
to achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East. Yet here we are today standing by and
allowing thousands of units to be built in East Jerusalem
and the West Bank by the Israeli Government with total
impunity and disregard for our calls to reverse this
trend.
As we have repeatedly stated, this deadly and
destructive conflict has global repercussions, and
time is running out for us to bring about a meaningful
solution. That is why it is extremely important for us
to present a united front and to support all multilateral
efforts to create a viable political horizon so as to
resolve this conflict once and for all.
As we seek to promote justice, respect for human
rights, international humanitarian law and all other
democratic principles around the world, we must not
compromise our credibility by ignoring the plight of
the Palestinian people. The members of the Security
Council, the Middle East Quartet and all other
stakeholders have a moral obligation to bring about an
end to this illegal occupation, which has lasted nearly
50 years. It is our hope that Israel will recognize the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and independence by ceasing all illegal
settlement activity, as well as all oppressive policies,
and participate constructively in all multilateral efforts
to revive negotiations, because that is the only true path
to lasting peace.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Let me first express my
gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Murray McCully,
Foreign Minister of New Zealand, for having convened
this meeting. My gratitude also goes to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his presence here and his
thorough briefing today.
As the Secretary-General mentioned in his briefing,
a variety of initiatives have been undertaken in pursuit
of the two-State solution. Unfortunately, we have seen
little progress. Japan expresses its strong concern over
the continued violence towards civilians, terrorist
attacks and incitements to violence. We also express
16-28845

15/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

strong concern over the continuing policy of settlement
expansion. We believe that settlement activity is a
violation of international law and steadily erodes the
viability of the two-State solution.
In addition, the continued violence is fundamentally
incompatible with a peaceful solution. The international
community must take action to address the dire
humanitarian situation and recovery needs of the people
of Gaza and to encourage the resumption of meaningful
negotiations.
Given the difficulty of the current situation on the
ground, creating an environment conducive to a twoState solution may seem like a roundabout approach.
However, I would like to make note of the fifth
ministerial-level meeting of the Four-Party Consultative
Unit for the Corridor for Peace and Security initiative,
which was held in Jericho, West Bank, on 7 September.
It was hosted by Japan, with ministerial-level
participation on the part of Israel, Jordan and Palestine.
Through job creation, this initiative seeks to support a
sustainable economy in Palestine, which underpins the
viability of a two-State solution. At first glance, this
project to create a conducive environment may not seem
like a short route to a two-State solution. However, the
cooperation of the four parties through this initiative
has lasted for 10 years, regardless of the highs and lows
of the political situation, and it plays a meaningful role
in rebuilding trust between the two parties through
economic and social development. Japan continues to
be committed to peace and prosperity in the region.
I would like to briefly discuss the situation in
Syria as well. Japan welcomes the agreement reached
on 9 September between Secretary Kerry and Foreign
Minister Lavrov, which has resulted in a nationwide
cessation of hostilities since 12 September. Even more
importantly, the degree of violence has decreased
markedly since the conclusion of this agreement.
The reduction in violence allows for the expansion of
humanitarian access, gives hope to Syria’s people and
increases the prospect of the resumption of the political
process.
Let us recall that the cessation of hostilities,
confirmed by resolution 2268 (2016) in February,
was observed fairly faithfully for two months. In the
following months, however, we witnessed a string of
breathtakingly tragic events. We must prevent a relapse.
Japan is committed to playing its role as a member of

S/PV.7772

the Council and the International Syria Support Group
to promote the stability and recovery of Syria.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
I should like to start by commending your initiative
of holding this meeting, which provides us with an
opportunity to once again exchange views on the
situation in the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine. I wish to convey my gratitude to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive briefing,
which clearly underscored the links between the impasse
in the political process, the unacceptable continuation
of the settlement policy and related activities, and the
very difficult humanitarian situation, especially in
Gaza.
Less than a month after our last meeting on the issue
(see S/PV.7757), we are gathered here yet again to discuss
the very difficult situation prevailing in the occupied
Palestinian territories. We note that, unfortunately, the
settlement policy and related activities are continuing
and intensifying, rendering increasingly uncertain the
prospects for a two-State solution.
According to the United Nations, in the month
of August 2016 alone, Israeli security services either
destroyed or confiscated 85 civilian structures
throughout 28 communities in the West Bank. In total,
more than 786 housing units and structures have been
destroyed in the West Bank in 2016 alone, leading to the
displacement of 1,197 people, including 558 children.
More than 200 of the structures destroyed had been
used for humanitarian purposes.
Then we have the destruction of the water-supply
system, which was built with UNICEF in the Jordan
River Valley, which impacts about 1,000 Palestinians
throughout five Bedouin communities that have
particularly erratic access to water, especially in
summer. In addition, communities including Daqiqa,
Khan Al-Ahmar, Umm Al-Khair, Abu Nuwar and
Susya, to list but a few, host very vulnerable Palestinian
communities, where families, which consist mainly
of displaced persons, live in constant fear of finding
themselves shelterless from one day to the next.
That is why my delegation denounces once again the
continuing and increasing demolition and confiscation
of Palestinian houses and structures, and urges the
Israeli Government to put an end to the forced transfer
of populations and to the physical and administrative
restrictions they have imposed, which exacerbate
tensions between the two communities.

16-2884511/19

S/PV.7772

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

15/09/2016

Palestinian children continue to pay a very heavy
price in this conflict. Thousands have lost their lives,
including 535 during the military assault on the Gaza
Strip in 2014. Their suffering is compounded by
administrative detention, the disproportionate use of
force and extrajudicial assassinations that, in addition
to constituting violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law, do nothing but stoke hatred and
violence. I express my delegation’s deep concerns over
the critical situation of three young Palestinians: the
brothers Muhammad and Mahmoud Balboul — a dentist
and army officer, respectively — and the journalism
student Malik Al-Qadi, who has been on hunger strike
for almost two months.

to the Israeli Government to implement previous
agreements and transfer competencies to the Palestinian
Authority, especially in Area C, so as to promote longawaited progress in housing, access to water and energy,
communications, agriculture and natural resources.

The catastrophic humanitarian situation in Gaza — a
small enclave of some 36,000 square kilometres that has
been besieged for over nine years, and where 1.3 million
of its 2 million inhabitants require assistance — should
weigh on our collective conscience. Following the
conflict two years ago, three-quarters of Gaza’s homes
are in need of repair as a result of the failure to honour
commitments amounting to $3.5 billion undertaken
in the framework of the Cairo donors conference of
2014. I therefore take this opportunity to welcome the
activities of humanitarian players, including United
Nations agencies, to mitigate the daily impact of the
conflict on children by enhancing their psychosocial
well-being, improving the supply of such basic services
as water, rebuilding schools and catching up on the
education of students who have fallen behind. Given
these circumstances, my delegation reiterates its call
for international protection for the Palestinian people,
who have been under occupation for nearly 50 years,
and reaffirms its support for the initiative to make 2017
the year that marks the end of the occupation.

I cannot conclude my statement without voicing
our hope that, despite the delays, local elections will be
held throughout the Palestinian territories and open the
way to reconciliation among the political stakeholders,
leading to the formation of a Government of national
unity on the basis of the Cairo agreement. We reaffirm
our conviction that influential countries of the region
and the Security Council have a crucial role to play in
the optimal management ofthe peace process. Similarly,
we reiterate our support for the Paris conference as a
contribution to the solution to the conflict based on
existing platforms, such as the Arab Peace Initiative,
leading to the establishment of two States of Israel and
Palestine within the pre-1967 borders.

Extreme poverty, a high level of unemployment and
the total lack of development prospects are scourges
that could promote the emergence of a new conflict.
The Quartet has drawn attention to that danger in its
report (S/2016/595, annex), which reveals that only
5 per cent of Gaza’s water is potable and that access
to electricity is scarce. In that regard, the report of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
is unambiguous. It tells us that the rate of growth of the
Palestinian economy could easily double if there were
no occupation, leading to a virtuous cycle of reduced
unemployment and poverty and offering the Palestinian
people conditions conducive to a better social and
economic life. We therefore echo the Quartet’s appeal
12/19

As the occupying Power, and in compliance with its
commitment to the two-State solution, Israel will have
to end all settlement and related activities and launch
sincere negotiations according to a pre-established time
table with explicit goals, leading to a lasting peace that
meets both its own security needs and the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people to a sovereignty
State on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and
Foreign Minister McCully for presiding over this
meeting.
Allow me also, on behalf of the United States, to
wish former Israeli President Shimon Peres a speedy
recovery. I last had the chance to meet President Peres
at his office in Israel in February, and greatly admire
his ongoing work to promote peace and closer ties
between Israelis and Palestinians.
The United States shares the Secretary-General’s
views about rising tensions on ground, and we continue
to condemn all terrorist attacks. All sides must exercise
restraint and refrain from provocative actions and
rhetoric. In the Golan Heights, we are alarmed by the
increasing number of rockets and shells fired from
Syria, as well as rockets launched from Gaza. In
addition, there have been recent reports of incitement
on social media, including on accounts allegedly linked
to Fatah.
16-28845

15/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We are also deeply concerned about allegations
of the use of excessive force by Israeli security forces
against Palestinian civilians. This includes the killing
and wounding of two Palestinian men inside their car
in the Shuafat refugee camp near East Jerusalem on
5 September. The Israeli Ministry of Justice has opened
an investigation, and we look forward to seeing the full
results. At the same time, we remain deeply concerned
about attacks on the Israel Defense Forces, including the
stabbing of an Israeli soldier near Jenin on 24 August.
The international community can make a tangible
investment in that region’s stability. Both reconstruction
efforts in Gaza and programmes run by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) are facing critical
funding shortfalls. For Gaza, out of $3.5 billion pledged
for reconstruction at the 2014 Cairo conference, just
$1.6 billion have been disbursed so far.
Even with limited funding, there has been some
progress. Fifty per cent of damaged homes have been
repaired and more than 30 per cent of fully destroyed
homes have been rebuilt. But Gaza needs more support.
For an economy with 41 per cent unemployment, further
disbursements of aid to Gaza will have a significant
impact. The UNRWA financial shortfall of $74 million
could leave more than 500,000 students out of school
and 30,000 employees without paychecks next month.
A suspension of UNRWA core services could further
destabilize an already volatile region. The United
States has contributed an additional $12 million to
fund UNRWA, bringing our total this year to nearly
$329 million. Sweden and Switzerland have also
stepped up with new contributions and pledges. We
urge other Governments to join this effort to avert a
potential humanitarian crisis, which would have longterm effects.
The United States strongly opposes continued Israeli
settlement activity, which is corrosive to the cause of
peace. As we have said repeatedly, such actions are not
consistent with Israel’s stated desire to achieve a twoState solution. We share the deep concern expressed
by the Secretary-General and other Council members
about reports in July that the Israeli Government
published tenders for hundreds of settlement units in
East Jerusalem and advanced other settlement plans. We
also share concerns regarding the Israeli Government’s
attempts to retroactively legalize outposts that are
illegal under Israeli law. Most recently, Ministry of
Justice officials questioned the 1 September order from

S/PV.7772

the High Court of Justice to demolish 17 houses in the
Netiv Ha’avot settlement outpost within 18 months. The
Court determined that these settlements were built on
private Palestinian lands. There are also reports that
the Israeli Government has begun the process to take
over or lease land privately owned by Palestinians so
as to relocate the illegal Amona outpost, as well as to
consider building homes for Israeli settlers in a military
compound in Hebron.
These cases represent unprecedented and troubling
steps that are inconsistent with prior Israeli legal
opinions. The cases also run counter to longstanding
Israeli official policy not to seize privately owned land
or use land originally seized for military purposes for
settlements. The situation in Susiya, which remains
under threat of demolition, is also troubling. If the
Israeli Government proceeds with demolitions,it would
have a very damaging impact on the lives of the area’s
Palestinian inhabitants, who were already displaced on
other, previous occasions.
Those actions appear to be the latest examples
of a steady acceleration of settlement activity and
demolitions, which is systematically undermining
prospects for a two-State solution. Those concerns
were addressed specifically in the Quartet report
(S/2016/595, annex), and have been raised repeatedly
by the other Quartet members and the international
community. We call on the parties to take significant
steps urgently to stabilize the situation and to reverse
current trends. We will continue to urge both sides to
demonstrate, through policies and actions, a genuine
commitment to preserving prospects for the two-State
solution. As a member of the Quartet, the United States
co-authored the Quartet report, and we stand behind
its recommendations in their entirety. Furthermore, we
support the efforts of Special Coordinator Mladenov
and his team, who continue to work tirelessly to
promote peace and to keep us apprised of developments
on issues that reflect the concerns of all members of the
Security Council.
Turning to Syria, as all members are aware, after
months of negotiations, the United States and Russia
reached an agreement on a series of steps aimed at
reducing the violence and alleviating the suffering
of the Syrian people. The goal is also to create an
environment conducive to negotiations on a political
transition for Syria, which is the only way to end this
horrific conflict. That agreement is not one based
on trust and promises. It is an agreement based on

16-2884513/19

S/PV.7772

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

reciprocal actions, halting attacks and allowing for
deliveries of assistance. We therefore look to Russia to
deliver on its commitment to use its leverage to stop the
Al-Assad regime from employing the barbaric tactics it
has long used in the conflict. That means a halt to the
barrel bombs, a halt to the chemical-weapon attacks, a
halt to indiscriminate assaults on civilian areas and a
halt to the starve-get-bombed-or-surrender tactics that
have characterized the Al-Assad regime’s approach to
conflict.
The plan starts with a nationwide cessation of
hostilities that excludes Jabhat Al-Nusra and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We urge
all parties, regime and opposition, to adhere to the
cessation of hostilities by stopping aerial bombardments
and stopping attempts to take new territory. So far,
early reports indicate that violence has decreased
significantly, which is encouraging. But violence has
not completely stopped. Progress towards a political
solution will depend upon all parties adhering to the
cessation of hostilities and all relevant Governments
using their influence to promote sustained calm.
I want to stress that the cessation of hostilities is
only one part of the agreement. Humanitarian assistance
also needs to flow. That ought to be straightforward,
but the Al-Assad regime has employed every possible
tactic to disrupt aid deliveries. Those include the
regime removing medical supplies from convoys and
withholding approvals for the United Nations to reach
certain areas. As we all know, the consequences are
direct and immediate. Blocking aid kills people. Those
tactics have to stop. United Nations convoys have to
be able to reach the nearly 600,000 Syrians living
in besieged areas, where people are almost entirely
dependent upon aid deliveries to survive — not in a few
weeks or months. The convoys need to roll today. That
means Damascus must grant swift, final approvals and
provide facilitation letters for assistance to reach all
besieged and hard-to-reach locations. It also means that
the opposition must provide assurances that assistance
will not be impeded in the areas that it controls.
Only after we have seen improved humanitarian
access and a sustained period of reduced violence will
the United States and Russia take steps to establish
a joint centre to facilitate the targeting of Jabhat
Al-Nusra, Al-Qaida’s affiliate in Syria, and ISIL.
Those are terrorist groups that pose a direct threat
to our collective security and whose toxic ideologies
are incompatible with the moderate opposition and
14/19

15/09/2016

the aspirations of the Syrian people. Any party to the
conflict that seeks to maintain its legitimacy should
distance itself in every way possible from terrorist
organizations. Targeting Jabhat Al-Nusra and ISIL,
however, cannot be a pretext for the Al-Assad regime’s
indiscriminate attacks and besiegement tactics, which
only increase the suffering of innocents and generates
new recruits for these violent extremist groups.
That is why the United States insisted in our
negotiation with Russia that two things had to happen
in parallel if we are to achieve our goals. We all must
intensify our actions against terrorists, and Russia must
ensure that Al-Assad’s forces are no longer in bombing
in any opposition or Al-Nusra areas — meaning that
the regime would no longer be able to use the excuse
that it is targeting Al-Nusra in order to go after its own
people. To stress: if and when the joint centre is stood
up and sets into motion action against terrorist targets,
Al-Assad’s military aircraft must simultaneously stop
flying any combat missions over eastern Aleppo, the
Damascus suburbs, Latakia, Idlib, Dar’a and any other
areas where opposition forces or Jabhat Al-Nusra are
present. It is noteworthy and important that Russia
agreed to that, as well as to the role of the joint centre
in monitoring the Syrian regime’s compliance. That
contributed significantly to our pursuit of the deal.
Yet we are clear-eyed about the many challenges
still to be tackled before we can reach that phase of the
deal. And many new challenges will arise to implement
it successfully, given the regime’s track record of
breaking its commitments and flouting its obligations,
including obligations determined by the Security
Council. If all parties live up to their obligations, we
have a chance — a chance to make progress towards a
political solution.
A civil defence volunteer in eastern Aleppo,
Mohammed Omar, told a reporter that, for the first time
in far too long,
“people are going about their business and children
are even playing in the street”.
Children playing outside should not be an aberration,
should not be worthy of comment in the Council. All
of us must do everything possible to ensure that this
relative calm can be sustained.
Mr. Arcia Vivas (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank the New Zealand presidency
for the convening of today’s meeting today, and we thank
16-28845

15/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Foreign Minister Murray McCully for presiding over
it. New Zealand’s effective leadership of the Security
Council and its willingness to address the initiatives
and proposals made in this organ are recognized and
welcomed by our delegation. We also welcome the
briefing by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, which is
a clear illustration of his interest and the importance he
attaches to the issue, as well as of his commitment so
that the United Nations, with the support of the United
Nations, can help find peace and stability in the region.
We reiterate our support for Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process Nickolay Mladenov.
The situation in the Middle East continues to give
rise to concerns, given the various pressing, diverse
and complicated situations in that tumultuous part of
the world. In that regard, we will focus our statement
on the Palestinian question, which is at the heart, or
has significant impact on, the recent problems and the
tensions in the region.
We continue to see, with disappointment and
indignation, how the intransigent attitude and heinous
practices of the Israeli occupying Power against the
Palestinian people in the occupied territories and
against others who suffer from the unjust blockade
of the Gaza Strip. We are deeply concerned at seeing
how the two-State solution — the most appropriate
and broadly recognized to ensure the existence of a
free and sovereign Palestinian State living in peace
alongside Israel — appears to be fading further away
each day with the actions of the occupying Power
against international law, respect for peoples and the
very norms of coexistence and understanding between
communities and peoples.
The lives of Palestinians are being threatened by
the illegal, provocative and violent acts committed by
Israeli authorities and settlers against a defenceless
population. Palestinian living conditions have
deteriorated significantly as a result of this reprehensible
occupation, leading to a critical humanitarian
situation. The geographic continuity, the political and
administrative divisions, the demographic composition,
historical rights and the cultural and religious fabric of
Palestinian communities and land in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem have been significantly altered in
favour of the occupying Power, thereby imperilling the
viability of an independent Palestinian State.
All of us are aware that one of the main impediments
to dialogue and peace between Israelis and Palestinians,

S/PV.7772

as well as one of the greatest threats to the two-State
solution and the very existence of Palestine, is the
immoral settlement policy of the Israeli occupying
Power, which, arbitrarily and with full impunity,
has moved forward with establishing and expanding
settlements on Palestinian territory, using force or legal
and administrative subterfuge to take land from the
Palestinians and destroy their homes, infrastructure
and property to set up hundreds of illegal settlements,
mostly inhabited by extremist Israeli settlers, who
add to the tragedy of the confiscation of property that
legitimately belongs to Palestinians the worry rooted
in the acts of harassment, assault and violence against
displaced Palestinians, who stand up and fight back in
dignity to assert their right over their land.
Some 684 housing units have been demolished in
the West Bank in 2016, and so far this year we have
seen a 25 per cent increase in demolitions of Palestinian
homes. Some of the demolitions have been punitive,
others have been due to the lack of building permits.
Sometimes they have been done in order for illegal
settlements to be built, in violation of international
humanitarian law and the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention. This represents a break with the
two-State solution concept and remorselessly affects
the viability of a free Palestine and its existence as an
equal State among the other nations of the Middle East.
In this atmosphere of tension and injustice,
Palestinians are living under the surveillance and
harassment of the Israeli military and security forces
which impedes the free movement of Palestinians.
Still worse, we are seeing adult men and women and
young Palestinians falling victim to indiscriminate and
disproportionate violence at the hands of the occupying
Power’s military and security forces and hotheaded
settlers. They have been killed, injured, indefinitely
detained and imprisoned. They are the victims of
collective punishment due to real or alleged attacks that
could have been perpetrated by a single Palestinian or
a group of Palestinians against an Israeli or a group of
Israelis, which are acts that we have the obligation to
reject and condemn.
Entire Palestinian towns and communities are at
the mercy of the indiscriminate and criminal repression
of the occupying Power, whose actions have led to the
death of 218 Palestinians since October 2015. More
than 17,000 Palestinians have been wounded by live
ammunition — rubber bullets — or felled by tear gas. In
addition, more than 7,000 Palestinians, including more

16-2884515/19

S/PV.7772

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

than 500 minors, are languishing in Israeli prisons, and
more than 700 people are being held in administrative
detention. The harassment, violence and oppression
exercised against the Palestinian people are part of the
Israeli strategy to deprive them of their ancestral lands
and bring about the end of the idea of having their own
State. We therefore reject this erroneous and prejudicial
approach by Israel in its way of addressing the question
of Palestine.
We must draw attention to the critical humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories as a
result of the Israeli occupation. The vast majority of
Palestinian communities in Area C of the West Bank
are facing serious difficulties in gaining access to
distribution networks of drinking water, due to the
lack or destruction of that infrastructure or because the
Israeli authorities or the water companies themselves
have decided to restrict the pumping of water. Access to
the education for Palestinian children and young people
is affected by Israeli action, including the detention of
minors, military operations, incidents with settlers,
restrictions on school construction, and restrictions on
movement occasioned by the checkpoints.
It has been extremely difficult for Palestinians
health systems in the West Bank to meet the needs of the
population because of the occupation, restricted access
and the lack of medical equipment. The Palestinians
subjected to the unjust and brutal blockade of the Gaza
Strip are in a similar or worse humanitarian situation.
Nearly 2 million have seen their homes destroyed, with
little or no possibility of their being rebuilt, which
is also the case with hospitals, schools, workplaces,
property or service facilities. Beyond the closure of
border-crossing points and severe limitations on entry
and exit to and from the Gaza Strip, there is the terrible
legacy of explosive remnants of war, which continue
to pose a threat to civilians, as does shelling from the
Israeli side, motivated or not by attacks from some
quarters in Gaza, resulting in the people of Gaza being
subject to collective and undeserved punishment. We
welcome the progress made by the Gaza reconstruction
mechanism, but this progress should not make us
forget that the reason for the dire situation remains the
blockade.
We call on the United Nations to extend and step
up efforts to address this situation and support the
Palestinian people during this humanitarian crisis. In
addition to the direct action and the contribution of
United Nations agencies, it is appropriate and necessary
16/19

15/09/2016

for the Security Council to continuously monitor the
humanitarian issue in the occupied territories and the
Gaza Strip, which is just as important as the Council’s
dedication to the political negotiations aspects it
focuses on. We would encourage Council members of
the Council to ensure that humanitarian aspects are
included in its discussions in order to safeguard the
welfare of the Palestinians.
Given this bleak picture, the call for the occupying
Power to cease its aggressive, destructive and colonial
policies and bring to justice those responsible for
massacres and undignified acts against Palestinians is
all the more necessary. We call for an end to the Israeli
occupation of the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
and an end to the blockade of the Gaza Strip. In all the
decades of their occupation of Palestinian territories,
the Israelis have done nothing but promote inequality,
injustice and impunity, which is a breeding ground for
despair and the rebellion of the Palestinians against the
unjust situation in which they find themselves.
The Security Council must cease its inaction,
stand firm in defence of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, make concrete efforts to bring the
parties to the negotiating table and decisively support
a political approach that will lead to a dialogue and
negotiation. From our critical position against the
intransigence and abusiveness of the occupying Power
that seems to be doing everything possible not to
achieve peace, we regard with optimism any act that
would facilitate Palestinian-Israeli rapprochement,
such as the recent steps taken to improve the electricity
situation.
We support the work of the Middle East Quartet and
we welcome all efforts by the international community
aimed at advancing political processes and talks with
Israeli and Palestinian with a view to achieving peace.
That should become the exclusive basis for the two-State
solution, taking into account the Arab Peace Initiative
and the right of Palestinians to live in their own State
within internationally recognized borders based on the
pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I join others in
welcoming today’s meeting and the briefing from the
Secretary-General.
16-28845

15/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Since the Quartet’s report (S/2016/595, annex)
issued in July, we have seen a worrying acceleration
of some Israeli policies in the West Bank that are, as
the report makes clear, eroding the viability of the twoState solution. Far from stopping settlement expansion,
as the Quartet recommended, we have seen Israel push
forward plans for over 1,500 settlement units as well as
the continued demolition of Palestinian structures. The
numbers speak for themselves — over 800 structures
destroyed this year, over a thousand people displaced,
including over 500 children. As the United Kingdom
Minister for the Middle East and Africa, Tobias
Ellwood, made clear earlier this month, these policies
fundamentally call into question Israel’s commitment
to the two-State solution.
The demolition orders issued against the Palestinian
village of Sussia and Khan Al-Ahmar school in the east
of Jerusalem are particularly concerning. Such steps
would have a terrible human impact on the inhabitants of
Sussia and the children of Khan Al-Ahmar. What hope
is there for the two-State solution when communities
are simply removed from the map and when futures are
literally bulldozed to the ground? So once again I hope
we can all urge Israel to cease its systematic policy
of settlement expansion, demolition of Palestinian
structures and limits on Palestinian development.
The Quartet report also set out the damaging effect
of incitement and violence. We deplore incitement on
both sides of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, including
any comments that could stir up hatred and prejudice.
Although levels of violence have dropped in recent
months, we continue to call on the parties to do all they
can to de-escalate tensions and prevent incitement. We
also continue to support the revival of the Trilateral
Commission on Incitement to address all allegations of
incitement on both sides.
Turning to Gaza, we remain extremely worried
about the ongoing dire situation there. It is estimated
that 90 per cent of Gaza’s water is not fit for consumption
or even for agricultural use. Gaza continues to have the
highest unemployment in the world. And the risk of a
return to conflict hangs heavy over Gaza, as shown
by the rocket attacks and Israeli response last month.
Militant groups in Gaza must permanently cease rocket
fire and other attacks against Israel.
The United Kingdom welcomes the steps taken
by the Palestinian Authority and Israel to improve the
energy, gas, electricity and water situation in Gaza.

S/PV.7772

These are significant advances that will improve
conditions on the ground, and it is critical that these
measures are implemented quickly, given the severity
of the situation. We are also encouraged that education
and health facilities have largely been rebuilt, even
though reconstruction is far from complete. Efforts
now need to focus on completing house-building and
reviving the productive sectors, stimulating exports
and creating jobs.
We too have a role to play. Donors must honour all
commitments that are still outstanding from the Cairo
conference. The United Kingdom remains committed to
doing so and to reaching those in need. I would like to
once again thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
and reaffirm our full and continued support for the
work of Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Process. We look forward to hearing
from him in our closed consultations later this morning.
Since this is an open meeting, before I conclude I
would like to take this opportunity to publicly welcome
the announcement on Friday by the United States and
Russia that they would be renewing the cessation of
hostilities in Syria. That is a long-awaited positive
step. The level of violence has dropped in recent days,
and I hope that will continue and bring with it full
humanitarian access and, eventually, an environment
that will enable talks to resume between the parties.
But we have been here before. In the past, the
violence has lessened only to rise to new levels of
barbarity. We cannot afford to repeat history. So let us
all urge the parties to honour their commitments, and
let us specifically call on Russia to use its influence to
restrain Al-Assad. That will be no simple feat. Earlier
this week, Al-Assad said that it was his objective to
regain the entire country by force, something that he
is unable to do alone and that would only prolong the
conflict for many years to come. For the sake of the
hundreds of thousands of Syrians killed in the conflict,
for the millions upon millions displaced, that simply
cannot come to pass.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to ask you, Mr. President, to
convey to Foreign Minister McCully how pleased we
were to see him presiding over the Security Council,
and also to congratulate you and your team on your
excellent stewardship of the Council this month. I
would also like to put on record — and this seems to
be a trend, whereby we see briefings turn into genuine

16-2884517/19

S/PV.7772

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

debates — that we agree that we need to change the
traditional format that we use to deal with this or
any other issue on the Council’s agenda. We believe
it warrants a collective decision by the Council and
probably the devotion of a meeting and consultations to
our methods of work.
That said, I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive briefing. We believe that
it is crucial that we defend the viability of a two-State
solution to the Palestinian question and, as Mr. McCully
said, we have no time to waste. There is a very real
danger that such a solution may soon be out of reach
altogether. It is very worrying to see the destruction
of Palestinian homes, the expansion of settlements and
the serious humanitarian situation, which is not in Gaza
alone. The stagnation in the peace process, which has
lasted so long, continues to undermine trust between the
parties. it is vital that we begin to create the possibility
of the prospect of peace if we are to resolve the conflict
before it is too late.
We are all familiar with the main causes of the
breakdown in the peace process — the settlements
policy and the use of violence — and we condemn
the violence, acts of terror and incitement to violence
regardless of their origin. Nor can we overlook the
importance of solving the intra-Palestinian rivalries if
we are to deal with the stagnated peace process. Spain
would like to emphasize its full support for the French
initiative for convening an international conference
that would enable us to relaunch the peace process.
My country is already participating actively in the
preparatory work for it; for example, we just took part
in a meeting held in Stockholm of a working group on
civil society.
It is essential that measures be taken to restore
trust, and we are pleased to see that some small steps
have been taken in that direction, such as the agreement
announced just two days ago, on 13 September,
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority on the
repayment of electricity costs. It is a small step, but
one in the right direction. Similarly, the international
community must take advantage of synergies between
the various initiatives — the proposals of the Quartet,
the French initiative and the Arab Peace Initiative. As
the Secretary-General rightly pointed out, the general
debate in the General Assembly begins next week,
during which a meeting of the Quartet will be held, after
a preparatory meeting in Paris, as well as a meeting
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee. We hope that all of
18/19

15/09/2016

these events and meetings will help to encourage the
parties to return to the negotiating table.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
We appreciate his active efforts to move the process
forward, as well as those of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General. The
conflict between Palestine and Israel is at the core of
Middle Eastern issues and is naturally of fundamental
importance to peace in the Middle East as a whole. The
international community should have a great sense of
urgency in terms of promoting peace negotiations and
take more substantive actions.
The international community has recently come
up with a series of new approaches aimed at settling
the question of Palestine. In early June, the ministerial
conference held in Paris in support of the Middle East
peace initiative reached a preliminary consensus on
how to promote the next phase of peace talks, and that
has prompted the international community to refocus
on the issue. We commend and support France’s efforts
to promote negotiations and peace. In the meantime,
Russia and Egypt have also been working actively on
the issue, and the Middle East Quartet has published a
new report (S/2016/595, annex). China supports every
effort that may help to ease the Palestinian-Israeli
situation and to arrive at a two-State solution.
Right now, the top priority is breaking the impasse
in which the peace talks are mired in order to work to
establish an independent sovereign Palestinian State
based on the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital. That is an inalienable right of the
Palestinian people. Both countries should exercise
restraint, refrain from violent conflict, introduce
initiatives that help to foster mutual trust, meet each
other halfway and strive to resume talks as soon as
possible and arrive at outcomes based on those talks.
Israel should demonstrate goodwill by acting first to
stop its expansion of settlements immediately, lift the
blockade of the Gaza Strip and remove restrictions on
aid to Palestinians. At the same time, Israel’s legitimate
security concerns should be respected.
The international community should increase its
coordination in order to translate the current positive
momentum towards settling the Palestine question into
concrete action. We should stay focused on the central
goal of all its efforts, a two-State solution, and work
diligently to achieve a resumption of the peace talks,
16-28845

15/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with a view to achieving real results. We should draw
on the experience gained through dealing with other
hotspot issues in the Middle East by exploring every
possible pathway to resuming talks under the auspices
of the Middle East Quartet by creating international
synergies. While we should continue to use the
mechanisms that are already in place, we should also
encourage new initiatives. Meanwhile, we should be
mindful of the leading role of the United Nations in this
issue, and any outcomes of the efforts to promote peace
should be approved by the Security Council.
China has always been supportive of the Palestinian
people’s just aspirations to the restoration of their
legitimate national rights and interests and has worked
to promote peace negotiations. As a permanent member
of the Security Council and a responsible major Power,
we have contributed constructively to the PalestinianIsraeli peace process. Earlier this year, President Xi
Jinping of China delivered a speech at the headquarters
of the League of Arab States in which he specifically
discussed China’s principled stance on the question of
Palestine. He called for relaunching peace talks at the
political level and promoting economic reconstruction.
At the Paris ministerial conference, China’s Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Wang Yi, put forward the “three
stops” and “three explorations” initiative. China has
also been assisting Palestine, to the best of its ability,
to help it revitalize its economy and improve the
livelihoods of its people. China is ready to work with
the international community to continue the push for
an early, just solution to the Israeli-Palestinian issue.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting under this format, which
is in line with our recent collective discussion on how
to modernize some of the working methods of the
Security Council.
Ukraine consistently supports the Middle East
peace process and the principle of a two-State solution,
with Israel and Palestine coexisting in peace and
security. We are deeply concerned about the ongoing
escalation we are witnessing, not only in the rhetoric
of high-level officials on both sides but on the ground
as well.
The shooting of a Palestinian man inside a refugee
camp in East Jerusalem on 5 September, as well as

S/PV.7772

the exchange of allegations of ethnic cleansing by the
leaders of the two sides on 9 September, does not serve
the purpose of resuming Israeli-Palestinian talks in
good faith. These facts do not contribute to restoring the
atmosphere of trust between the two sides, so-needed
in the light of the prospect for possible talks between
Netanyahu and Abbas — in Moscow, Luxembourg
or elsewhere.
The recent escalation serves as yet another
reminder that the status quo is a road to nowhere.
We strongly believe that both sides must demonstrate
genuine restraint and refrain from the use of force,
which will only fuel the violence and lead to increased
casualties — all of which could play into the hands
of extremists who are trying to undermine the fragile
prospects for peace.
No one can reasonably argue that tackling this
challenge is possible without addressing its root causes,
as the unresolved status of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict ranks high on the terrorist agenda in the region
of the Middle East and North Africa.
The decision announced to suspend the Palestinian
municipal elections scheduled to take place on 8 October
is regrettable, as we believe that intra-Palestinian
reconciliation is an important precondition for reaching
a viable agreement with Israel.
We are convinced that the establishment of a stable,
peaceful and democratic Palestinian State is in Israel’s
long-term security interests. However, the ongoing
process of settlement expansion and the legalization
of outposts could undermine the efforts of the
international community to achieve tangible progress
in the peace process.
Ultimate success depends upon a genuine
commitment by all interested parties. Diplomatic
efforts must be redoubled to contain and de-escalate
the latest wave of violence and to unblock IsraeliPalestinian negotiations. Ukraine remains steadfast in
its support of any effort to restore the hope that a twoState solution can be achieved through negotiations.
The President: I now Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

16-2884519/19
